NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MARKET FOR TEACHER QUALITY
Eric A. Hanushek
John F. Kain
Daniel M. O’Brien
Steven G. Rivkin
Working Paper 11154
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11154
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005

John Kain participated in the development of this project but sadly died before its completion. This paper
benefited from early discussions with Larry Katz and from comments on the draft by Chris Robinson,
Michael Podgursky, and participants at the NBER Summer Institute. This research has been supported by
grants from the Smith Richardson Foundation and the Packard Humanities Institute. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2005 by Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain, Daniel M. O’Brien, and Steven G. Rivkin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Market for Teacher Quality
Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain, Daniel M. O’Brien, and Steven G. Rivkin
NBER Working Paper No. 11154
February 2005
JEL No. I2, J4, H4
ABSTRACT
Much of education policy focuses on improving teacher quality, but most policies lack strong
research support. We use student achievement gains to estimate teacher value-added, our measure
of teacher quality. The analysis reveals substantial variation in the quality of instruction, most of
which occurs within rather than between schools. Although teacher quality appears to be unrelated
to advanced degrees or certification, experience does matter

but only in the first year of teaching.

We also find that good teachers tend to be effective with all student ability levels but that there is a
positive value of matching students and teachers by race. In the second part of the analysis, we show
that teachers staying in our sample of urban schools tend to be as good as or better than those who
exit. Thus, the main cost of large turnover is the introduction of more first year teachers. Finally,
there is little or no evidence that districts that offer higher salaries and have better working
conditions attract the higher quality teachers among those who depart the central city district. The
overall results have a variety of direct policy implications for the design of school accountability and
the compensation of teachers.
Eric A Hanushek
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu
John F. Kain
School of Social Sciences
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083

Daniel M. O’Brien
School of Social Sciences
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083
obri@utdallas.edu
Steven G. Rivkin
Amherst College
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 5000
Amherst, MA 01002-5000
and NBER
sgrivkin@amherst.edu

The Market for Teacher Quality
by Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain, Daniel M. O’Brien and Steven G. Rivkin
Given the emphasis parents, students, and educators place on teachers, evidence that
observable measures of teacher quality explain little of the variation in student performance
provides a conundrum for researchers. It may be that parents and students overstate the
importance of teachers, but an alternative explanation is simply that measurable characteristics
such as experience, certification, advanced degrees, and even scores on standardized tests explain
little of the true variation in teacher effectiveness.
In this paper we use matched panel data on teachers and students for a large district in
Texas to estimate variations in teacher quality through a semi-parametric approach based on
value added to student achievement. These estimates confirm the existence of substantial
variation in teacher effectiveness, much of it within as opposed to between schools. This within
school heterogeneity has direct implications for the design of accountability and teacher incentive
programs. Our findings on teacher effectiveness are also consistent with prior evidence showing
that certification and experience explain little of the quality variation, with the exception of
sizeable improvement following the initial year of teaching. The pattern of results supports the
view that good teachers tend to be superior for students across the achievement distribution, but
there is strong evidence that students benefit from being matched with teachers of the same race.
The development of teacher-specific quality measures permits investigation of important
aspects of the market for teacher quality. Administrators in large urban districts often bemoan the
loss of teachers to the suburbs, private schools, and other occupations, and available evidence
suggests that exit probabilities are higher for teachers with better alternative earning opportunities
or more education. However, there is no prior evidence on instructional effectiveness on school
leavers, a void we can fill by comparing movers and stayers by their performance in the
classroom.

Our analysis brings some commonly held beliefs into question. First, teachers who
remain in our urban schools are as good as or better on average than those leaving. Second, there
is little evidence that higher salaries and more desirable student characteristics raise the quality of
new hires among teachers who switch districts in this labor market. This finding lends itself to
two alternative though not mutually exclusive interpretations that carry different policy
ramifications: 1) districts are unable to rank applicants on the basis of actual classroom
effectiveness; or 2) quality plays a secondary role in the hiring process.

Empirical Model
A student’s performance at any point in time reflects not only current educational inputs
but also the history of family, neighborhood, and school factors. Even as databases begin to
follow students over time, it is generally not possible to parse the separate current and historical
influences that combine to determine the level of student performance. This leads many to focus
on achievement gains rather than levels, an approach we adopt in this paper.1
The basic model relates achievement growth to the flow of current inputs such as:
(1)

∆Aisg = Aisg g − Aisg −1 g −1 = f ( X ig ,Sig ,γ i ,ε isg )

where Aisg is achievement of student i, in school s and grade g, and ∆A is the gain in
achievement across grades; X is a vector of nonschool factors including family, peers, and
neighborhoods; S is a vector of school and teacher factors; γ is individual differences in
achievement growth; and ε is a random error. 2

1

Random assignment or instrumental variables techniques might be used to purge the estimates of
confounding influences, although serial correlation in the variables of interest often complicates the
interpretation of the results. Another alternative is estimation models of test score levels with student fixed
effects. While this removes fixed unobserved factors that affect the performance level, it does not control
for time varying influences in the past including variation in the quality of recent teachers.
2

Alternative growth formulations including placing the earlier achievement, Aisg −1 g −1 , on the right hand

side have been employed; see Hanushek (1979). We discuss these alternatives explicitly below when we
consider measurement issues.

2

This formulation controls for past individual, family, and school factors and permits
concentration on the contemporaneous circumstances that are generally measured along with
student achievement. Nonetheless, focusing on annual gains does not eliminate the difficulties in
separating the various inputs from unmeasured confounding factors. A series of specification and
measurement issues must be addressed before it is possible to obtain credible estimates of the
influence of teachers on student achievement.
General Specification Issues
In past analyses, parametric models based on observed school and teacher characteristics
have not yielded a reliable characterization of important aspects of schools and teachers, even
when very detailed data on students and teachers are available (Hanushek (2003), Hanushek and
Rivkin (2004)). The alternative, which we pursue here, is the semi-parametric estimation of
teacher and school effects. Consider:
(2)

∆Aisg = f '( X ig ,Si ig ) +

∑t T

j ijg

+( γ i + ε isg )

where Tijg=1 if student i has teacher j in grade g and is 0 otherwise. Si ig represents school factors
other than teachers, and we combine the unmeasured individual and idiosyncratic terms (γ, ε) into
a single error term. In this formulation teacher fixed effects, tj, provide a natural measure of
teacher quality based on value added to student achievement.3
Although this approach circumvents problems of identifying the separate components of
teacher effectiveness, it must address a variety of selection issues related to the matching of

3

For previous analyses of this sort, see among others Hanushek (1971, 1992), Murnane (1975), Armor et
al. (1976), Murnane and Phillips (1981), Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander (2003), and Rockoff (2004).
Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005) address the various selection factors along with providing a lower
bound on the variations in teacher quality specified in this way. A different but complementary strand of
research comes out of the Tennessee value-added work of William Sanders and his co-authors (Sanders and
Horn (1994); Sanders, Saxton, and Horn (1997)); see also the methodological discussions in Ballou,
Sanders, and Wright (2004).

3

teachers and students. Because of the endogeneity of community and school choice by families
and of administrator decisions about classroom placement, the unmeasured influences on
achievement are likely not orthogonal to teacher quality. In particular, students with family
background and other factors conducive to higher achievement tend to seek out better schools
with higher quality teachers. Administrative decisions regarding teacher and student classroom
assignments may amplify or dampen the correlations introduced by such family choices. The
matching of better students with higher quality teachers would tend to increase the positive
correlations produced by family decisions, while conscious efforts to place more effective
teachers with struggling students would tend to reduce them. Importantly, conditioning on prior
score in the gains formulation does eliminate the first order selection problems because any
placement by observed achievement will be accounted for by the early test score. Nonetheless,
more subtle placement by unobserved characteristics will not be captured by prior achievement.
Another source of correlation between teacher quality and student performance results
from the matching of teachers with schools. Teacher preferences for schools with higher
achieving, nonpoor students in addition to higher salaries potentially introduce a positive
correlation between teacher quality and family contribution to learning (Hanushek, Kain, and
Rivkin (2004)). A desire to work in better managed schools likely amplifies the correlation
between teacher and school quality. On the other hand, the failure of schools to hire the best
available candidates would dampen this relationship (Ballou (1996)). Importantly, district
assignment practices tend to give the newest teachers the lowest priority in terms of deciding
where to teach, frequently leading to the pairing of the most inexperienced teachers with the most
educationally needy children (see, for example, Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (forthcoming)).
In each of these cases, the central issue is whether it is reasonable to presume:
(3)

E (γ i + ε isg | f '( X ig , Si ig ), Tijg ) = 0

4

The requirement that teacher fixed effects are orthogonal to the error highlights the importance of
accounting for systematic elements of families and schools that explicitly or implicitly affect
teacher-student matching.
The potential failure of observable characteristics such as family income, parental
education, principal education, certification or experience, peer demographic composition, and
other readily available variables to capture all school, peer, neighborhood, and family influences
related to teacher quality leads us to include school fixed effects in many specifications. In these
models, the teacher coefficients reflect only within school variation in the quality of instruction.4
This approach goes too far to the extent that the typical teacher in some schools is better
than the typical teacher in others, perhaps in part because an important dimension of
administrator skill is the ability to identify and develop good teachers. By eliminating all
between school variation in teacher quality, the estimator implicitly attributes all aggregate school
variation to factors other than the teachers.
Although the concentration on within school variation does not guard against all potential
selection problems, we interpret its as a lower bound estimate of the variation in teacher quality.
Only the purposeful matching of students and teachers in a very specific manner could conflate
teacher and student influences in a way that biases upward estimates of the within school
variation in teacher quality. Our empirical model focuses on student gains, includes a series of
student covariates, employs a test metric (described below) that compares teachers on the basis of
their performance with comparable students, and considers just teacher effects that persist over
time as reflecting quality differences. Thus, only persistent sorting of students on the expected
rate of learning conditional on initial score and the included covariates would introduce any
upward bias. We believe strongly that the downward biases introduced by ignoring all between

4

This approach of concentrating on within school variation is related to that in Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain
(2005), which develops a lower bound on the variation in teacher quality. That analysis, however, uses a
different methodology that systematically guards against a variety of possible dimensions of selection,
although it does not permit quality estimation for individual teachers.

5

school variation in teachers and year to year differences in a teacher’s performance (see below)
dwarfs any remaining contamination induced by within school sorting. Nonetheless, we also
present estimates based on the variations across the entire district (and including between school
variation) in order to indicate the range of plausible estimates.
An alternative approach that we do not pursue is the simultaneous estimation of student
and teacher fixed effects in adjusted gains.5 In addition to the computational demands and
introduction of substantial noise in the estimation of the teacher coefficients, extensive school
sorting by ethnicity and income raises a serious concern about the interpretation of the teacher
fixed effect estimates generated by such a model. In the extreme case of complete school
segregation by race, for example, the model imposes the assumption that average teacher quality
for black students equals average teacher quality for white students. Of course the focus on
within school differences ignores all average differences among schools, but in that case the
identifying assumption is transparent and a much more tractable model is estimated.
Test Measurement Issues
Although psychometricians have long been concerned about the properties of cognitive
tests and the implications for research on teachers and schools, economists have not paid much
attention to these issues until recently.6 Our analysis relies on the achievement tests used in
Texas (the TAAS tests) to assess basic student proficiency in a range of subjects.7 These tests,
designed for the Texas accountability system, focus on minimum competency as defined by
5

In sorting out the effects of teacher-student matching by race, we do introduce student fixed effects. See
the discussions below about the specific interpretation of those estimates.
6
One exception is Kane and Staiger (2002, 2002), who have discussed measurement error and test
reliability in the context of school accountability systems. Bishop et al. (2001) considers the structure of
tests from the perspective on student incentives. Bacolod and Tobias (2003) and Tobias (2004), as
discussed below, do put testing into the context of achievement modeling.
7
The TAAS tests are generally referred to as criterion referenced tests, because they are devised to link
directly to pre-established curriculum or learning standards. The common alternative is a norm referenced
test that covers general material appropriate for a subject and grade but that is not as closely linked to the
specific state teaching standards. In principle, all students could achieve the maximum score on a criterion
referenced test with no variation across students, while norm referenced tests focus on obtaining
information about the distribution of skills across the tested population. In practice, scores on the two types
of tests tend to be highly correlated.

6

subject matter standards for each grade. This focus dictates that the variation in test score gains
generated by differences in instructional quality differs across the initial achievement distribution.
For example, the additional gain in test scores resulting from a substantial improvement in the
quality of instruction may be quite sizeable for a student who begins at the lower end of the skill
distribution and for whom the test covers much of the knowledge gained by virtue of any higher
teacher quality. On the other hand, a student higher up the initial skill distribution may answer
most of the questions correctly even if taught by a quite low quality teacher. Better instructional
quality may translate into only a few additional correct answers if the test does not concentrate on
or cover the additional knowledge generated for this student by the superior instruction.
Figure 1 provides some insight into the potential magnitude of this problem. This graph
plots two elements of the test score distribution. The test scores for students on the TAAS
mathematics test are divided into ten equal score intervals. The solid line (corresponding to
frequencies on the left axis) shows the distribution of scores across students. This distribution is
highly skewed with a significant proportion in the highest two score intervals of correct test
answers, where improvements would be quite difficult because of the test score ceiling. The
dashed line (corresponding to the axis of raw gains measured in standard deviations of the test)
portrays the distribution of average gains during a school year of students whose initial test scores
fall into each score interval. This graph makes it very clear that typical gains at the bottom are
much higher than in the upper ranges. Part of this could reflect regression to the mean induced by
measurement error, but the problem is not simply one of the bounds on the tests as seen by the
consistent pattern of gains in the middle of the distribution. The distribution of test questions in
terms of degree of difficulty also suggests that those who begin at a lower level likely gain more
knowledge about items examined on these tests. A rank order statistic such as percentile
mitigates problems introduced by any correlation between initial knowledge and expected gain,
but this transformation does not eliminate the problem that identical differences in teacher quality
do not produce identical variations in average student improvement (in this case percentile

7

Figure 1. Relative Frequencies and Achievement Gains
by Score Interval of Initial Test Scores
1.00

25

0.80
Average Raw Gain

Frequency
0.60

15

0.40

0.20

10

0.00
5
-0.20

0

-0.40
0-10

10-20

20-30

30-40

40-50

50-60

Initial Test Score Interval

60-70

70-80

80-90

90-100

Average Raw Gain (s.d.)

Relative Frequency (%)

20

changes) across the initial skill distribution. Permitting the pretest score to have a coefficient less
than one by moving it to the right hand side provides an alternative solution. However, the
assumption of linearity between pretest and post-test scores is likely to be inappropriate (e.g., the
test may focus on the center of the skill distribution), and the inclusion of a noisily measured,
endogenous variable on the right hand side introduces additional problems.8
We adopt a direct approach for standardizing gains that permits comparisons of teachers
in classrooms with very different initial test score distributions. First, we divide the initial test
score distribution into ten equal score intervals (cm for m=1,…,10) and for each year compute the
mean and the standard deviation of the gains for all district students starting in that interval.
Specifically, suppressing the notation for year and school, for all students with Aig −1 in the

c
cm
m
interval cm defined by [ A
 g −1 , Ag −1 ] for the given year,

µ gcm = ( Aig − Aig −1 ) , and

(4)

(5)

σ gcm =

∑ (( A

ig

− Aig −1 ) − µ gcm

)

2

ncm

The standardized gain score for each student in interval cm is then calculated as:
(6)

Gisg = ( Aisg − Aisg −1 ) − µ gcm  σ gcm

Consequently, gains are distributed with mean zero and standard deviation one for each

score interval in each year, and teachers are judged based on their students’ gains relative to other

8

If the pretest score is measured with error, the usual problems of errors-in-variables occurs, and this will
be exacerbated by persistent errors for individuals. Bacolod and Tobias (2003) actually estimate a semiparametric nonlinear relationship between pre- and post-test scores and subsequently rely on residuals from
predicted scores for individuals to assess schools; see also Tobias (2004). Their approach is quite similar to
our own in spirit, although problems related to the inclusion of the pretest as a regressor remain. Hanushek
(1992) does not, however, find that test measurement errors are important in biasing the estimates of
educational production functions that include pretest scores on the right hand side.

8

students in the same place in the initial test score distribution.9 This normalization also permits us
to explore the possibility that effectiveness for teachers varies across the distribution, such as
might occur if teachers tend to specialize in certain types of students.
This transformation of the dependent variable does not eliminate problems caused by
errors in measurement and test reliability. Importantly, in contrast to parametric models for
which classical measurement error in the dependent variable does not introduce bias, such error
does contaminate estimates of the variance in teacher quality derived from teacher fixed effects.
As previously discussed in Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander (2003) and Rockoff (2004), any such
error inflates estimates of the variance in teacher quality.10
Our estimates of teacher quality, t j , are conditional means of student performance and
necessarily include any aggregate test measurement error for classrooms. We now rewrite t j as
the sum of the true quality index (tj) and an error component (ν j ).
(7)

t j = t j + ν j

Assuming classical measurement error, the variance of t j is the sum of the true variance of
quality (tj) and the variance of the error.
We use of multiple years of information for teachers to obtain a direct estimate of the
variation in teacher quality. Specifically, we estimate a separate fixed effect for each teacher/year
combination and use the year-to-year correlation among the estimated fixed effects for each
teacher to eliminate the contribution of random error. If we have estimates for teacher effects for
(1) ( 2 )
two years ( t j ,t j ) and if the measurement error in teacher quality is independent across years,

then the expected value of the correlation of teacher estimates, E(r12), is:

9

Note that simple gains models that include student fixed effects implicitly compare students at similar
places in the skill distribution.
10
Kane and Staiger (2001, 2002) also highlight problems introduced by measurement error in the related
context of school aggregate scores.

9

(8)

E( r12 ) = var( t ) / var( t )

Multiplication of the estimated variance of t by the year-to-year correlation thus provides an
estimate of the overall variance in teacher quality corrected for measurement error. Importantly,
this approach addresses problems related to both the noisiness of tests as measures of learning
and any single year shocks (either purposeful or random) in classroom average student quality.11
The removal of all non-persistent variation also eliminates some portion of the true
variation in quality resulting from changes in actual effectiveness. To address one portion of this
problem, we remove first year teachers from the correlation calculations, because of the sizeable
gains to experience in the initial year (see Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005)and below).
Yet the estimate of a teacher’s quality based on within school variation may also change
over time even in the absence of any true difference in performance, because the within school
estimates of quality are defined relative to other teachers. Any turnover can alter a teacher’s
place in the quality distribution in her school. Therefore, by considering just the persistent
quality differences (equation 8), some true systematic differences in teachers are masked by a
varying comparison group and are treated as random noise – amplifying the downward bias in the
estimation of the variation in teacher quality.

Texas Schools Project Data
The cornerstone of the analysis of teacher quality is a subset of the unique stacked panel
data set constructed by the Texas Schools Project of the University of Texas at Dallas. The data
on students, teachers, schools and other personnel in the Texas Schools Microdata Panel (TSMP)

11

This differs significantly from corrections based on the sampling error of estimated fixed effects. Those
approaches are directly related to the equation error variance in the sample, so that anything that reduces
that error – including sample selection, the classroom sorting of students on the basis of unobservables, and
simply adding more regressors to the model – tends to reduce the estimated error and thus the measurement
error correction. See Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander (2003) and Rockoff (2004). Simply splitting the
sample and using the correlations among the samples to correct the variance would also fail to remove the
influences of annual shocks, implying that the split samples would have correlated errors.

10

have been augmented to include the details of classroom assignment of students and teachers for
one large urban district – the “Lone Star” district.
TSMP contains administrative records on students and teachers collected by the Texas
Education Agency (TEA) from the 1989-90 school year through 2001-2002. Student and teacher
records are linked over time using identifiers that have been encrypted to preserve data
confidentiality. These identifiers enable us to follow both teachers and students who switch
schools within the Lone Star district and who move to another public school in Texas.
The student background data contain a number of student, family, and program
characteristics including race, ethnicity, gender, and eligibility for a free or reduced price lunch
(the measure of economic disadvantage). Students are annually tested in a number of subjects
using the Texas Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS), which was administered each spring to
eligible students enrolled in grades three through eight. These criterion referenced tests evaluate
student mastery of grade-specific subject matter, and this paper presents results for mathematics.
The results are qualitatively quite similar for reading, although, consistent with the findings of our
previous work on Texas, schools appear to exert a larger impact on math than reading in grades 4
through 8 (see Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2002) and Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005)).12
Teacher and administrative personnel information in the TSMP include characteristics
such as race/ethnicity, degrees earned, years of experience, certification test results, tenure with
the current district, specific job assignment, and campus.
Importantly, for this paper we employ a significant extension to the basic TSMP database
that permits the linkage of students and teachers for a subset of classrooms. TEA does not collect
information linking individual students and teachers, but for this study we use additional
information obtained from the Lone Star district to match a student with her mathematics teacher
in each year. This is typically a general classroom teacher for elementary school and a specialist
12

Part of the difference between math and reading might relate specifically to the TAAS instruments,
which appear (as seen in Figure 1) to involve some truncation at the top end. For math, the outcomes are
less bunched around the highest passing scores than they are for reading.

11

mathematics teacher for junior high.
In this paper we study students and teachers in grades 4 through 8 for the school years
1995/1996 to 2000/2001. We eliminate any student without a valid test score and teachers with
fewer than ten students having valid test score gains.

The Distribution of Teacher Quality
A fundamental issue is how much variation in teacher quality exists. If small, policies to
improve student performance should concentrate on issues other than the hiring and retention of
teachers. This section describes the distribution of teacher quality in Lone Star district and
examines the sensitivity of the estimates to controls for student, peer, and other differences across
schools and years. By using the persistence of teacher effects over time, we account for the
contribution of measurement error to estimated differences among teachers. A complementary
analysis considers the roles experience, certification examination scores, and educational
attainment play in explaining differences in teacher quality. Finally, we extend the basic
modeling to consider the role of match quality that potentially leads teachers to be differentially
effective with students of varying ability or backgrounds.
Performance Variations Across Teachers
We begin with a basic description of the contributions of teachers, principals, and other
institutional features of district schools in shaping student achievement. Table 1 reports the
between classroom (teacher by year) variance, the adjacent year correlation of estimated teacher
value added, and the measurement error adjusted estimate of the variance in teacher quality for
different specifications. The first and second columns use both within and between school
variation, while the third and fourth use only within school variation. In addition, the second and
fourth specifications regression-adjust for differences in observable characteristics. Differences

12

Table 1. Classroom and Teacher Differences in Student Achievement
Gains
Within district

Within school and year

Unadjusted

Demographic
controlsb

Unadjusted

Demographic
controlsb

Teacher-year variationa

0.210

0.179

0.109

0.104

Adjacent year correlation

0.500

0.419

0.458

0.442

Teacher quality variance /
(s.d.)

0.105
(0.32)

0.075
(0.27)

0.050
(0.22)

0.047
(0.22)

Notes:

a. The columns provide the variance in student achievement gains explained by fixed effects for
teachers by year.
b. Student characteristics are eligibility for free or reduced lunch, gender, race/ethnicity, grade,
limited English proficiency, special education, student mobility status, and year dummy variables.

among the specifications provide information on the extent of student sorting and on the
magnitude of within relative to between school and year variation in classroom average gains.
A comparison of the estimated variance across columns indicates the potential
importance of factors correlated with classroom differences in achievement. Controlling for
observable student characteristics and using only within school and year variation noticeably
reduces the between teacher variance in standardized gain. As expected given that most sorting
occurs among schools, controls for measured student heterogeneity have a much larger effect in
specifications not restricted to within school and year variation.13
The second row reports the adjacent year correlations in estimated teacher value added.
The magnitudes range from 0.50 to 0.42, suggesting that roughly half of the variance is persistent.
These correlations show considerable stability in the impact of individual teachers, particularly
when just compared to other teachers in the same school. Again the controls for student
heterogeneity reduce the correlations much less in the within school and year specifications.
(Since some of the year to year variation in estimated teacher value added relative to others in the
school comes from random differences in students, these controls could potentially increase the
estimated persistence).
The most conservative estimate of the variance in teacher quality in Column 4 is based
entirely on within-school variations in student achievement gains controlling for measured
student heterogeneity and measurement error. Although this specification eliminates any between
school variation in teacher quality and changes over time in the quality of instruction for a given
teacher, it protects against variations in the effectiveness of principals, school average student
characteristics, random measurement error, year to year differences in student ability and the like.
Despite the fact that it almost certainly understates the true variations in the quality of
instruction, the variance estimate of 0.047 indicates the presence of substantial differences in

13

Student characteristics are eligibility for free or reduced lunch, gender, race/ethnicity, grade, limited
English proficiency, special education, student mobility status, and year dummy variables.

13

teacher quality when put in the context of student achievement growth. This implies that a one
standard deviation increase in teacher quality raises standardized gain by 0.22 standard
deviations. In other words, a student who has a teacher at the 85th percentile can expect annual
achievement gains of at least 0.22 s.d. above those of a student who has the median teacher.
Since these quality variations relate to single years of achievement gains for students, they
underscore the fact that the particular draw of teachers for an individual student can accumulate
to huge impacts on ultimate achievement.
The range of ambiguity about the causal impact of teacher quality differences is also
relatively small. The best bounds on the standard deviation of teacher quality are 0.22 to 0.27.
The higher estimate controls for measured differences among students (race, subsidized lunch
status, LEP, and special education status), but allows between school teacher quality differences.
These estimates can be compared to the bound on teacher quality differences reported in
Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005). That lower bound of 0.11 standard deviations estimate is
based entirely on within school differences over time for the same students, subject to
measurement error that almost certainly attenuates the estimate, and based on specifications that
control comprehensively for possible sources of upward bias. Importantly, however, that
estimate is not directly comparable to the estimates here, because it is based on the distribution of
raw gains, which have a standard deviation of approximately two-thirds of the standard deviation
of the standardized gain used here. Putting our current estimates on the same scale, two-thirds of
our within-school estimate of 0.22 equals slightly less than 0.15.
The finding of significant quality variation within school and years coupled with the large
annual turnover of teachers (below) enters directly in discussions of teacher performance
incentives and teacher personnel practices more generally. First, the regression adjusted teacher
average test score gains in a given year capture important variation among teachers within and
almost certainly between schools, even if they are noisy measures of teacher quality. In contrast,

14

an incentive program having just the test score level provides far less information on teacher
value added.
Second, any incentive program (such as incorporated in many state accountability
systems) that focuses just on between school performance ignores the primary source of quality
variation that occurs within schools. The importance of within school variations also highlights
problems with the suggestion in Kane and Staiger (2002) that accountability systems should
aggregate test scores over time in a way that produces the least noisy estimate of school average
performance.14 The changing cadre of teachers in a school certainly contributes to the year-toyear variation in school average performance, and turnover is likely to lead to larger year to year
differences in small schools in which the school annual average variation in teacher quality will
generally be larger. Not only does such intertemporal averaging miss the majority of real
variation in teacher quality, but, more importantly, it also confuses the performance of current
teachers with that of their predecessors and thus provides a weaker incentive for improvement.
Measurable Teacher Characteristics
Prior studies suggest that most observable characteristics other than experience explain
little of the variation in teacher quality (Hanushek (2003)). This section adopts the common
education production function framework but extends it to circumvent analytic problems that
have plagued prior work. The basic formulation is:
(9)

Gisg = f ( X ig ) + αTC TCijg + ( γ i + ε isg )

where TC is a vector of measurable teacher characteristics with associated impact parameters,
αTC. Although the adjusted gain specification deals directly with fixed factors that enter into
achievement differences, the inclusion of time varying family effects and, at times, individual

14

Kane and Staiger (2002) consider a variety of dimensions of measurement error and appropriately
highlight the error introduced by separately evaluating small subgroups of the students. The text discussion
refers to aggregate school measures.

15

student fixed effects addresses issues of nonschool factors that systematically affect the growth in
student performance.
We concentrate on the effects of a master’s degree, a passing score on certification
examinations, and teacher experience on standardized math score gains. These are particularly
important characteristics because they are directly linked to teacher compensation. The initial
estimates concentrate on the sample of teachers with information on certification tests. While we
do not know the precise scores on the relevant certification tests, we do know whether they
passed the first time they took the test and whether they have ever passed the test.15
The hypotheses of no significant differences in teacher value added on the basis of
teacher education or certification examination performance cannot be rejected at conventional
levels regardless of whether student fixed effects are included. These findings shown in Table 2
reinforce prior studies and raise serious questions both about the desirability of requiring or
rewarding with higher pay those with a post-graduate degree and about the efficacy of the
existing certification procedures in Texas and similar systems in other states.
To describe the impact of teacher experience, we return to the more complete sample of
teachers (which does not exclude teachers without certification data).16 Existing evidence
suggests that most improvement occurs very early in the career (see Hanushek and Rivkin (2004),
Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005)), but experience may affect student achievement gains
through a number of channels. The first is learning by doing. The second is nonrandom
selection: If less talented teachers are either more or less likely to quit than more talented peers on
15

Note that there are many different certificates, and thus many different tests, for which teachers can
qualify. We make no attempt to distinguish among alternative certificates. The testing information is not
available for all teachers, thus reducing the sample to those with valid test information. In general, this
information is more commonly available for younger teachers, reflecting the history of the certification
program. The sample used in the certification regressions is roughly 60 percent as large as the sample used
in the experience regressions.
16
Note that the estimation in Table 2 also includes teacher experience, and the results for experience are
qualitatively similar to those reported below. Our measure of experience is total years of teaching in any
Texas public school, not just in the Lone Star district. Experience in private schools or in schools outside
of Texas is not observed. Note also that the multiple observations on experience are used to correct
inconsistencies in the raw data; see Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005).

16

Table 2. Estimated Impacts of Advanced Degree and Passing score
on the Certification Examination (absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses)

No fixed effects

With student fixed
effects

Master’s degree

0.015
(1.17)

0.004
(0.27)

Pass certification exam

0.002
(0.08)

-0.002
(0.07)

Pass certification exam
on first attempt

0.015
(0.91)

-0.039
(1.85)

Note: Each coefficient comes from a separate regression. All specifications include full sets of experience,
year, and grade dummy variables and indictors for special education classification, eligibility for a
subsidized lunch, limited English proficient classification, a structural move from elementary to junior high
school prior to the academic year, and a non-structural school change prior to or during the academic year.
Specifications without student fixed effects also include gender and race/ethnicity dummy variables.
Sample sizes are 230,000 for the Master’s degree regressions and 141,744 for the certification examination
regressions.

average, estimates of the return to experience capture the change in the average quality of the
teaching pool. Finally, teachers may vary effort systematically with experience in response to
tenure decisions or other institutional and contractual issues. Each of these causal links raises the
possibility of a highly nonlinear relationship between the quality of instruction and experience.
Therefore we include a series of dummy variables indicating first, second, third, fourth and fifth
year teachers. (Teachers with more than five years experience are the omitted category.
Preliminary analysis, not shown, found no experience effects beyond five years of experience).
The results in Table 3 highlight the much lower average performance of first year
teachers. Notice that the inclusion of student fixed effects does not alter significantly the return
to experience, but the addition of teacher fixed effects reduces the penalty for first year teachers
by roughly 25 percent and also eliminates any quality deficit for second year teachers.17 This
pattern indicates some selection effects in that inexperienced teachers who exit following the
school year are systematically less effective than other teachers. We will return to this issue in
the transition section below. Finally, it appears that fourth year teachers perform systematically
better than others, suggesting the possibility that average incentives are quite strong in the fourth
year. While Texas schools do not have formal collective bargaining, the character of contracts
and teacher reviews may influence the incentives at this career point.
These experience effects indicate that the high turnover among U.S. teachers, and
particularly urban teachers, has detrimental effects on student achievement. For Texas, some ten
percent of teachers with 0-2 years of experience and 7 percent of all teachers leave teaching each
year, requiring replacements who generally arrive with no experience.18 For the Lone Star

17

A different pattern appears if raw gains are used instead of the standardized gains. The first
year effect is smaller in raw gains with no fixed effects than in Table 3, but increases by almost 40 percent
with the introduction of student fixed effects. We interpret this pattern as confirming the standardization of
gains for the TAAS test. The fixed effects serve the same function as the test score transformation by
restricting the estimation to comparisons of students with others (in this case oneself) at the same part of
the test score distribution.
18

These figures refer to 1994-96 in Texas (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004)). The rate of new hires

17

Table 3. Estimated Impact of Experience Level
(comparisons to teachers with 6 or more years experience)

Year teaching
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year
5th year

No fixed
effects

With student
fixed effects

With student
and teacher
fixed effects

-0.16
(8.36)
-0.03
(1.55)
0.03
(1.43)
0.05
(2.38)
0.04
(1.76)

-0.16
(9.60)
-0.03
(1.82)
0.02
(1.28)
0.08
(3.42)
0.03
(1.51)

-0.12
(8.01)
0.00
(0.29)
0.02
(1.26)
0.06
(3.14)
0.01
(0.55)

Note: All specifications include full sets of year and grade dummy variables and indictors for special
education classification, eligibility for a subsidized lunch, limited English proficient classification, a
structural move from elementary to junior high school prior to the academic year, a non-structural school
change prior to or during the academic year, and that the teacher has an M.A. Specifications without
student fixed effects also include gender and race/ethnicity dummy variables. The sample size is 230,000.

district, similar to other large urban districts, the annual exit rates from the district for teachers
with 0-3 years experience are close to 20 percent (see Appendix A, below). The first year effects
estimated here show that having a first year teacher on average is roughly equivalent to having a
teacher a half standard deviation down in the quality distribution.
Teacher-Student Matching
The analysis presumes that each teacher can be ranked according to a single underlying
dimension of quality and that we can infer this from information about student progress. This
may, however, not be a satisfactory characterization. Teachers may specialize with particular
skill groups or merely decide to target a particular skill range. Student and teacher demographic
characteristics may also influence the quality of student/teacher interactions. Each of these cases
alters the concept of teacher quality by raising the possibility that it is not constant for all
students. Importantly, the distribution of quality that we trace out may also be influenced by
differences in the nature of classroom matching across schools and principals.
To investigate specialization by student achievement, we divide students into three
academic preparation classifications (based on initial scores) and compute the correlation
between the teacher average gain for students in one category with the teacher average
standardized gain for students in the other categories.19 The positive correlations of 0.45 between
the low and middle categories, 0.57 between the high and middle categories, and 0.31 between
the low and high categories refute the notion that the effects of any curricular targeting or
matching are large relative to the impact of overall teacher quality. These correlations are in the
same general range as those across years (Table 1). The strong positive correlation between the
average standardized gains in the top and bottom categories is particularly striking given the

varies some over time, depending on student demographics, the extent of teacher retirement, and the
numbers of returning teachers who have prior experience.
19
The ten categories used to produce the standardized gain measure are aggregated into three using the
district average distribution of students over all years as the fixed weights for all teachers.

18

relatively small number of students in the bottom category in schools with large numbers of
students in the top category and the large error variance described above.
The possibility of differential effects by the matching of teacher and student race also
exists, if for example students respond better to teachers in the same ethnic group. The reanalysis of the Coleman Report data by Ehrenberg and Brewer (1995) suggested a positive race
matching effect but raised questions about how quality differentials of black teachers might work
against race matching with students. Dee (2004), using the random assignment data from the
Tennessee STAR, finds strong evidence for beneficial effects from matching the race of teacher
and students.
Table 4 provides descriptive information about the matching of teachers and students in
the Lone Star district. (The table identifies teachers and students who are black, Hispanic, and
white and omits separate tabulations of the small numbers of both teachers and students of other
ethnic backgrounds). Few teachers are Hispanic, making the black and white comparisons the
interesting part.
Black teachers are disproportionately matched with black or Hispanic students. In
contrast, white teachers, who make up approximately 40 percent of the teaching force, end up
teaching two-thirds of the white students. These patterns are consistent with the race differences
in teacher mobility patterns found by Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004) . In an analysis of the
entire state of Texas, they found that white teachers typically moved to schools with fewer
minority students and with higher achieving students. In contrast, black teachers moved to
schools with more minority students, although they still sought higher achieving students.
Table 5 turns to the achievement implications of this sorting. The table reports results for
regressions that include those covariates used in the experience regressions as well as indicators
for black and Hispanic teachers and interactions between teacher and student race and ethnicity.
(Asian and Native American students and teachers are excluded because of their small numbers).

19

Table 4. Joint Distribution of Black, Hispanic, and non-Hispanic White
Students and Teachers by Race/Ethnicity
Students
Teachers

Black

Hispanic

White

All

Black

27.7

21.0

4.2

54.1

Hispanic

0.5

3.2

0.3

4.0

White

10.0

18.2

9.4

39.5

All

38.6

43.9

14.1

Note: Neither the joint nor marginal probabilities sum to 100 because of the omission of Asian and Native
American Teachers and Students.

Experience dummy variables are excluded to capture the full effect of race differences, but the
results from specifications with experience controls are almost identical.
The clearest finding is that, regardless of whether the specification includes student fixed
effects, black teachers tend to be more effective with minority students. Estimates range in size
from 0.05 to 0.10 standard deviations, or somewhere between 30 percent and 70 percent of the
cost of having a first year teacher. The final column of Table 5 suggests that the benefit of a
same race teacher is higher for girls than boys, but the difference is small and not statistically
significant.
On the other hand, the table reveals contradictory findings on the question of ethnic
differences in average teacher quality. Without student fixed effects black teachers appear to be
significantly less effective than white teachers (the omitted category), but with student fixed
effects the average effectiveness of black teachers appears to exceed that of white teachers.
Moreover, the first specification (without fixed effects) suggests that despite the benefits derived
from being matched with a same race teacher, average quality of instruction received by black
students with white teachers exceeds the average quality received by black students with black
teachers. In contrast, the fixed effect specifications show just the opposite.
Which specification is more informative? Two factors enter the interpretation of the
models with student fixed effects. First, and most straightforward, the change in the apparent
impact of black teachers partially reflects assignment of black teachers to schools with more
difficult to educate students. Table 4 shows that in the Lone Star district white teachers tend to
teach fewer minority students but the matching is even more skewed than that suggests. Only 56
percent of black students taught by white teachers are disadvantaged (as measured by free and
reduced price lunch status), while 71 percent of black students taught by black teachers are
disadvantaged; further, black teachers teach twice the proportion of disadvantaged white students
as the white teachers do. In short, the measured, and likely the unmeasured, characteristics of the

20

Table 5. Effects of teacher and student race matching on standardized achievement gains
No fixed effects
Teacher black
Teacher Hispanic
Teacher black*student black

-0.057
(5.12)
-0.034
(1.34)

-0.082
(5.13)
-0.087
(2.11)
0.047
(2.40)

With student fixed
effects
0.025
(2.34)
-0.011
(0.48)

With student and teacher
fixed effects

-0.015
(1.02)
-0.068
(1.65)
0.102
(5.31)

0.105
(7.89)

0.036
(2.10)
0.076
(1.30)
0.084
(1.94)

0.030
(2.72)
0.019
(0.47)
0.020
(0.82)

Teacher black*student male
Teacher black*student black*student male
Teacher black*student Hispanic
Teacher Hispanic*student black
Teacher Hispanic*student Hispanic

0.040
(2.30)
0.049
(0.83)
0.079
(1.85)

.119
(7.74)
0.001
(0.06)
-0.031
(1.54)
0.030
(2.61)
0.020
(0.48)
0.020
(0.82)

Note: All specifications include full sets of year, and grade dummy variables and indictors for special education classification, eligibility for a subsidized lunch,
limited English proficient classification, a structural move from elementary to junior high school prior to the academic year, and a non-structural school change
prior to or during the academic year. Specifications without student fixed effects also include gender and race/ethnicity dummy variables. Asian and Native
American teachers and students are excluded. The sample size is 216,958.

student bodies tend to be correlated with teacher race. The introduction of student fixed effects is
designed to control for systematic but unobserved student heterogeneity.
The inclusion of student fixed effects, however, does more than simply control for
unobserved student heterogeneity. With student fixed effects, the estimates of the average impact
of a black teacher come entirely from variations in average achievement patterns of students who
have both a black and a white teacher over the observation period. Consequently, if the extensive
sorting of students and teachers among schools described in Table 4 and the distribution of
subsidized lunch students is accompanied by systematic differences in teacher effectiveness, the
estimated racial gaps in teacher effectiveness could differ across specifications even in the
absence of unobserved student differences. (This discussion is an extension of the earlier
discussion about identification of teacher fixed effects when school fixed effects are also
included).
To see the complications, consider the following case that is consistent with the aggregate
move patterns of teachers: 1) The average effectiveness of white teachers weighted by the share
of students who also have a black teacher is below the overall average effectiveness of white
teachers; and 2) the average effectiveness of black teachers weighted by the share of students who
also have a white teacher is roughly equal to the overall average for black teachers. Assuming no
unobserved student or school differences, these patterns imply that the addition of student fixed
effects would raise the estimate of the average effectiveness of black teachers relative to white
teachers. Thus, the estimates in Column 3 indicate that the typical black teacher is better than the
typical white teacher in the same school setting, but it is not possible to provide a precise
comparison to the average white teacher found across the district.
Notice that these same ambiguities from the inclusion of student fixed effects potentially
complicate the interpretation of the differences between the estimated benefits of having a teacher
with the same ethnicity. Nevertheless, the fixed effect specification shows clearly that black

21

students who have had both a black and white teacher perform better relative to classmates during
the year in which they had the teacher of their own race.
The underlying mechanism behind the matching gains (to both white and black students)
from having a same race teacher cannot be identified from this analysis. It is not possible, for
example, to distinguish between positive mentoring effects that raise the performance of a black
student with a black teacher and negative learning effects that lower the performance of a white
student with black teachers.

Teacher Transitions
The finding of significant variations in teacher quality that are not captured by simple
observed characteristics is interesting from a research perspective but does not necessarily have
any direct policy implications. Even if researchers do not fully understand teacher quality
differences, policy makers, educators, and parents may understand these differences and may act
effectively on them. To investigate implications for policy, we turn to the operation of the
teacher labor market.
The high rate of teacher turnover in large urban districts engenders considerable concern
among educators, but the absence of evidence on the link between actual performance in the
classroom and transitions makes it difficult to judge the importance of this concern. One aspect
of this – the effect of initial teacher experience – has already been noted. Here we complement
that with a comparison of the overall effectiveness of teachers who exit the Lone Star District
with those who remain.
We divide teachers into four mobility categories for each year that they teach: remaining
in the same school, moving to a new school in the Lone Star District, moving to a new school

22

outside of Lone Star, or exiting the Texas public schools entirely.20 These categories correspond
to those common to policy discussions about teacher turnover.
Three features of teacher mobility rates are important. First, consistent with a number of
prior studies, teacher turnover is large (see, for example, Boyd et al. (2002), Hanushek, Kain, and
Rivkin (2004), and Podgursky, Monroe, and Watson (2004)). As described in detail in Appendix
A, the turnover of inexperienced teachers is especially high. Only 70 percent of teachers with
less than three years of experience remain in the same school from year to year. Second, teacher
turnover is systematically related to characteristics of the student body, most importantly the
achievement level of students in a school. Third, and relevant for the subsequent estimation of
mobility patterns, teachers who change districts on average see lower salary increases in the year
of transition than those who remain in the Lone Star district.
Our direct estimates of quality differences permit tracing the achievement implications of
the observed transitions. Table 6 reports estimates of differences in teacher quality by transition
type for a series of regressions that differ according to whether or not they control for student
fixed effects, school-by-year fixed effects, and the status of women teachers who return following
a one year hiatus (which may have been a maternity leave). The first three columns ignore any
subsequent return, while for the final specification women returnees are reclassified based on
where they teach in the year following their return. Note that the school-by-year fixed effect
specifications generate coefficients based on achievement differences within schools. All
estimates compare those who leave a school with those who remain.
The estimates in Table 6 provide little or no evidence that more effective teachers have
higher exit probabilities. On the contrary, those who exit are significantly less effective on
average than stayers regardless of whether they are compared to all stayers in the district or only
those in the same school and year. Moreover, those who switch campuses within the same

20

There is no distinction between involuntary and voluntary separations, because such information is not
available, but past analysis suggests that virtually all transitions out of teaching are teacher initiated.

23

Table 6. Estimates of Mean Differences in Teacher Quality by Transition Status

(Standardized Gains compared to teachers remaining in same school; absolute value of t statistics in parentheses)
With student fixed effects

Change campus
Change district
exit public schools

-0.089
(3.96)
-0.011
(0.36)
-0.044
(1.90)

-0.061
(2.69)
-0.031
(1.05)
-0.089
(3.83)

With school by
year fixed effects

With
reclassification of
women returnees

-0.054
(2.59)
-0.023
(0.78)
-0.072
(3.53)

-0.060
(2.65)
-0.028
(1.02)
-0.095
(3.77)

Note: All specifications include full sets of experience, year, and grade dummy variables. The sample size is 230,000.

district are also significantly less effective, while teachers who switch districts do not appear to
differ significantly from the stayers.
These mean differences are certainly informative, but they do not paint a comprehensive
picture of the distributions of stayers and movers. It is important to know if movers come
disproportionately from the tails of the distribution. Are inner city schools actually losing a large
number of the most promising teachers to other districts? Do those who really struggle in the
classroom have a very high rate of attrition?
In order to learn more about quality differences by transition status, Figures 2 plots kernel
density estimates of the distributions of teacher fixed effects by move status based on regressions
of adjusted student gain on a full set of teacher-by-year fixed effects, teacher experience dummies
included above, and student characteristics. Because of the aforementioned sorting of teachers
among schools, we also plot estimated teacher fixed effects produced by specifications that
include school fixed effects (Figure 3). Regardless of the specification, however, the distributions
of those who either change campuses or exit public schools fall distinctly below those who stay,
while quality distributions for those who change districts are quite similar to those of the stayers.
Although the specifications control for experience effects, the differences across
transition categories may differ systematically by experience. Therefore, Table 7 reports separate
estimates of differences by transition type for teachers with one, two, and three years of
experience. Unfortunately most of these coefficients are not precisely estimated, but two distinct
experience patterns do emerge. In the case of within district campus changes and exits out of the
Texas public schools, the largest quality gaps arise for teachers who transition out following their
second and third years. In the case of district switchers on the other hand, the younger movers
tend to be slightly above average in performance, although this difference is not statistically
significant and any quality premium appears to decline (and even reverse) with experience.
Interestingly, plots of the full distribution of teachers in the lower experience categories
(not shown) give some idea of the source of the mean differences that were identified. The

24

Figure 2. Kernal Density Estimates of Teacher Quality Distribution: Standardized Average Gains by Teacher
Move Status
1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
-2

-1.8

-1.6

-1.4

-1.2

-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

Relative teacher quality (s.d.)
Stays at Campus

Campus Change

District Change

Out of Public Education

1.4

1.6

1.8

Figure 3. Kernal Density Estimates of Teacher Quality Distribution: Standardized Average Gains Compared to
Other Teachers at the Same Campus by Teacher Move Status
1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
-2

-1.8

-1.6

-1.4

-1.2

-1

-0.8

Stays at Campus

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

Campus Change

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

District Change

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

Out of Public Education

1.6

1.8

Table 7. Estimates of Differences in Teacher Quality by Transition and Experience
(Standardized Gains compared to teachers remaining in same school including student fixed effects;
absolute value of t statistics in parentheses)
Teacher experience

Change campuses

Change districts

Exit Texas public
schools

First year experience

-0.031
(0.45)
-0.130
(1.27)
-0.089
(1.46)

0.107
(1.51)
0.062
(0.07)
0.021
(0.28)

-0.071
(1.40)
-0.159
(2.31)
-0.173
(2.73)

-0.057
(2.14)

-0.082
(2.21)

-0.059
(1.91)

Second year experience
Third year experience
More than three years
experience

Note: All specifications include full sets of experience, year, and grade dummy variables. The sample size is 230,000.

numbers of teachers in the transition groups by experience get rather small, but the positive mean
for the inexperienced district changers appears to be driven by a small number of very good
teachers who leave, and the distribution for the bulk of district switchers falls slightly to the left
of those who do not move. For those who exit teaching, the right hand tail of quality is very
similar to that for the stayers, but there is a noticeably thicker left hand half of the quality
distribution for exiters.
A final issue is the interpretation of the finding that teachers who exit the Texas public
schools are systematically less effective than those who remain. While these teachers may have
been less effective in the classroom throughout their careers, it is also possible that the exit year
was anomalous and not indicative of typical performance. For example, the exiting teacher might
have had a particularly unruly class or might have reacted to some other bad situation in the
school such as conflict with a new principal. An alternative possibility is that effort is reduced
once the decision is made not to return and that at least a portion of the transition quality gap
arises from the feedback effect of the decision to exit.
To investigate these possibilities, we measure teacher quality by student gains in the year
prior to each transition. For example, we describe the distribution of quality for transitions
following the 1999 school year with average student gains during the 1998 school year, meaning
that any change in circumstances or effort following the decision not to return for the subsequent
year does not affect the quality calculations. Note that this reduces sample size by eliminating
student performance information on the final year taught for each teacher and all who teach only
a single year in Lone Star district.
Table 8 reports two sets of coefficients, one based on lagged achievement gains and the
second based on current achievement gains for the same sample of transitions. The table also
compares movers both to all teachers and to just those in the same school through the inclusion of
school fixed effects. Note that, although the point estimates for the current scores without school

25

Table 8. Differences in Teacher Quality by Transition and Year Quality Measured
(Standardized Gains compared to teachers remaining in same school; absolute value of t statistics in parentheses)
Current year quality estimates
Within district
Within school
comparisons
comparisons
change campus
change district
exit public schools

-0.067
(2.29)
-0.021
(0.54)
-0.060
(1.90)

-0.033
(1.32)
-0.038
(1.01)
-0.067
(2.46)

Lagged year quality estimates
Within district
Within school
comparisons
comparisons
-0.032
(1.12)
-0.024
(0.54)
0.004
(0.12)

Note: All specifications include full sets of experience, year, and grade dummy variables. The sample size is 149,420.

0.002
(0.08)
-0.023
(0.60)
0.001
(0.05)

fixed effects differ some from the comparable estimates in Table 6 that use the entire sample, the
patterns are qualitatively the same.
Two findings stand out in the examination of exit year effects. First, those who leave a
school within the Lone Star District tend to be below average in both the district and the specific
school they are leaving during their final year. Second, and more important, the performance
during the exit year is noticeably worse than in the previous year. This strongly suggests that
those who exit are not systematically worse in a longer term sense but only in the year in
question. Whether this reflects a reduction in effort or particular difficulties in that year (that
might contribute to an exit decision) cannot be fully ascertained at this time. Nonetheless, the
fact that the differences holds for the within school comparisons suggest that it is not simply a
new principal or any school wide problem that is driving the results.

Who Hires More Effective Teachers?
The large changes in student characteristics observed for teachers who leave Lone Star
district for another Texas public school are similar to those described in other work and strongly
suggest that teachers consider these factors in making decisions about where to work.21
Moreover, even though salary declines on average following a transfer out of Lone Star District,
research indicates that current salary and alternative opportunities each affect transition
probabilities once compensating differentials have been adequately accounted for, although the
majority of teachers who exit the profession, at least in Georgia, do not procure jobs with higher
salaries.22 The crucial, unanswered question is whether schools take advantage of the
attractiveness of their student body (or, more likely, amenities correlated with student
characteristics) or higher pay to procure a higher quality teacher.
21

See Boyd et al. (2002) for evidence on New York State teachers, Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004) for
evidence on Texas teachers, and Scafidi, Sjoquist, and Stinebrickner (2002) for evidence on Georgia
teachers.
22
See Boyd et al (2002) and Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004) for discussions of compensating
differentials. Scafidi, Sjoquist, and Stinebrickner (2002) follow teachers when they leave teaching in
Georgia to ascertain the change in income for those exiting.

26

Ballou (1996) presents evidence that districts do not hire the best candidates based on
measurable characteristics and that administrators may trade off quality for lower expected
turnover. Since experience appears to have substantial impacts early in the career, such a tradeoff
could be justified if the quality differential is not too large – but prior analyses are mute on this..
To learn more about the value of quality in the teacher labor market, we examine the
linkage between salary and school demographic characteristics on the one hand and teacher
quality on the other for the 245 teachers who move to a new district. Previous work with flows of
teachers suggests that salary and the composition of students are each, on net, an attraction to
teachers. On the other hand, such districts might squander these advantages either because they
pursue other objectives or because they are not able to measure quality.
Table 9 reports salary and student demographic coefficients for a series of teacher
characteristic regressions that differ according to the “quality” measure that is the dependent
variable. The first is our outcome based measure (the teacher value added coefficients from
earlier regressions on standardized gain with an adjustment for experience), while the latter two
are common observable teacher characteristics – advanced degrees and certification test results.
It is important to recognize that we do not offer direct evidence on district choices. That
is, we do not observe which teachers applied to which schools or even which teachers looked to
change schools or districts. Nonetheless, the apparent preferences of teachers for certain types of
school environments and higher salaries strongly suggests that schools able to offer better
compensation packages (including non-pecuniary amenities) can choose from a deeper applicant
pool and thus can have a better chance of hiring high quality teachers. Consequently, if schools
are able to determine teacher effectiveness and they choose to hire the most effective teachers, we
should observe a systematic relationship between teacher quality and all aspects of compensation.
The results in Table 9 provide evidence that higher salaries and fewer black students may
raise the probability of hiring a teacher with an advanced degree. There is, however, little
systematic evidence that districts use higher salaries to procure better quality teachers defined in

27

Table 9. Estimated Effects of Salary and Student Demographic Characteristics on
the Quality of Newly Arrived Teachers (absolute value of t statistics in parentheses)
Direct quality
measure
Destination
campus
characteristics

Teacher quality proxies

teacher
standardized
gains

passed
certification
examination

advanced
degree

log salary

0.12
(0.63)

-0.15
(1.72)

0.22
(1.88)

% Black

0.0000
(0.01)

-0.0009
(1.18)

-0.0024
(2.67)

% Limited English
Proficient

0.0016
(0.89)

-0.0017
(1.86)

-0.0017
(1.49)

Note: All specifications include experience, year, teacher gender, and teacher race/ethnicity
dummy variables. The sample size is 245. Teacher fixed effects are obtained from the
regression of adjusted gain on a full set of teacher dummy variables, student characteristics,
and a full set of teacher experience dummy variables.

terms of student outcomes. The salary coefficient in the specification with our measure of quality
as the dependent variable does not approach statistical significance. Although the small sample
size certainly contributes to the imprecise estimates in the quality specifications, the consistency
with the evidence that shows that an advanced degree has little systematic relationship with the
quality of instruction reinforces the result.

Conclusions
Much policy debate revolves around the importance of teacher quality, but little
consistent evidence has been available about the importance or character of quality variations.
This paper investigates a number of dimensions of the distribution of teacher quality: the
magnitude of the variation in quality; the contributions of experience and teacher education to
that variation; and the importance of student teacher matching. This description expands
considerably what we know about the importance of teacher quality.
This analysis of teacher quality is, however, largely an input into understandings how
market forces play out in the teacher labor market. We employ our direct quality measures to
ascertain differences between those who remain in the large, urban district and those who leave
for other districts or professions. Further, we consider the extent to which suburban districts use
salary and student characteristics to attract better teachers.
Three methodological issues are important. First, because of the psychometric
characteristics of the Texas tests, it is crucial to standardize the test for the initial level of
achievement in order to compare teachers across the entire distribution. Second, we control for
potential nonteacher factors through both direct measurement of student body characteristics and,
at times, by restricting attention just to within-school variations in quality. Third, we use repeated
measures of teacher performance to obtain estimates of measurement error versus systematic
quality differences.

28

The analysis of the determinants of quality reveals some very important insights. First,
there is significant learning about the craft of teaching in the first few years of teaching. The
largest impact is the first year of experience, and experience effects disappear quickly after the
first year. Second, teachers who do well with students in one part of the achievement distribution
also do well with students in other parts of the distribution, suggesting that teacher-student
matching by initial preparation is not a particularly important policy issue. Third, students benefit
from having a same race teacher, quality held constant, and that benefit is sizeable.
The impact of these factors differs systematically by student ethnicity. Because of the
pattern of changing schools by teachers, 12 percent of the black and Hispanic students are taught
by teachers in their first year as compared to 7 percent of white students.23 A new teacher lowers
achievement growth by 0.12-0.16 standard deviations, holding overall teacher quality constant. If
we cumulate these effects across six years of primary schooling, the experience differential could
account for 0.04 s.d. average difference between whites and either blacks or Hispanics.
A commonly voiced policy concern is that large urban districts lose their better teachers
to other occupations or to suburban schools. We find little if any support for the notion that the
better teachers are the most likely to exit the public schools entirely. To the contrary, teachers
exiting Texas public schools are significantly less effective on average in the year prior to leaving
than those who remain, and those changing districts are quite similar in terms of effectiveness.
Similarly, there is little systematic evidence in support of the view that the urban district
loses its better teachers to the suburbs. Much has been made of the fact that salary differentials in
metropolitan areas exist and that these may frequently lead to a drain of high quality teachers
from urban centers. This view is reinforced by analyses that show urban areas to be net suppliers
of teachers to other districts and that show urban districts to lose teachers disproportionately from
schools with low achievement and high minority populations. Although high turnover hurts

23

The difference for teachers in their second year of experience is much smaller: 7 percent for black
students, 8 percent for Hispanic students, and 6 percent for white students.

29

students because of the lower performance of inexperienced (replacement) teachers, the evidence
does not support the related concern that the best teachers are those most likely to leave.
At the same time, looking at hiring patterns for districts employing teachers from the
Lone Star district fails to find a strong relationship between quality and salary, suggesting that it
may be quite difficult to discern quality from a teacher’s past performance in another district.
(The small sample size does, however, limit the precision of the estimates).
The identification of large variation in the quality of instruction within schools has at
least two additional implications related to school accountability. Current state accountability
systems typically aggregate the level of student scores for an entire school, in part on arguments
about averaging out any measurement error. First, even if the average level of test scores has a
larger signal to noise ratio, the appropriately constructed achievement gain is a much more
appropriate measure of value added and school effectiveness. It is more closely related to current
teacher performance and controls for important family and community differences that tend to
confound estimates of teacher value added based on achievement levels. And second, any formal
or informal school evaluation program that aggregates performance to the school level or across
years misses the majority of the variation in the quality of instruction. This weakens the
incentives for good teachers to enter and remain in teaching, for ineffective teachers to leave, and
for all teachers to put forth greater effort. These costs should be compared with the superiority of
measuring performance at the school level in terms of fostering greater teacher cooperation
within the school, a concept frequently advanced in policy discussions.
Separating the elements of teacher quality from other possible influences on achievement
is difficult, and some ambiguity will necessarily remain. Moreover, this analysis is further
limited in important ways: It is clearly conditional upon both the test instruments and the
institutional structure of Lone Star schools and their hiring patterns. Nonetheless, it provides both
a methodology and a set of initial investigations of the market of teacher quality – something that
has defied past analysis.

30

Appendix A. Description of Teacher Mobility in the Lone Star District
Appendix Table A1 shows the substantial teacher mobility in the Lone Star District,
particularly among inexperienced teachers. Only 70 percent of teachers with fewer than three
years of experience remain in the same school from one year to the next. New teachers have the
highest transition rates: 12 percent switch schools within Lone Star District, 4 percent switch
districts, and 14 percent exit the Texas public schools entirely following their first year as
teachers. As teachers acquire experience, the probability of exiting declines steadily prior to
rising again near retirement. On the other hand, experience does not substantially reduce
movement within Lone Star District, and a substantial fraction of teachers with fewer than 10
years of experience move to a different Texas public school outside of Lone Star District.
Consistent with prior studies, the probability of moving differs by a number of classroom
characteristics. Appendix Table A2 provides school average student demographic characteristics
by annual teacher move status. This shows vividly that average math score is much lower for
teachers who switch schools within Lone Star District (-0.38 standard deviations) and lower for
those who exit the public schools entirely (-0.33 s.d.) or switch districts (-0.29 s.d.) than for
teachers who remain in the same school.24 Somewhat surprisingly based on our prior work for the
state as a whole (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004)), the differences in racial and ethnic
composition and income are smaller and less systematic.
Because transition rates are higher for less experienced teachers, the two panels report
these classroom characteristics for teachers in their first year and in their second or third years of
experience, i.e., for the groups with the highest exit rates from their current school. While
anecdotal stories of teacher placement suggest that beginning teachers work in classrooms that
uniformly have the lowest achievement levels and the most disadvantaged students in terms of
income or the race and ethnicity of the students, within the Lone Star District these patterns do
not completely hold. As with all teachers, those switching schools within the district have the
lowest average achievement in their classes (compared to other categories of move status). The
racial composition and income composition, however, do not show much in the way of systematic
patterns, quite possibly reflecting the very high minority enrollment and the generally low income
levels of the district.
While Appendix Table A2 presents the characteristics of Lone Star District classrooms
from which teachers exit, an alternative perspective is how campus characteristics change with a
move. Appendix Table A3 reports the year-to-year changes in salary, average math achievement,
and student demographic characteristics by experience and transition type for those who switch
schools within the district and those who leave the district for another Texas public school. Not
surprisingly, those who exit Lone Star District for another district see the most dramatic change in
student characteristics. Average math achievement increases by 0.13 standard deviations and
percentages Black, Hispanic, and students eligible for a subsidized lunch fall by 8, 15 and 28
percentage points, respectively. This compares to much smaller changes for those who switch
schools within Lone Star District (or remain in the same school).
In contrast to the dramatic improvements in student achievement and increases in student
SES, district switchers tend to experience smaller salary increases than those who remain in Lone
Star District. For all teachers who do not move, the average salary increase is $2,137; first year
24

All test scores, as described previously, are normalized to mean zero and standard deviation one for the
state as a whole in each grade-test year. The overall scores for all teachers simply indicate that Lone Star
District, like most large urban districts, has overall performance that is 0.25 standard deviations below the
Texas state mean.

teachers who stay in the same school have salary increases averaging $3,204. But, the average
salary increase for all district movers is $2,085 and for new teachers it is only $1,807. This
pattern is consistent with research on the State of Texas as a whole (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin
(2004)). Given that teachers initiate the vast majority of transitions and undoubtedly prefer higher
salaries, this pattern indicates the existence of large compensating differentials which complicate
the identification of the relationship between salary and the supply of teachers.
Overall, the changes by experience group are most interesting in their similarities to the
“all teacher” results. While there are a few differences such as the decline in campus math scores
for new teachers that change districts, most of the overall patterns are quite consistent.

Appendix Table A1. Teacher Transitions by Teacher Experience
(annual rates in percent)

Teacher
Experience
1 year
2-3 years
4-6 years
7-11 years
12-21 years
> 21 years

No Move
70.4
70.8
77.0
79.7
86.2
86.5

Change
Campus
11.5
11.2
10.4
10.6
8.3
5.7

Change
District
4.0
5.0
5.4
4.3
2.0
0.7

Exit Public
Schools
14.0
13.0
7.2
5.4
3.5
7.2

Appendix Table A2. Average Classroom Characteristics by
Transition Status and Teacher Experienceb
No Move

Change
Campus

Change
District

Exit Public
Schools

All teachers
Average Math z Scorea
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Percent Lunch Program

-0.23
33.4
52.3
73.6

-0.38
35.3
55.5
79.3

-0.29
33.7
53.0
75.9

-0.33
33.5
52.1
73.2

1 year experience
Average Math z Scorea
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Percent Lunch Program

-0.47
31.4
59.7
80.5

-0.57
37.8
57.1
85.4

-0.40
43.1
45.7
78.8

-0.56
40.8
49.2
75.6

2-3 years experience
Average Math z Scorea
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Percent Lunch Program

-0.29
31.1
57.6
77.0

-0.39
34.7
57.9
80.6

-0.25
32.0
53.6
75.4

-0.34
31.3
57.1
76.4

Notes: a. Scores are normalized in each grade and year such that the entire state has mean zero and
standard deviation one.
b. Characteristics pertain to classroom characteristics for each year teachers are observed.

Appendix Table A3. Change in Average Campus Characteristics and
Pay By Transition Status and Experience

No Move

Change
Campus

Change District

All teachers
Average Math z Score
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Percent Lunch Program.
Average Salary

0.00
-0.57
1.04
1.17
2,137

0.03
-2.79
-0.65
-4.65
2,435

0.13
-8.17
-14.85
-27.63
2,085

1 year experience
Average Math z Score
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Percent Lunch Program..
Average Salary

0.03
-0.65
1.07
1.25
3,204

0.07
-6.72
5.22
-1.56
3,580

-0.03
-9.36
-8.57
-27.40
1,807

2-3 years experience
Average Math z Score
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Percent Lunch Program.
Average Salary

0.02
-0.56
1.00
1.08
1,631

0.06
-2.10
-5.04
-9.24
1,604

0.17
-6.73
-17.26
-27.84
1,340

References
Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander. 2003. "Teachers and Student Achievement
in the Chicago Public High Schools." WP 2002-28, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
(June).
Armor, David J., Patricia Conry-Oseguera, Millicent Cox, Niceima King, Lorraine McDonnell,
Anthony Pascal, Edward Pauly, and Gail Zellman. 1976. Analysis of the school preferred
reading program in selected Los Angeles minority schools. Santa Monica, CA: Rand
Corp.
Bacolod, Marigee P., and Justin L. Tobias. 2003. "Schools, school quality and academic
achievement: Evidence from the Phillipines." (mimeo), University of California, Irvine
(March).
Ballou, Dale. 1996. "Do public schools hire the best applicants?" Quarterly Journal of Economics
111,no.1 (February):97-133.
Ballou, Dale, William Sanders, and Paul Wright. 2004. "Controlling for student background in
value-added assessment of teachers." Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics
29,no.1 (Spring):37-65.
Bishop, John H., Ferran Mane, Michael Bishop, and Joan Moriarty. 2001. "The role of end-ofcourse exams and minimal competency exams in standards-based reforms." In Brookings
papers on education policy 2001, edited by Diane Ravitch. Washington, DC:
Brookings:267-345.
Boyd, Don, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. 2002. "Do high-stakes tests
affect teachers' exit and transfer decisions? The case of the 4th grade test in New York
State." Stanford Graduate School of Education (mimeo)
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor. forthcoming. "Who teaches whom?
Race and the distribution of novice teachers." Economics of Education Review.
Dee, Thomas S. 2004. "Teachers, race, and student achievemen tin a randomized experiment."
Review of Economics and Statistics 86,no.1 (February):195-210.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G., and Dominic J. Brewer. 1995. "Did teachers' verbal ability and race matter
in the 1960s? Coleman revisited." Economics of Education Review 14,no.1 (March):1-21.
Hanushek, Eric A. 1971. "Teacher characteristics and gains in student achievement: Estimation
using micro data." American Economic Review 60,no.2 (May):280-288.
———. 1979. "Conceptual and empirical issues in the estimation of educational production
functions." Journal of Human Resources 14,no.3 (Summer):351-388.
———. 1992. "The trade-off between child quantity and quality." Journal of Political Economy
100,no.1 (February):84-117.

———. 2003. "The failure of input-based schooling policies." Economic Journal 113,no.485
(February):F64-F98.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steve G. Rivkin. 2002. "Inferring program effects for
specialized populations: Does special education raise achievement for students with
disabilities?" Review of Economics and Statistics 84,no.4 (November):584-599.
———. 2004. "Why public schools lose teachers." Journal of Human Resources 39,no.2:326354.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2004. "How to improve the supply of high quality
teachers." In Brookings Papers on Education Policy 2004, edited by Diane Ravitch.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press:7-25.
Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas O. Staiger. 2001. "Improving school accountability measures."
WP 8156, National Bureau of Economic Research (March).
———. 2002. "The promise and pitfalls of using imprecise school accountabilty measures."
Journal of Economic Perspectives 16,no.4 (Fall):91-114.
———. 2002. "Volatility in school test scores: Implications for test-based accountability
systems." In Brookings Papers on Education Policy 2002, edited by Diane Ravitch.
Washington, DC: Brookings:235-269.
Murnane, Richard J. 1975. Impact of school resources on the learning of inner city children.
Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Murnane, Richard J., and Barbara Phillips. 1981. "What do effective teachers of inner-city
children have in common?" Social Science Research 10,no.1 (March):83-100.
Podgursky, Michael, Ryan Monroe, and Daniel Watson. 2004. "The academic quality of public
school teachers: An analysis of entry and exit behavior." Economics of Education Review
23,no.5 (October):507-518.
Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2005. "Teachers, schools, and academic
achievement." Econometrica 73,no.2 (March).
Rockoff, Jonah E. 2004. "The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence
from Panel Data." American Economic Review 94,no.2 (May):247-252.
Sanders, William L., and Sandra P. Horn. 1994. "The Tennessee value-added assessment system
(TVAAS): Mixed-model methodology in educational assessment." Journal of Personnel
Evaluation in Education 8:299-311.
Sanders, William L., Arnold M. Saxton, and Sandra P. Horn. 1997. "The Tennessee Value-Added
Assessment System: A Quanititive, Outcomes-Based Approach to Educational
Assessment." In Grading Teachers, Grading Schools: Is Student Achievement a Valid
Evaluation Measure? Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press, Inc.

Scafidi, Benjamin, David Sjoquist, and Todd R Stinebrickner. 2002. "Where do teachers go?
Georgia State University (mimeo), October.
Tobias, Justin L. 2004. "Assessing Assessments of School Performance: The Case of California."
American Statistician 58,no.1:55-63.

