                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY IN A LIQUIDITY TRAP:
                       THE JAPANESE EXPERIENCE 1999-2004

                                            Mitsuru Iwamura
                                             Takeshi Kudo
                                           Tsutomu Watanabe

                                          Working Paper 11151
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11151


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




We would like to thank Hiroshi Fujiki, Fumio Hayashi, Bennett T. McCallum, Shigenori Shiratsuka, and
Kazuo Ueda for useful suggestions and comments, and Naohiko Baba and Kazuhiko Ishida for helping us
to collect the data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Mitsuru Iwamura, Takeshi Kudo, and Tsutomu Watanabe. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a Liquidity Trap: The Japanese Experience 1999-2004
Mitsuru Iwamura, Takeshi Kudo, and Tsutomu Watanabe
NBER Working Paper No. 11151
February 2005
JEL No. E31, E52, E58, E61, E62

                                             ABSTRACT

We characterize monetary and fiscal policy rules to implement optimal responses to a substantial

decline in the natural rate of interest, and compare them with policy decisions made by the Japanese

central bank and government in 1999—2004. First, we find that the Bank of Japan’s policy

commitment to continuing monetary easing until some prespecified conditions are satisfied lacks

history dependence, a key feature of the optimal monetary policy rule. Second, the term structure of

the interest rate gap (the spread between the actual real interest rate and its natural rate counterpart)

was not downward sloping, indicating that the Bank of Japan’s commitment failed to have su.cient

influence on the market’s expectations about the future course of monetary policy. Third, we find

that the primary surplus in 1999—2002 was higher than predicted by the historical regularity,

implying that the Japanese government deviated from the Ricardian rule toward fiscal tightening.

These findings suggest that inappropriate conduct of monetary and fiscal policy during this period

delayed the timing to escape from the liquidity trap.

Mitsuru Iwamura                                         Tsutomu Watanabe
GSAPS                                                   Institute of Economic Research
Waseda University                                       Hitotsubashi University
Shinjyuku, Tokyo 169-0051                               Kunitachi, Tokyo 186-8603
JAPAN                                                   JAPAN

Takeshi Kudo
Graduate School of Economics
Hitotsubashi University
Kunitachi, Tokyo 186-8603
JAPAN
1     Introduction

Recent developments in the Japanese economy are characterized by the concurrence of two rare phe-
nomena: deflation and zero nominal interest rates. The year-on-year CPI inflation rate has been

below zero for about six years since the second quarter of 1998 (see Figure 1). On the other hand, the
uncollateralized overnight call rate has been practically zero since the Bank of Japan (BOJ) policy

board made a decision on February 12, 1999 to lower it to be “as low as possible” (see Figure 2).
    The concurrence of these two phenomena has revived the interest of researchers in what Keynes
(1936) called a liquidity trap, and various studies have recently investigated this issue. These studies

share the following two features. First, regarding diagnosis, they argue that the natural rate of interest,
which is defined as the equilibrium real interest rate, is below zero in Japan, while the real overnight

call rate is above zero because of deflationary expectations, and that such an interest rate gap leads to

weak aggregate demand. This diagnosis was first made by Krugman (1998) and shared by Woodford
(1999), Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Jung et al. (2003), and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003a,

b) among others.1

    Second, based on this diagnosis, these studies write out a prescription that the BOJ should make

a commitment to an expansionary monetary policy in the future. Woodford (1999) and Reifschneider
and Williams (2000) argue that, even when the current overnight interest rate is close to zero, the long-

term nominal interest rate could be well above zero if future overnight rates are expected to be above

zero.2 In this situation, a central bank could lower the long-term nominal interest rate by committing

itself to an expansionary monetary policy in the future, thereby stimulating current aggregate demand.
As emphasized by Woodford (1999), Jung et al. (2003), and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003a, b), an
important feature of this prescription is monetary policy inertia: a zero interest rate policy should be

continued for a while, even after the natural rate of interest returns to a positive level. By making
such a commitment, a central bank is able to achieve lower long-term nominal interest rates, higher

   1 Rogoﬀ (1998) casts doubt on the plausibility of this diagnosis by pointing out that the investment-GDP ratio is well

over 20 percent in Japan. Benhabib et al. (2002) show the existence of a self-fulfilling deflationary equilibrium, in which
deflation and zero interest rates simultaneously occur even if the natural rate of interest stays above zero. Christiano
(2004) investigates the numerical conditions under which the natural rate of interest falls temporarily below zero, using
a model with endogenous capital formation.
   2 Note that this argument assumes that an adverse shock to the natural rate of interest is not permanent but

temporary. Otherwise, future overnight rates are also constrained by the zero lower bound, so that there is no room
for lowering the long-term nominal interest rate. Svensson (2001) names this a temporary liquidity trap to emphasize
the diﬀerence from the original definition by Keynes (1936) in which the long-term nominal interest rate faces the zero
bound constraint.


                                                            2
expected inflation, and a weaker domestic currency in the adverse periods when the natural rate
of interest significantly deviates from a normal level. This is as if a central bank “borrows” future

monetary easing in the periods when current monetary easing is exhausted.
    This idea of borrowing future easing has been discussed not only in the academic arena, but also
in the policy-making process.3 Just after the introduction of a “zero interest rate policy” in February

1999, there was a perception in the money markets that such an irregular policy would not be continued

for long. Reflecting this perception, implied forward interest rates for longer than six months started
to rise in early March. This was clearly against the BOJ’s expectation that the zero overnight call

rate would spread to longer-term nominal interest rates. Forced to make the bank’s policy intention
clearer, Governor Masaru Hayami announced on April 13, 1999 that the monetary policy board would

keep the overnight interest rate at zero until “deflationary concerns are dispelled”.4 Some researchers

and practitioners argue that this announcement has had the eﬀect of lowering longer-term interest

rates by altering the market’s expectations about the future path of the overnight call rate (Taylor
(2000)). Given such a similarity between the BOJ’s policy intention and the prescriptions proposed

by academic researchers, a natural question is whether or not the BOJ’s policy commitment is close

to the optimal one. The first objective of this paper is to measure the distance between the optimal
monetary policy rule derived in the literature and the BOJ’s policy in practice.

    The second objective of this paper is to think about the role of fiscal policy in a liquidity trap. The

typical textbook answer to the question of how to escape from a liquidity trap is to adopt an expan-

sionary fiscal policy, given that monetary policy is ineﬀective in the sense of no more room for current
interest rate reductions (Hicks (1967)). Interestingly, however, researchers since Krugman (1998) pay
almost no attention to the role of fiscal policy. This diﬀerence comes from their assumption about

the behavior of the government: the government adjusts its primary surplus so that the government
intertemporal budget constraint is satisfied for any possible path of the price level. That is, fiscal
policy is assumed to be “passive” in the sense of Leeper (1991) or “Ricardian” in the terminology of

Woodford (1995). Given this assumption, the government budget constraint is automatically satis-

    3 For example, Governor Toshihiko Fukui stated on June 1, 2003 that the idea behind the current policy commitment

is “to achieve an easing eﬀect by the Bank’s commitment to keep short-term rates at low levels well into the future. In
this way, even if short-term rates come up against the lower bound, the Bank can still “borrow” from the eﬀect of the
future low rates” (Fukui (2003)).
    4 The BOJ terminated this commitment in August 2000, and made a new commitment of maintaining quantitative

easing policy until “the core CPI registers stably a zero percent or an increase year on year” in March 2001. See Table
1 for the chronology of the BOJ’s monetary policy decisions in 1999—2004.


                                                          3
fied, so that researchers need not worry about the government’s solvency condition in characterizing
the optimal monetary policy rule in a liquidity trap.5 However, this does not necessarily imply that

fiscal policy plays no role in the determination of equilibrium inflation. Rather, as pointed out by

Iwamura and Watanabe (2002) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003b), a path for the primary sur-
plus is uniquely selected when one chooses a monetary policy path by solving a central bank’s loss
minimization problem. Put diﬀerently, even if a central bank faithfully follows the optimal monetary

policy rule derived in the literature, the economy might fail to achieve the optimal outcome if the
government’s behavior deviates from the one compatible with the optimal monetary policy rule. Then

one might ask whether or not the assumption of passive fiscal policy was actually satisfied during the
period in which the Japanese economy was in a liquidity trap. Specifically, one might be interested

in whether or not the Japanese government has adjusted the primary balance as implicitly assumed

in the literature.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 characterizes optimal monetary and fiscal

policy in a liquidity trap by solving a central bank’s intertemporal loss-minimization problem. Sections
3 and 4 compare the optimal commitment solution with the monetary and fiscal policy adopted in

1999—2004. Section 5 concludes the paper.


2      Optimal commitment policy in a liquidity trap
2.1      A simple model

Household’s consumption decision                 Let us consider a representative household that seeks to

maximize a discounted sum of utilities of the form
                                      "∞                        #
                                       X
                                             t
                                  E0       β u(ct + gt , · · · ) ,
                                             t=0

where u(·) is an increasing and concave function with respect to ct + gt , and β represents the discount

factor. Following Woodford (2001), we assume that the private consumption expenditures ct and the

government purchases gt are perfectly substitutable, so that government purchases have exactly the

same eﬀect on the economy as transfers to households of funds suﬃcient to finance private consumption
for exactly the same amount. This assumption, together with the assumption of lump-sum taxes,
creates a simple environment in which the government behavior aﬀects the equilibrium only through
    5 Withrespect to this, Krugman (2000) states, “We assume ... that any implications of the [open market] operation
for the government’s budget constraint are taken care of via lump-sum taxes and transfers” (Krugman (2000), p. 225).


                                                         4
changes in the household’s budget constraint. Also, we do not treat money balances and labor supply
explicitly in the utility function in order to make the exposition simpler (see Woodford (2003) for

detailed discussions on these issues).
    The representative household is subject to a flow budget constraint of the form
                                 ∞
                                 X                 £ h        h
                                                                      ¤            h
                      P t ct +         Et [Qt,t+j ] Bt,t+j − Bt−1,t+j   ≤ Pt dt + Bt−1,t ,                     (2.1)
                                 j=1

where Pt is the price level, dt is the household’s disposable income, and Qt,t+j is a (nominal) stochastic

discount factor for pricing arbitrary financial claims that matures in period t + j.6 We assume that
the government issues zero-coupon nominal bonds, each of which pays one yen when it matures, and

denote the face value of bonds held by the representative household at the end of period t that will
                             h
come due in period t + j by Bt,t+j . Since the nominal market price in period t of a bond that matures

in period t + j is Et [Qt,t+j ] (=Et [1 × Qt,t+j ]), the second term on the right-hand side represents the
amount of repayment for bonds that mature in period t. The representative household allocates the

sum of disposable income and the repayment between consumption expenditures and the purchases
                               h        h
of government bonds. The term Bt,t+j − Bt−1,t+j represents the change from the previous period in

the face value of bonds that mature in period t + j, namely, an amount of net purchase in period t.

These new bonds are evaluated at the market price in period t. Note that nominal bond prices must
satisfy

                         Et [Qt,t+j ] = Et [Qt,t+1 Qt+1,t+2 × · · · × Qt+j−1,t+j ] ,

and that the one-period risk-free nominal interest rate in period t + k (k ≥ 0), which is denoted by
it+k , satisfies

                                             1
                                                   = Et+k [Qt+k,t+k+1 ].
                                          1 + it+k

Under the assumption that the central bank can control the one-period risk-free interest rate, these two
equations imply that the market’s expectations about the future course of monetary policy, represented
by the path of it+k , aﬀects nominal bond prices.
    The sequence of flow budget constraints and the No-Ponzi-game condition implies an intertemporal
budget constraint, and necessary and suﬃcient conditions for household maximization are then that
   6 Under the assumption of complete financial markets, the existence and uniqueness of such an asset-pricing kernel
follows from the absence of arbitrage opportunities.


                                                            5
the first-order condition
                                                 (        "       0
                                                                                         #)−1
                                            −1                u (ct+1 + gt+1 ) Pt
                             1 + it = β              Et                                                       (2.2)
                                                                u0 (ct + gt ) Pt+1

holds at all times, and that the household exhausts its intertemporal budget constraint. We assume

that some part, denoted by νt , of the economy’s output yt is distributed to another type of household

that does not make consumption decisions based on intertemporal utility maximization, so that the

market-clearing condition can be written as yt = ct + νt + gt . Substituting this condition into (2.2)
yields
                                                (        "    0
                                                                                         #)−1
                                           −1                u (yt+1 − νt+1 ) Pt
                            1 + it = β              Et                                           .            (2.3)
                                                               u0 (yt − νt ) Pt+1

Substituting the same condition into the flow budget constraint (equation (2.1) with an exact equality)

and the corresponding intertemporal budget constraint leads to
                                     ∞
                                     X
                           Pt st +         Et [Qt,t+j ] [Bt,t+j − Bt−1,t+j ] = Bt−1,t                         (2.4)
                                     j=1
                            ∞
                            X                                         ∞
                                                                      X
                                  Et [Qt,t+j Pt+j st+j ] =                  Et [Qt,t+j ]Bt−1,t+j              (2.5)
                            j=0                                       j=0

where st represents the real primary surplus, which is defined as tax revenues less government expen-
ditures, and Bt,t+j is the supply of government bonds.7
   We log-linearize equations (2.3) and (2.4) around the baseline path of each variable, which is

specified as follows. With respect to the maturity structure of government debt, we assume
                               ∗
                             Bt−1,t+j
                             ∗         = θj ≤ 1                             for   j = 1, 2, · · · ,           (2.6)
                            Bt+j−1,t+j

where θ is a parameter satisfying 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1. We use ∗ to indicate the baseline path of a variable.
          ∗
The term Bt−1,t+j represents the face value of bonds at the end of period t − 1 that mature in period
            ∗
t + j, and Bt+j−1,t+j represents the face value of the same type of bonds just before redemption in

period t + j. Equation (2.6) simply states that the government issues additional bonds, which mature
in period t + j, at a rate θ in each period between t and t + j − 1. Note that θ = 0 corresponds to the
case in which all bonds mature in one period, while θ = 1 corresponds to the case in which all bonds

are perpetual bonds. With respect to other variables, we assume

                     c∗t = c∗ ; yt∗ = y ∗ ; s∗t = s∗ ; Pt∗ = P ∗ ; Q∗t,t+j = β j ; νt∗ = 0.
  7 Here we implicitly assume that the second type of household faces a flow budget constraint similar to (2.1), and
that they exhaust their budget constraint.


                                                                      6
Note that the inflation rate is assumed to be zero on the baseline path.
    Log-linearizing (2.3) around the baseline path, we obtain
                                                  h                        i
                             x̂t = Et x̂t+1 − σ −1 (ît − Et π̂t+1 ) − r̂tn ,                                            (2.7)

where a variable with a hat represents the proportional deviation of the variable from its value on

the baseline path (for example, P̂t is defined as P̂t ≡ ln Pt − ln Pt∗ ),8 and σ is a positive parameter
                       00          0
defined as σ ≡ −u (y ∗ )y ∗ /u (y ∗ ). The output gap xt is defined as xt ≡ yt − ytn , where ytn represents
the natural rate of output or potential output. The inflation rate πt is defined as πt ≡ ln Pt − ln Pt−1 .

Finally, the deviation of the natural rate of interest from its baseline path, r̂tn , is defined as
                                                 £ n                              ¤
                                       r̂tn ≡ σEt (ŷt+1 − ŷtn ) − (ν̂t+1 − ν̂t ) .                                     (2.8)

According to the above definition of r̂tn , variations in the natural rate of interest are caused by short-

term factors such as changes in νt , as well as long-term factors such as the growth rate of potential
output. Log-linearizing (2.4) around the baseline path, we obtain9
                  h               i                                           h          i
         (1 − βθ) B̂t − β −1 B̂t−1 = −(1 − βθ)(1 − θ)(βθ)−1 Q̂t − β −1 (1 − β) P̂t + ŝt                                 (2.9)

where Bt and Q̂t are defined as
                                       ∞
                                       X                                ∞
                                                                        X
                             B̂t ≡           (βθ)j B̂t,t+1+j ; Q̂t ≡          (βθ)j Et [Q̂t,t+j ].
                                       j=0                              j=0

B̂t and Q̂t can be interpreted as a nominal debt aggregate, and an index of nominal bond prices.
    Equation (2.7) can be seen as an “IS equation” that states that the output gap in period t is
determined by the expected value of the output gap in period t + 1 and the gap between the short-

term real interest rate and the natural rate of interest in period t. Equation (2.7) can be iterated
forward to obtain
                                                       ∞
                                                       X       h                           i
                                                  −1                                   n
                                       x̂t = −σ              Et (ît+j − π̂t+j+1 ) − r̂t+j   .                          (2.10)
                                                       j=0
                                                                        P∞         h                           i
                                                                                                           n
According to the expectations theory, the expression                      j=0    Et (ît+j − π̂t+j+1 ) − r̂t+j   stands for the
deviation of the long-term real interest rate from the corresponding natural rate of interest in period
t, which implies that, given the path of the natural rate of interest, the output gap depends negatively

on the long-term real interest rate.
   8 Thedefinition of ît diﬀers slightly from those of the other variables; namely, ît ≡ ln(1 + it ) − ln(1 + i∗t ).
   9 Thehousehold’s intertemporal budget constraint and the market clearing condition imply that Bt−1,t      ∗      /Pt∗ = (1 −
          −1  ∗
βθ)(1 − β) st holds on the baseline path. We use this to obtain (2.9).


                                                                    7
New Keynesian Phillips curve                    In addition to the IS equation, we need an “AS equation” to
describe the supply side of the economy. We adopt a framework of staggered price setting developed

by Calvo (1983). It is assumed that in each period a fraction 1 − α of goods suppliers get to set a new
price, while the remaining α must continue to sell at their previously posted prices. The suppliers
that get to set new prices are chosen randomly each period, with each having an equal probability of

being chosen. Under these assumptions, we obtain an AS equation of the form10


                                                 π̂t = κx̂t + βEt π̂t+1 ,                            (2.11)

where κ is a positive parameter which is conversely related to the value of α. Equation (2.11) is
the so-called New Keynesian Phillips curve, which diﬀers from the traditional Phillips curve in that

current inflation depends on the expected rate of future inflation, Et π̂t+1 , rather than the expected

rate of current inflation, Et−1 π̂t .


Locally Ricardian fiscal policy                 We assume that the government determines the (nominal) pri-
mary surplus each period following a fiscal policy rule of the form
                                       ∞
                                       X
                             Pt st =         [Et (Qt,t+j ) − Et−1 (Qt−1,t+j )] Bt−1,t+j ,            (2.12)
                                       j=0

where the term Et (Qt,t+j )−Et−1 (Qt−1,t+j ) represents the realized nominal one-period holding return,
including interest payments and capital gains/losses, for a bond that matures in period t+j. Equation
(2.12) simply states that the government creates a primary surplus by an amount just enough to
cover these payments on existing liabilities. In a deterministic environment, in which there is no

uncertainty about the sequence of bond prices, the absence of arbitrage opportunities implies it−1 =

(Qt,t+j − Qt−1,t+j )/Qt−1,t+j , so that (2.12) reduces to
                                                                  
                                             X∞
                               Pt st = it−1     Qt−1,t+j Bt−1,t+j  ,                               (2.13)
                                                       j=0

                    P∞
where the term         j=0   Qt−1,t+j Bt−1,t+j represents the market value of the existing government lia-

bilities at the end of period t − 1, and the right hand side of equation (2.13) represents the interest
payments on existing liabilities. Equation (2.13) is equivalent to a budget deficit (not primary deficit

but conventional deficit) targeting rule, and in that sense, is very close to the spirit of the fiscal
 10 See   Woodford (2003) for more on the derivation.


                                                               8
requirement of the Maastricht treaty or the Stability and Growth Pact in the European Monetary
Union. Also, the fiscal policy rule of this form is used in empirical studies such as Bohn (1998), in

order to describe the actual government’s behavior.
    Sustituting (2.12) into the government’s flow budget constraint (equation (2.4)), we observe that
                          ∞
                          X                                 ∞
                                                            X
                                Et [Qt,t+1+j ]Bt,t+1+j =           Et−1 [Qt−1,t+j ]Bt−1,t+j
                          j=0                                j=0

holds each period. That is, the market value of the existing government liabilities does not change
in each period as long as the government determines the primary surplus following (2.12). Using this

property, we observe that
                                              
                      ∞
                      X                                          ∞
                                                                 X
          Et Qt,τ +1    Qτ −1,τ +j Bτ −1,τ +j  = Et [Qt,τ +1 ]   Et−1 [Qt−1,t+j ]Bt−1,t+j
                           j=0                                            j=0


holds for all τ > t, which implies11
                                                                               
                                                    ∞
                                                    X
                                 lim Et Qt,τ +1          Qτ −1,τ +j Bτ −1,τ +j  = 0.                               (2.14)
                                 τ →∞
                                                    j=0


This equation states that the fiscal policy rule (2.12) guarantees the transversality condition for any
path of the price level. Thus the government’s transversality condition does not aﬀect the price level

in equilibrium as long as the government follows the rule (2.12). Fiscal policy rules with this feature

are called “passive” by Leeper (1991), and “locally Ricardian” by Woodford (1995).

    Equations (2.7), (2.9), (2.11), and the log-linear version of (2.12)
                                                                    h                 i
                      ŝt + P̂t = (1 − βθ)B̂t−1 + (1 − β)−1 (1 − βθ) Q̂t − θ −1 Q̂t−1                                (2.15)

consist of four key equations of our model.12 Given the natural rate of interest r̂tn as an exogenous
variable and the short-term nominal interest rate ît as a policy variable, which is determined as we see
in the next subsection, these four equations determine the equilibrium paths of x̂, P̂ (or equivalently

π̂), B̂, and ŝ.13 It should be emphasized that fiscal variables (ŝt and B̂t ) do not appear in the IS and AS

equations ((2.7) and (2.11)), so that, given the paths of ît and r̂tn , these two equations determine the
  11 Here we assume that the short-term nominal interest rate might be zero in the present and subsequent periods, but

that it is strictly above zero in the suﬃciently remote future, so that limτ →∞ Et [Qt,τ +1 ] = 0.
  12 Note that equation (2.5), which is an equilibrium condition related to government solvency, is not a part of the key

equations, since it is automatically satisfied as long as the government follows the rule (2.12).
  13 Since Q̂ = −î −
                          P∞        j
              t       t     j=1 (βθ) Et [ît+1 + ît+2 + · · · + ît+j−1 ], the value of Q̂t is determined by the path of the
short-term nominal interest rate chosen by the central bank. Note that the expectations theory holds locally (i.e., as
long as deviations of each variable from its baseline value are small enough).


                                                              9
paths of x̂t and π̂t (or equivalently P̂t ), independently of the fiscal variables. In this sense, equations
(2.7) and (2.11) constitute an independent block in the four equations system; namely, they first

determine the paths of x̂t and π̂t , and, given them, the other two equations determine the paths of
the two fiscal variables (ŝt and B̂t ). This structure of the model is fully utilized when we characterize
the optimal monetary policy rule in the next subsection.

2.2     Optimal monetary policy

Adverse shock to the economy                 Following Jung et al. (2003), we consider a situation in which

the economy is hit by a large-scale negative demand shock; the central bank responds to it by lowering
the short-term nominal interest rate to zero; but aggregate demand is still insuﬃcient to close the
output gap. More specifically, we assume that a large negative shock to the natural rate of interest,

denoted by ²n0 , occurs in period 0, so that the natural rate of interest takes a large negative value in

period 0 and subsequent periods. The deviation of the natural rate of interest from the baseline path

is described by

                         r̂tn ≡ ln(1 + rtn ) − ln(1 + rtn∗ ) = ρt ²n0   for   t = 0, · · · ,                      (2.16)

where rtn∗ is the baseline value of the natural rate of interest, which is assumed to be equal to

β −1 (1 − β), and ρ is a parameter satisfying 0 ≤ ρ < 1.14
    It is important to note that the natural rate of interest r̂tn appears only in the IS equation ((2.7)),

and that fluctuations in the natural rate of interest could be completely oﬀset if the central bank

equalizes the short-term nominal interest rate to the natural rate of interest (ît = r̂tn ). In the usual

situation, therefore, aggregate demand shocks can be completely oﬀset by an appropriate monetary

policy. However, this is not true if the natural rate of interest falls below zero and the non-negativity
constraint of the short-term nominal interest rate, it ≥ 0, or its log-linear version


                                              ît + β −1 (1 − β) ≥ 0                                              (2.17)


is binding.


  14 Here we assume that, following Jung et al. (2003), the shock to the natural rate of interest is known in period 0 and

that no new information arrives in the subsequent periods. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003a, b) extend the analysis
by introducing stochastic disturbances of some special form. It is important to note that certainty equivalence does
not hold in our optimization problem because of the non-negativity constraint on nominal interest rates, so that the
diﬀerence between a deterministic and a stochastic environment is not trivial.


                                                           10
Optimization under discretion          The central bank chooses the path of the short-term nominal
                                       n                 o
interest rates, starting from period 0, î0 , î1 , · · · to minimize
                                                      ∞
                                                      X        £            ¤
                                                 E0         β t π̂t2 + λx̂2t ,
                                                      t=0

subject to (2.7), (2.9), (2.11), (2.15), and (2.17). Since equations (2.7) and (2.11) consist of an inde-
pendent block, and the fiscal variables (ŝt and B̂t ) do not appear in the loss function, the optimization

problem can be solved in a step-by-step manner: we first minimize the loss function subject to (2.7),

(2.11), and (2.17) and characterize the optimal paths for ît , x̂t , and π̂t ; then we substitute them into

(2.9) and (2.15) to obtain the optimal paths for ŝt and B̂t .

   Under the assumption of discretionary monetary policy, the central bank reoptimizes in each

period. The optimization problem is represented by a Lagrangian of the form
              ∞
              X        n                                                                                   o
         L=         β t Lt + 2φ1t [x̂t − x̂t+1 + σ −1 (ît − π̂t+1 − r̂tn )] + 2φ2t [π̂t − κx̂t − β π̂t+1 ] ,
              t=0

where φ1t and φ2t represent the Lagrange multipliers associated with the IS and AS equations. We
diﬀerentiate the Lagrangian with respect to π̂t , x̂t , and ît to obtain the first-order conditions

                                                                  π̂t + φ2t      =   0                          (2.18)

                                                      λx̂t + φ1t − κφ2t          =   0                          (2.19)
                                             h                     i
                                                 ît + β −1 (1 − β) φ1t          =   0                          (2.20)

                                                      ît + β −1 (1 − β)         ≥   0                          (2.21)

                                                                        φ1t      ≥   0                          (2.22)

Equations (2.20), (2.21), and (2.22) are Kuhn—Tucker conditions regarding the non-negativity con-

straint on the nominal interest rate. Observe that ∂L/∂ ît = 2σ −1 β t φ1t ∝ φ1t . If the non-negativity
constraint is not binding, ∂L/∂ ît is equal to zero, so that φ1t is also zero. On the other hand, if the

constraint is binding, ∂L/∂ ît is non-negative, and so is φ1t .
   Given the assumption that the natural rate of interest converges monotonically to its baseline
value, it is straightforward to guess that the non-negativity constraint is binding until some period,

denoted by period T d , but is not binding afterwards. By eliminating φ2t from (2.18) and (2.19), we

obtain
                                                    £              ¤
                                            φ1t = −κ π̂t + κ−1 λx̂t .

                                                                  11
Substituting φ1t = 0 into this equation leads to λx̂t + κπ̂t = 0, which, together with the AS equation,
imply π̂t = 0, x̂t = 0, and

                                               ît = r̂tn                                                 (2.23)

for t = T d + 1, · · · . Thus the central bank sets the short-term nominal interest rate at zero during

the periods in which the natural rate of interest is below zero, but, once the natural rate returns to a

positive level, the central bank equalizes it with the level of the natural rate of interest. In this sense,
the timing to terminate a zero interest rate policy is determined entirely by an exogenous factor, r̂tn .


Optimization under commitment              We now proceed to the commitment solution: the central
bank makes a commitment about the current and future path of the short-term nominal interest rate,

considering the consequences of the commitment on the private sector’s expectations. The first-order
conditions become

                               π̂t − (βσ)−1 φ1t−1 + φ2t − φ2t−1       =     0                             (2.24)

                                  λx̂t + φ1t − β −1 φ1t−1 − κφ2t      =     0                             (2.25)
                                          h                   i
                                            ît + β −1 (1 − β) φ1t    =     0                             (2.26)

                                                 ît + β −1 (1 − β)   ≥     0                             (2.27)

                                                               φ1t    ≥     0                             (2.28)

which diﬀer from those obtained earlier in that lagged Lagrange multipliers, φ1t−1 and φ2t−1 , appear

in the first two equations. We eliminate φ2t from equations (2.24) and (2.25) to obtain a second-order

diﬀerence equation with respect to φ1t .
                                                          £                         ¤
        φ1t − [1 + β −1 + κ(βσ)−1 ]φ1t−1 + β −1 φ1t−2 = −κ π̂t + κ−1 λ(x̂t − x̂t−1 )

                                                                          for   t = 0, · · · , T c + 1,   (2.29)

where T c is the final period of a zero interest rate policy, and initial conditions are given by φ1−1 =

φ1−2 = 0. A unique solution to this diﬀerence equation is given by
                                          £                         ¤
                              φ1t = −κA(L) π̂t + κ−1 λ(x̂t − x̂t−1 ) ,                                    (2.30)

where L is a lag-operator and A(L) is defined by
                                            µ                 ¶
                                       1         ξ1     ξ2
                            A(L) ≡                  −           ,
                                    ξ1 − ξ2 1 − ξ1 L 1 − ξ2 L

                                                     12
and ξ1 and ξ2 are the two real solutions to the characteristic equation associated with the diﬀerence
equation (2.29), satisfying ξ1 > 1 and 0 < ξ2 < 1.

      Equation (2.29) has the following implications regarding the diﬀerences between the discretionary

and commitment solutions. First, as pointed out by Woodford (1999) and Jung et al. (2003), a
zero interest rate policy is continued longer in the case of commitment. To see this, we observe from
equations (2.10), (2.11), and (2.30) that
                                                h                     i
                                      φ1t = B(L) (ît − π̂t+1 ) − r̂tn ,

where
                                £                                                       ¤
               B(L) ≡ κσ −1 A(L) κ(1 − βL−1 )−1 (1 − L−1 )−1 + κ−1 λ(1 − L−1 )−1 (1 − L) .

Note that the real interest rate will never be below the natural rate of interest ((ît − π̂t+1 ) − r̂tn ≥ 0)
in the case of discretion. Thus, if a zero interest rate policy is terminated in period T d , φ1t takes a

positive value at t = T d + 1, indicating that

                                                0 ≤ T d ≤ T c < ∞.

The optimal commitment solution is characterized by monetary policy inertia, in the sense that a zero

interest rate policy is continued for a while even after the natural rate of interest becomes positive.

This is in sharp contrast with the case of discretion, in which a zero interest rate policy is terminated

as soon as the natural rate of interest becomes positive.

      Second, we compare fiscal adjustments between the discretionary and commitment solutions. By
log-linearizing the government’s intertemporal budget constraint ((2.5)), we obtain
                                                                    "                                                                   #
∞
X          h        i                                                              ∞
                                                                                   X                                  ∞
                                                                                                                      X
       t                                 −1                −1                                t                               t
      β E0 P̂t + ŝt = (1 − βθ)(1 − β)        B̂−1 + (1 − β)            (1 − βθ)         (βθ) E0 (Q̂0,t ) − (1 − β)         β E0 (Q̂0,t ) .
t=0                                                                                t=0                                t=0
                                                                                                                                            (2.31)

In either discretionary or commitment solutions, the short-term nominal interest rate is set at zero for
some periods and then returns to a normal level, which means that E0 (Q̂0,t ) takes positive values in

period 0 and subsequent periods and then returns to zero. Given that θ ∈ [0, 1], this implies that the
second term on the right-hand side is non-positive, therefore the (nominal) primary surplus must be
on or below its baseline path.15 Furthermore, the degree of fiscal expansion depends on the maturity
 15 Note  that, given the assumption that the economy is on the baseline before the natural rate of interest falls in
period 0, B̂−1 in equation (2.31) must be zero.


                                                               13
structure of government bonds; the shorter the maturity, the larger the fiscal expansion. When the
maturity of bonds is very long, reductions in the short-term nominal interest rate in the current and

future periods raise bond prices significantly, therefore fewer fiscal adjustments are needed.16
      To compare the degree of fiscal adjustments between the discretionary and commitment solutions,
we compute

∞
                                           (   ∞
                                                                                     )                    ("                ∞                                           ∞
                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
X         t
                                               X                                                     −1
                                                                                                                            X                                           X
      β       E0 [ŝct   −   ŝdt ]   =−             β   t
                                                             E0 [P̂tc   −   P̂td ]       + (1 − β)             (1 − βθ)           (βθ)   t
                                                                                                                                             E0 (Q̂c0,t )   − (1 − β)         β   t
                                                                                                                                                                                      E0 (Q̂c0,t )
t=0                                            t=0                                                                          t=0                                         t=0
                                                                                                        "                                                                                       #)
                                                                                                                       X
                                                                                                                       ∞
                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                   X
                                                                                                                                                                   ∞
                                                                                                     − (1 − βθ)              (βθ)       E0 (Q̂d0,t )   − (1 − β)         β   t
                                                                                                                                                                                 E0 (Q̂d0,t )        ,
                                                                                                                       t=0                                         t=0


 where the first term on the right-hand side is negative since P̂tc is greater than P̂td in every period,
and the second term is also negative because T d ≤ T c implies E0 (Q̂c0,t ) ≥ E0 (Q̂d0,t ) in every period.

Thus we observe
                                                                        ∞
                                                                        X                          ∞
                                                                                                   X
                                                                                β t E0 [ŝct ] ≤          β t E0 [ŝdt ].                                                              (2.32)
                                                                        t=0                        t=0

This indicates that the commitment solution cannot be achieved by monetary policy alone, and that

a close coordination with fiscal policy is indispensable.17 A more expansionary stance should be taken

on the side of fiscal policy, as well as on the side of monetary policy.

2.3             Numerical examples

In this subsection we numerically compute the optimal path of various variables.18 Figure 3 shows the

responses of eight variables to an adverse shock to the natural rate of interest in the case of discretion.
The paths for the short-term nominal and real interest rates and the natural rate of interest represent

the level of those variables (it , it − πt+1 , and rtn ), while those of other variables are shown by the
deviations from their baseline values. The natural rate of interest, which is shown at the bottom
left, stays below zero for the first four periods until period 3, and becomes positive in period 4, then

gradually goes back to a baseline level. In response to this shock, the short-term nominal interest rate
  16 For  example, in the case of θ = 0, in which all bonds are one-period bonds, reductions in the short-term nominal
interest rate in the currentPand future periods have no influence on the current bond price, so that the first term in the
squared bracket ((1 − βθ) ∞           t
                              t=0 (βθ) E0 (Q̂0,t )) is zero, and the expression in the squared bracket takes a large negative
value. On the other hand, if all bonds are perpetual bonds (θ = 1), the expression in the squared bracket equals to zero.
   17 See Iwamura and Watanabe (2002) for a similar argument in a setting of perfectly flexible prices.
   18 The values for structural parameters are borrowed from Woodford (1999): λ = 0.048/42 ; β = 0.99; σ = 0.157;

κ = 0.024. We assume that θ = 0.8. The initial shock to the natural rate of interest, ²n     0 in equation (2.16), is equal to
-0.10, which means a 40 percent decline in the annualized natural rate of interest. The persistence of the shock, which
is represented by ρ in equation (2.16), is 0.5 per quarter. The parameter values are all adjusted so that the length of a
period in our model is interpreted as a quarter.


                                                                                                   14
is set at zero for the first four periods, but becomes positive as soon as the natural rate of interest turns
positive in period 4. Given the shock to the natural rate of interest and the monetary policy response

to it, the short-term real interest rate rises and the spread between it − πt+1 and rtn is widened, as
shown in the bottom-left panel. Consequently, inflation and the output gap stay below the baseline

for the first four periods during which a zero interest rate policy is adopted, and return to zero as
soon as that policy is terminated.

   The four panels on the right-hand side of Figure 3 show the fiscal aspects of the model. The price
level falls during the first four periods and continues to stay at a level below the baseline, while the
bond price rises in period 0 and subsequent periods reflecting the market expectation of monetary

easing in the current and future periods. This leads to a rise in the real value of the existing public
debt, which puts the government under pressure to increase the real primary surplus, while lower

interest payments due to the zero interest rate policy create room for the government to reduce the

real primary surplus. Combining these two conflicting eﬀects, the real primary surplus is below the
baseline for the first eight periods until period 7, but slightly above the baseline path thereafter.

   Figure 4 shows the responses of the same set of variables for the case of commitment. An important
diﬀerence from the discretionary solution is that a zero interest rate policy is continued longer. Re-

flecting this, the cumulative sum of the deviation of the short-term real interest rate from the natural

rate of interest becomes significantly smaller in comparison with the case of discretion, leading to a
decline in the real long-term interest rate. This alleviates deflationary pressures on the inflation rate

and the output gap. Turning to the fiscal aspects of the model, monetary policy inertia (i.e., prolong-
ing a zero interest rate policy) keeps the price level higher than the baseline path, which is in sharp
contrast with the case of discretion. As a result, the real primary surplus stays below the baseline

path even after the zero interest rate policy is terminated. The diﬀerences between the commitment
and discretionary solutions (the commitment solution minus the discretionary solution) are shown in
Figure 5.

    Table 2 shows the amounts of fiscal adjustments needed to achieve the optimal outcomes under
                                                  P
discretion and commitment. Nominal adjustments ( ∞        j
                                                     t=0 β [P̂t + ŝt ]) are negative in both solutions,

indicating that fiscal expansion is needed to achieve the optimal outcomes. Note that the amount
of fiscal adjustments is larger in the commitment solution in which a zero interest rate policy is

continued longer. Also, note that the amount of fiscal adjustment depends on the maturity structure


                                                     15
of government debt: the amount of fiscal adjustment is larger when the maturity is shorter. Turning
                         P
to the real adjustments ( ∞    j
                          t=0 β ŝt ), they are positive in the discretionary solution while negative

in the commitment solution. This reflects a diﬀerence between the two solutions in terms of the

path of the price level. In the case of the discretionary solution, the price level is lower than on the
baseline (Figure 3), so that a larger primary surplus is needed to finance larger real redemption. On
the other hand, the price level is higher than on the baseline in the commitment solution (Figure 4),

thus a smaller surplus is suﬃcient to finance smaller real redemption. The diﬀerence between the
two solutions again depends on the maturity structure of government debt: the real amount of fiscal

adjustment becomes larger when θ is smaller.19


3     Monetary policy in 1999—2004
3.1     Term structure of interest rate gaps

As emphasized by Woodford (1999), Jung et al. (2003), and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003a, b),

history dependence is one of the most important features of the commitment solution. To see how
history dependent monetary policy aﬀects the output gap and inflation, we rewrite the IS and AS

equations ((2.7) and (2.11)) as
                                                              h                        i
                                      x̂t = −σ −1 (1 − L−1 )−1 (ît − Et π̂t+1 ) − r̂tn ;
                                                               h                       i
                      π̂t = −σ −1 κ(1 − βL−1 )−1 (1 − L−1 )−1 (ît − Et π̂t+1 ) − r̂tn .

An important thing to note is that these two variables are determined soley by the current and future
values of the interest rate gap (i.e., the spread between the actual real interest rate and its natural

rate couterpart, [ît − Et π̂t+1 ] − r̂tn ), and, in that sense, the interest rate gap is the key variable through
which monetary policy aﬀects the real side of the economy.20 Given this structure, the central bank’s

commitment to continuing a zero interest rate policy even after the natural rate of interest becomes

positive makes the private sector expect that the interest rate gap will shrink in the future periods,
thereby weakening the deflationary pressure on the current output gap and inflation.
  19 Put diﬀerently, this implies that keeping the maturity of government debt longer during peacetime (i.e., on the

baseline) is an eﬀective way of insuring against the risk of falling into a liquidity trap. See Iwamura and Watanabe
(2002) for more on this point.
  20 Admittedly, this simple relationship between the interest rate gap and x̂ or π̂ depends on the structure of our model.
                                                                              t     t
However, Neiss and Nelson (2003) find a similar relationship, through simulation analysis, in a more complicated (and
realistic) model with endogenous capital formation, habit persistence in consumption, and price setting of the Fuhrer-
Moore type. Also, their empirical analysis using the UK data finds a reasonably storong negative relatioship between
the interest rate gap and the inflation rate.


                                                            16
    Figure 3 shows that the diﬀerence between the real short-term interest rate and the natural rate of
interest is consistently non-negative in the case of the discretionary solution, thus the term structure

of interest rate gaps defined by
                                          K
                                          X £                       n
                                                                        ¤
                                     Et         (it+k − πt+k+1 ) − rt+k   ,                                     (3.1)
                                          k=0

monotonically increases with K. In contrast, Figure 4 shows that, in the case of the commitment

solution, the diﬀerence between the two interest rates turns to negative in period 3, therefore the gap
defined by (3.1) decreases with K at least temporarily. These findings suggest a simple way to test
whether the BOJ’s actual policy has a feature of history dependence: we estimate the term structure

of interest rate gaps to see whether the gap increases or decreases with K.
    We start by estimating the natural rate of interest using the methodology developed by Laubach

and Williams (2003).21 Equation (2.8) may be rewritten as

                                                 rtn = σgtp + zt ,                                              (3.2)


where the potential growth rate gtp is defined as gtp ≡ Et (yt+1
                                                             n
                                                                 −ytn ), and the other stationary component

zt is defined as zt ≡ −σEt (νt+1 − νt ). Following Laubach and Williams (2003), we assume that gtp

is a random walk process, while zt follows an AR process. Using these two assumptions (together

with other assumptions adopted in Laubach and Williams (2003)), we estimate the natural rate of

interest for the period from 1982:1Q to 2003:4Q, which is presented in the upper panel of Figure 6.
Note that the natural rate of interest shown here represents the annualized overnight rate. Figure 6

shows that the natural rate of interest was seven percent in 1990, and then gradually declined until
it reached almost zero in 1995. Furthermore, it declined below zero in 1998:1Q-1999:2Q, 2000:3Q-
4Q, and 2001:2Q-2002:1Q, indicating that Krugman’s (1998) prescription for the Japanese economy

is not rejected by the data. The middle and bottom panels of Figure 6 decompose fluctuations in
the natural rate of interest into the two components: the random walk component (σgtp ) and the
stationary component (zt ). The middle panel shows that the potential growth rate was barely above

zero in the 1990s, but fell below zero for the three quarters starting from 2001:3Q. Negative values for

  21 Laubach and Williams (2003) use the Kalman filter method to estimate a system of equations consisting of the

observation equations (i.e., the IS and AS equations) and the transition equations that describe the law of motion for
the components of the natural rate of interest. The same methodology is applied to the Japanese data by Oda and
Muranaga (2003). We would like to thank Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams for providing us with the program
code used in their paper.


                                                          17
the natural rate of interest are due to very low potential growth rates, as well as adverse temporary
shocks that had occurred several times after the mid 1990s.

    Figure 7 compares the natural rate of interest with the overnight real interest rate, it −Et πt+1 . We
use the uncollateralized overnight call rate for it , and the actual inflation rate in period t as a proxy
for the expected overnight inflation rate. Figure 7 shows that the real call rate is significantly lower

than the natural rate of interest in the latter half of the 1980s, which is consistent with the results

from the existing studies that the BOJ’s policy was too expansionary, thereby contributing to the

asset price inflation during this period. It also shows that the opposite (i.e., the real call rate is higher
than the corresponding natural rate) happened in the period from 1998 to 2002. The nominal call rate
had already been lowered to the zero lower bound during this period, but deflationary expectations

kept the real call rate above zero, thereby creating positive overnight interest rate gaps in these years.
   Given that the time-series estimates for the natural rate of interest are to hand, we next construct a
                                                                      P
time-series for the expected values of the natural rate of interest Et K      n
                                                                         k=0 rt+k , as well as a time-series

for the expected rate of inflation. We construct the first by utilizing the fact that the natural rate of

interest consists of a random walk component and a stationary component.22 As for the expected rate

of inflation, we use the five-year forecasts published by a private research institute, the Japan Center

for Economic Research (JCER) in December of each year.23 By using these two time-series, we can

compare the natural rate of interest and the real interest rate for various time horizons (namely, K

in equation (3.1)).

    The results of these calculations are presented in Figure 8, which shows the term structure of
interest rate gaps at the end of each year starting from 1998.24 First, the term structure at the end

of 1998, just before the introduction of the zero interest rate policy, was upward sloping although the
overnight gap was very close to zero. The upward-sloping curve mainly comes from the term structure
of nominal interest rates.25 These two findings suggest that market participants expected that the
BOJ would not adopt expansionary monetary policy suﬃcient to oﬀset an expected decline in the
natural rate of interest. Second, the term structure curve at the end of 1999 shifted downward from

its position in 1998, and the gaps became negative for the time-horizon of less than three years. This
  22 Specifically,zt follows a AR (1) process, which is estimated as zt = 0.8304 ∗ zt−1 + et .
  23 The  JCER Mid-term Economic Forecasts, various issues.
  24 To be precise, we estimate the term structure for the average gaps (rather than for the cumulative ones) by dividing
   P
Et K                            n
      k=0 [(it+k − πt+k+1 ) − rt+k ] by K + 1.
  25 See Okina and Shiratsuka (2003) for the evolution of the term structure of nominal interest rates during the zero

interest rate period.


                                                           18
suggests that the BOJ’s new regime introduced in early 1999 had successfully aﬀected the market’s
expectations. More importantly, however, we see no indication of a downward sloping curve, which

should be observed under the history dependent monetary policy commitment.26 Third, the term
structure curve at the end of 2001 shifted up substantially from its positions in the preceding years,

suggesting that quantitative monetary easing combined with a renewed commitment in March 2001
was not strong enough to oﬀset a pessimistic expectation about the future path of the natural rate of

interest.

3.2     Inflation targeting to implement the commitment solution

Eggertsson and Woodford (2003a) propose a version of price-level targeting to implement the optimal
commitment solution characterized by Jung et al. (2003). However, as mentioned by Eggertsson and

Woodford (2003a), price-level targeting is not the only way to implement it, but a version of inflation
targeting can also implement the commitment solution. The BOJ’s commitment relates the timing

to terminate a zero interest rate policy (or quantitative easing policy) to the rate of inflation, so

that it should be closer to inflation targeting rather than price-level targeting. In this subsection, we
characterize a version of inflation targeting that achieves the commitment solution and compare it

with the BOJ’s policy commitment.


History dependent inflation targeting                We start by defining an output-gap adjusted inflation
measure π̃t as


                                        π̃t ≡ π̂t + κ−1 λ(x̂t − x̂t−1 ),

and then denote a target for this adjusted inflation by πtT ar . We also denote the target shortfall by

∆πt (∆πt ≡ πtT ar − π̃t ). Given these definitions, we substitute φ1t = κ∆πt into equation (2.29) to obtain

                             πtT ar = [1 + β −1 + κ(βσ)−1 ]∆πt−1 − β −1 ∆πt−2 .                                 (3.3)


Now let us consider the following targeting rule. The inflation target for period 0 is set at zero
(π0T ar = 0), and the targets for the subsequent periods are determined by equation (3.3). The
central bank chooses the level of the overnight interest rate in each period, so that it can achieve
  26 The only example of a downward sloping curve we observe is the year of 2000 (December 2000), when the BOJ

did not have any explicit commitment about future monetary policy after it terminated its zero interest rate policy in
August 2000. The downward sloping curve at the end of 2000 should not be attributed to monetary policy commitment.


                                                         19
the predetermined target level for the adjusted inflation rate. If the central bank successfully shoots
the target in each period starting from period 0, then ∆πt is always zero, therefore the target in

each period never deviates from zero. However, if the natural rate of interest falls below zero, the

central bank cannot achieve the target even if it lowers the overnight interest rate to zero. Then, ∆πt
takes a positive value, and consequently the predetermined target for the next period becomes higher
than zero. Given that the natural rate of interest evolves over time following equation (2.16), the

central bank fails to achieve the targets in period 0 and subsequent periods even though it lowers the
overnight interest rate to zero. Therefore the central bank must continue a zero interest rate policy

until it achieves the target in some period, which is denoted by T + 1. Since ∆πT +1 equals to zero by

definition, φ1T +1 must equal to zero as well, therefore T = T c must hold. Put diﬀerently, the central

bank is able to implement the commitment solution by adopting a version of inflation targeting in

which the target inflation rate is updated in each period following (3.3).27 It is important to note

that this inflation targeting has a feature of history dependence since the current target inflation rate

depends on the values of the natural rate of interest and the performance of monetary policy in the
past.

    The upper panel of Figure 9 shows the evolution of the target inflation rate that is needed to

implement the commitment solution presented in Figure 4. The values for the adjusted inflation rate
are below its target levels in the first six periods, but the target shortfall in each period gradually

decreases until it finally reaches zero in period 6, when the central bank terminates the zero interest

rate policy.


A comparison with the BOJ rule                       The regime of history dependent inflation targeting defined

above has some similarities with the BOJ’s commitment of continuing a zero interest rate policy (or
quantitative easing policy) until some conditions regarding the inflation rate are met,28 but these two


  27 Price-level targeting to implement the commitment solution can be derived in a similar way. We define an output-

gap adjusted price-level index as P̃t ≡ P̂t + κ−1 λx̂t , and denote the target shortfall as ∆P         t ≡ Pt
                                                                                                              T ar − P̃ . Then,
                                                                                                                        t
substituting φ1t = κ∆P   t  into  (2.29) leads   to an equation    describing  the evolution of the target price  level (equation
(3.11) in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003b)). See the middle panel of Figure 9 for the path of PtT ar to implement the
commitment solution. By a similar calculation, we can characterize an instrument rule to implement the commitment
solution: ît = max{0 − i∗t , iT
                               t
                                 ar }, where iT ar = r̂ n + [1 + βκσ(κ2 + λ)−1 ]E π̂
                                               t        t
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                      t t+1 + σEt x̂t+1 − λσ(κ + λ)
                                                                                                                        −1 x̂
                                                                                                                              t−1 +
[1 + β −1 + κ(βσ)−1 ]∆it−1 − β −1 ∆it−2 , and ∆it ≡ iT    t
                                                            ar − î . See the lower panel of Figure 9 for the path of iT ar that
                                                                   t                                                     t
implements the commitment solution.
  28 For example, Governor Fukui emphasizes the importance of intentional policy delay by stating that the BOJ will

continue to implement monetary easing “even after the economy has started to improve and inflationary expectations
are emerging” (Fukui (2003)).


                                                                20
rules diﬀer in some important respects. To show this, we first express the BOJ’s target criterion as

                                                  π̂t = π̄ T ar .


The BOJ chooses overnight call rate in each period so as to achieve this target criterion if is possible;
however, if it is not possible due to the zero interest rate bound, it simply sets the call rate at zero.

    This BOJ rule diﬀers from the regime of history dependent inflation targeting in the following

respects. First, the output gap, x, is completely ignored in the BOJ’s targeting criterion, while it

plays an important role in the targeting criterion of the history dependent inflation targeting unless
λ equals to zero. Put diﬀerently, under the BOJ rule, fluctuations in the output gap do not aﬀect

the timing to terminate a zero interest rate policy (or quantitative easing policy). Second, the target
inflation rate is never revised under the BOJ rule, while equation (3.3) requires the central bank to
revise the target for the next period depending on whether it successfully shoot the target in the

current period.29 In fact, despite the occurrence of a series of unanticipated adverse events including

the failures of major banks, the target inflation rate has never been revised since the introduction

of a zero interest rate policy in February 1999: some of the BOJ board members repeatedly showed
an adherence to the commitment made in the past and no intention at all to revise its target level

of inflation.30 As seen in equation (3.3), the target inflation rate should have been upwardly revised

in response to these additional shocks to the natural rate of interest. The lack of history dependent

responses to unanticipated additional shocks implies the suboptimality of the BOJ rule.

    To make a quantitative evaluation on the diﬀerence between the two rules, we construct a time-
series of πtT ar using the actual data. Specifically, we assume that the target level for the adjusted

inflation rate was zero just before the introduction of a zero interest rate policy, and then compute
πtT ar by substituting the actual values for the inflation rate and the output gap into equation (3.3). If
the estimated target is close to a level slightly higher than zero in each period, then the BOJ rule could
be seen as a good approximation to the regime of history dependent inflation targeting. However, the
result presented in the upper panel of Figure 10 clearly shows that the implied target in each period
  29 Most of the discussions about the BOJ’s policy commitments have focused on whether π̄ T ar is high enough to

escape from the liquidity trap (see, for example, @@@@). However, somewhat surprisingly, little has been said about
the absence of state-contingent responses to additional shocks.
  30 However, this does not necessarily mean that the BOJ did not make any response to additional shocks. On the

contrary, it responded to them by revising the target for the current account balances very frequently: it has been
revised nine times during the last three years. However, as correctly pointed out by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003a),
an additional provision of liquidity to the market without any implications about the future course of monetary policy
has no eﬀects on the economy as long as the demand for liquidity reaches a satiation level (“Irrelevance proposition”).


                                                           21
is significantly higher than zero.
    The lower panel of Figure 10 conducts the same exercise but now we take into account supply

shocks to make the discussion closer to the reality. If deflation since the late 1990s is at least partly
due to supply shocks (or equivalently, changes in relative prices), the target level of inflation that the
BOJ seeks to achieve should be lowered to some extent.31 To incorporate this type of argument into

our model, we divide the items contained in the CPI into two subgroups, “goods” and “services”,

and denote the inflation rate in each sector by π̂1t and π̂2t . The inflation rate in each sector is not

necessarily identical, thus the relative price between the two sectors could change over time. This is

the situation in which Aoki (2001) and Benigno (2003) discuss the optimal monetary policy under the
assumption of sticky prices. Benigno (2003) searches for a desirable index of the inflation rate that

a central bank should target, and finds that it is not the traditional CPI inflation rate (namely, the

simple average of the two inflation rates) but

                                               γ π̂1t + (1 − γ)π̂2t ,

where the weight γ is defined by

                                          nα1 (1 − α1 )−1 (1 − α1 β)−1
                 γ≡                                                                      .
                       nα1 (1 − α1 )−1 (1 − α1 β)−1 + (1 − n)α2 (1 − α2 )−1 (1 − α2 β)−1

Here αi represents the probability of no price adjustments being allowed (αi takes a larger value for

more sticky prices). Note that if the core inflation rate defined above equals to zero, the traditional

CPI inflation rate (nπ̂1t + (1 − n)π̂2t , where n represents the CPI weight for the goods sector) equates
to (n − γ)[π̂1t − π̂2t ].32 Given that the central bank responds to relative price changes as recommended

by Benigno (2003), this implies that equation (3.3) changes to

                  πtT ar = (n − γ) [π̂1t − π̂2t ] + [1 + β −1 + κ(βσ)−1 ]∆πt−1 − β −1 ∆πt−2 .                       (3.4)

The lower panel of Figure 10 presents the implied target inflation rate πtT ar computed using equation

(3.4).33 The implied target inflation rate is now much closer to zero as compared with the upper
  31 With respect to an appropriate policy response to supply shocks, a BOJ policy board member stated, “It would

be diﬃcult for monetary policy to control the impact of supply shocks. If monetary policy were to try to control
such impacts, it is likely that sustainable price stability would be impaired as production swings became larger and
uncertainty regarding investment increased. Therefore, we should accept change in prices due to supply shocks to a
certain extent” (Shinotsuka (2000)).
  32 As pointed out by Benigno (2003), the traditional CPI inflation rate coincides with the core inflation rate if α = α
                                                                                                                     1   2
or either of the two is equal to zero.
  33 The values for α and α are taken from the estimates in Fuchi and Watanabe (2002): α = 0.389 and α = 0.853.
                      1       2                                                                1                 2
Other parameter values are the same as before.


                                                           22
panel, but it still requires high inflation of more than two percent per quarter. This implies that a
quantitative diﬀerence between history dependent inflation targeting and the BOJ rule is not trivial

even if we take supply shocks into consideration.


4     Fiscal policy in 1999—2004
4.1     Did the Japanese government follow a Ricardian rule in 1999—2004?

It is assumed in section 2 that fiscal policy is passive (or locally Ricardian) in the sense that the

government adjusts the primary surplus so that the government’s solvency condition is satisfied for
any path of the price level. In this subsection, we look at the behavior of the Japanese government
to see whether or not this assumption has been satisfied since early 1999, when the BOJ introduced

a new policy regime.


Evidences from the time-series data              A positive linkage between the primary surplus and the real

value of public debt is one of the most important implications of Ricardian fiscal policy.34 Everything

else equal, a fall in the price level leads to an increase in the real value of public debt, and then the

Ricardian government responds to it by increasing the primary surplus.

    The upper panel of Figure 11 shows the gross public debt (relative to the nominal GDP) on the
horizontal axis against the primary surplus (relative to the nominal GDP) on the vertical axis, for

1970—2003. This Figure shows that both variables tend to deteriorate simultaneously in the 1990s,

indicating a negative correlation between them. However, such a correlation may be spurious for the

following reasons. First, cyclical fluctuations in economic activities lead to changes in the primary
surplus, mainly through changes in tax revenues. Since we are mainly interested in the government’s
discretionary responses to various shocks, we need to remove the changes in primary surplus due to such

an automatic stabilizer. Second, as emphasized by Barro (1986) and Bohn (1998), the government’s
tax-smoothing behavior could create a negative correlation between the two variables. For example,

think about the consequence of a temporary increase in public expenditure. It is possible to increase
taxes simultaneously in accordance with it, but changing marginal tax rates over time increases the

excess burden of taxation. Therefore, an optimizing government minimizes the costs of taxation by

   34 Woodford (1998) emphasizes that a positive linkage between these two variables is a necessary but not a suﬃcient

condition for the Ricardian rule to hold, because a similar positive linkage could emerge even under the non-Ricardian
fiscal policy rules, through a response of the price level to a change in the expected future primary surplus.


                                                         23
smoothing marginal tax rates over time. This implies that a temporary increase in public expenditures
would lead to a decrease in the primary surplus and an increase in the public debt.

    Following Barro (1986) and Bohn (1998), we remove these two factors by estimating a regression
of the form

                   SU RP LU St = a0 + a1 GV ARt + a2 Y V ARt + a3 DEBTt−1 + υt ,                                  (4.1)


where SU RP LU St is the primary surplus, DEBTt−1 is the amount of the public debt at the end

of the previous period, GV ARt is the level of temporary government spending, measured by the
deviation of the government spending from its trend, and Y V ARt is the output gap, measured by

the deviation of the GDP from its trend (all relative to GDP).35 The columns [1] and [2] of Table 3

present the ordinary least squares estimates of this equation for the sample period 1970—2003: the

column [1] uses the gross public debt while the column [2] uses the net public debt.36 The coeﬃcients

on GV AR and Y V AR are in the correct sign and statistically significant in both specifications, while

the coeﬃcient of our interest, a3 , is almost equal to zero in both specifications, rejecting the Ricardian

fiscal policy rule. To see why it is rejected, the lower panel of Figure 11 plots the two variables

again, but now the primary surplus is adjusted by subtracting the business cycle component as well
as the temporary government spending component (SU RP LU St − (a0 + a1 GV ARt + a2 Y V ARt )). As

seen in the figure, there is indeed a positive correlation between the two variables during the period

1970—1993: the adjusted primary surplus tends to increase by about 0.10 percentage points for one

percentage point increase in the public debt, which is close to the corresponding U.S. figures reported
in Barro (1986) and Bohn (1998). On the other hand, during the period 1994—2003, we observe a

slightly negative correlation between the two variables even after controlling for the business cycle

factor and temporary government spending. The lack of a positive relationship in the latter period
may be due to low nominal interest rates during the post-bubble period, particularly during the period
of the zero interest rate policy and quantitative easing (see equation (2.13)).

    To control for fluctuations in nominal interest rates in addition to the business cycle and temporary


  35 GV AR and Y V AR are defined by GV AR ≡ (G − G∗ )/Y and Y V AR ≡ (1 − Y /Y ∗ )(G∗ /Y ), where G is the
            t            t                        t     t    t    t             t        t   t    t  t           t
real government spending, Yt is the real GDP, and G∗t and Yt∗ represent the trend of each variable estimated by the
HP filter. See Barro (1986) for more on the definition of these two variables.
  36 The diﬀerence between the gross and net figures is not trivial in Japan: for example, the debt-GDP ratio in 2003 is

1.6 for the gross debt, while 0.7 for the net debt. Broda and Weinstein (2004) argue that the net figure should be used
to evaluate the Japanese fiscal situation.


                                                          24
government spending, we now estimate a regression of the form

                 SU RP LU St = b0 + b1 GV ARt + b2 Y V ARt + b3 IN T ERESTt + υt ,                                  (4.2)

where IN T ERESTt represents the government’s debt interest payments, which corresponds to the
expression on the right hand side of (2.13). Note that (4.2) can be a good approximation to (4.1)

as long as the interest rate is constant over time, but not so during the period in which the interest

rate exhibits a significant fluctuation as it did in the latter half of the 1990s. The estimate of this

equation for the same sample period (1970—2003) is reported in the columns [3] (in which gross debt
interest payments is used) and [4] (in which net debt interest payments is used). The coeﬃcients on
GV AR and Y V AR are almost the same as before, but the coeﬃcient on the debt interest payments is

now positive and significantly greater than unity, implying that the Ricardian rule cannot be rejected.
These sets of regression results indicate that the Japanese government adjusted the primary surplus

in response to changes in the public debt, but only through changes in the debt interest payments.

    Given that the Japanese government behavior was, on average, consistent with the Ricardian rule
during 1970-2003, Figure 12 looks more closely at the diﬀerence between the actual and fitted values

for the primary surplus,37 which can be interpreted as a measure for the deviation from the Ricardian

rule. There are three phases in which the residual takes significant positive values: 1970-74, 1987-92,
and 1999-2002. It is not surprising to observe positive residuals in 1987-92, a period of famous episode

of fiscal reconstruction during which the Japanese government intensively cut expenditures to achieve
a target of “no net issuance of government bonds”.38 But it might be somewhat surprising to observe

positive residuals in 1999-2002, during which the Japanese economy had been in the midst of deflation.
This result supports the view that the Japanese government started fiscal tightening just after the

Obuchi Administration ended in April 2000.39 It also suggests that policy coordination between the

government and the BOJ did not work well during this period, in the sense that the government
deviated from the Ricardian rule toward fiscal tightening while the BOJ adopted a zero interest rate
policy and quantitative easing.
  37 Here we use the estimates in the column [3] of Table 3; but we obtain the same result even when we use the

specification [4] of Table 3.
  38 See Ihori et al. (2001) for more on the fiscal reform during this period.
  39 See, for example, Iio (2004). According to Iio (2004), the shift in fiscal policy stance toward tightening occurred

during the Mori Administration (April 2000 to April 2001) and the Koizumi Administration (April 2001 to the present).
Iio (2004) argues that a change in the electoral system from the middle-size district system to the single-member district
& PR party lists parallel system has strengthened the influence of the prime minister relative to other political players,
thereby creating a political environment for these administrations to start fiscal reconstruction. See, for example,
Persson and Tabellini (2000) for more on the relationship between electoral systems and fiscal policy making.


                                                           25
Evidences from the private sector’s forecasts By taking innovations of the log-linear version
of equation (2.13), we obtain
                                                            n                                     o
(Et − Et−q )ŝt = (1 − β)−1 (Et − Et−q )ît−1 + (Et − Et−q ) (1 − βθ)[B̂t−1 + (βθ)−1 Q̂t−1 ] − P̂t ,

which simply states that the forecast errors in the primary surplus should be positively correlated
with those in the real public debt as well as those in the nominal interest rate. This suggests that

looking at the correlation between the forecast errors for those variables is another way to test the
assumptions of Ricardian fiscal policy. Suppose that the private sector did not expect a change in the

monetary policy regime from discretion to commitment,40 and that, at the end of 1998, just before

the introduction of a new monetary policy regime, they expected the discretionary solution would

continue to be realized in the coming years. Given the analysis in section 2, this implies that the
private sector should be surprised not only by a change in monetary policy, but also by a shift in fiscal

policy toward more expansionary (or less tightening) in 1999 and subsequent years, because the price

level should be unexpectedly higher and thus the real debt burden should be unexpectedly lower.
    Table 4 compares the forecasts about fiscal policy variables published in December 1998 by the

JCER41 with the corresponding actual values. The fiscal surplus, which is measured by the net

saving of the general government (relative to the nominal GDP), was expected to deteriorate over
time, starting from -0.085 in FY1999 to -0.117 in FY2003. But this expectation turns out to be too

pessimistic: the corresponding actual values were -0.077 in FY1999 and -0.081 in FY2003. These

forecast errors seem to be consistent with the theoretical prediction obtained in section 2. However,
what is going on behind them is quite diﬀerent from the theoretical prediction. First, the rate of

deflation was higher than expected: very mild deflation in terms of the GDP deflator was expected
(0.3 percent per year in 1998—2003), while the actual rate of deflation turned out to be much higher

(1.8 percent per year during the same period). Second, in spite of the unexpectedly high rate of
deflation, the public debt, measured by the gross debt (relative to the nominal GDP) of the general

government at the beginning of each fiscal year, was lower than expected. For example, the figure for
FY2003 was expected to be 1.790 but turned out to be 1.619, mainly due to a slower accumulation
  40 The BOJ had been conducting monetary policy in a discretionary manner before it started a zero interest rate policy

(See, for example, Ueda (1993)). Also, Ueda (2000) emphasized the importance of the regime switch from discretion to
commitment by stating that “the ZIRP [zero interest rate policy] was a unique experiment in the history of the BOJ
not just because the level of the overnight rate was zero but because it involved some commitment about the future
course of monetary policy”.
  41 The JCER Mid-term Economic Forecast, December 1998.




                                                          26
of nominal government debt. Third, and most importantly, the combination of an overprediction
of the public debt (i.e., an unexpectedly low government debt) and an underprediction of the fiscal

surplus (i.e., an unexpectedly small fiscal deficit) is inconsistent with the assumption of Ricardian
fiscal policy. Together with the fact that the nominal interest rate was lower than expected,42 this
suggests the possibility that the Japanese government deviated from the Ricardian fiscal policy rule

toward tightening.

   To investigate further the unanticipated improvement in fiscal deficits, Table 5 shows how forecasts

for the amount of public investment were updated over time.43 The amount of public investment tends

to be decided on a discretionary basis; therefore the government’s fiscal policy intention should be

more clearly seen in its changes. Table 5 shows that downward revisions were consistently made for
the years of FY1999, 2000 and 2001, while no substantial revisions were made for FY2002 and 2003.

This suggests that an unanticipated shift in fiscal policy stance toward contraction took place around

the year 2000.

4.2     Optimal monetary policy under the assumption of non-Ricardian fiscal
        policy

The above evidence suggests that the Japanese government has been deviating from Ricardian fiscal

policy since the latter half of the 1990s. Given that evidence, the next question we would like to address
is whether the deviation from Ricardian policy has some implications for optimal monetary policy

commitment. As shown by Iwamura and Watanabe (2002) in a model with perfectly flexible prices,

the optimal commitment solution diﬀers depending on whether the government follows a Ricardian

or a non-Ricardian policy. This is because the government solvency condition implies an equilibrium
relation between current and expected future inflation under the assumption of non-Ricardian fiscal
policy, so that the central bank must choose between deflation now or deflation later, a tradeoﬀ

analogous to the “unpleasant monetarist arithmetic” of Sargent and Wallace (1981). It is important
to note that, in this situation, Krugman’s (1998) prescription of making a commitment to a higher
price level in the future would not work well, as emphasized by Iwamura and Watanabe (2002).

   To see how the optimal monetary policy commitment would change, let us conduct the same

exercise as we did in section 2.2, but now under the assumption of non-Ricardian fiscal policy. Since
  42 According to the JCER forecast in December 1998, the government bonds yield (10 years, benchmark) was expected

to be 1.40, 1.72 and 1.94 percent in 2001, 2002, and 2003, much higher than the actual values.
  43 The Nomura Research Institute, The NRI Short-term Forecast, various issues.




                                                        27
the government solvency condition (equation (2.31)) is no longer automatically satisfied, we have
to consider (2.31) as an additional constraint for the central bank’s loss minimization problem. To

simplify the discussion, we assume that all bonds are perpetual bonds (θ = 1), then (2.31) reduces
to44
                                           ∞
                                           X                          ∞
                                                                      X
                                                 β t π̂t = −(1 − β)         β t ŝt .                                  (4.3)
                                           t=0                        t=0

The Lagrangian becomes
       ∞
       X        n                                                                                                            o
L=           β t Lt + 2φ1t [x̂t − x̂t+1 + σ −1 (ît − π̂t+1 − r̂tn )] + 2φ2t [π̂t − κx̂t − β π̂t+1 ] + 2µ [π̂t + (1 − β)ŝt ] ,
       t=0

where µ is a new Lagrange multiplier associated with the government’s solvency condition (4.3).

Denoting the optimal value of Lt by L∗t , the Lagrange multiplier µ must satisfy45
                                             P∞
                                          1 ∂ t=0 β t L∗t
                                   µ=         P           ≥ 0.
                                          2∂ ∞       t
                                                t=0 β ŝt

The diﬀerence equation that characterizes the timing to terminate a zero interest rate policy (equation

(2.29)) now becomes

             φ1t − [1 + β −1 + κ(βσ)−1 ]φ1t−1 + β −1 φ1t−2 = −κ[π̂t + κ−1 λ(x̂t − x̂t−1 )] − κµ,

and its unique solution is given by

                                φ1t = −κA(L)[π̂t + κ−1 λ(x̂t − x̂t−1 )] − κµA(1),                                      (4.4)

where the definition of A(L) is the same as before, and A(1) satisfies A(1) = (1 − ξ1 )−1 (1 − ξ2 )−1 < 0.
Then, it is straightforward to see that if a zero interest rate policy is terminated in the same period as
in section 2 (namely, period T c ), φ1t takes a positive value at t = T c +1, indicating that a zero interest

rate policy should be continued longer in the case of non-Ricardian fiscal policy. Put diﬀerently, the

property of history dependence plays a more important role in the case when the government deviates
from Ricardian fiscal policy.


5      Conclusion

Have the Japanese central bank and the government adopted appropriate policies to escape from the

liquidity trap? To address this question, we first characterize optimal policy responses to a substantial
  44 We continue to assume as before that the economy is on theP  baseline before period 0, so that B−1 = 0.
  45 As                                                            ∞     t
       we saw in section 2, the Ricardian government reduces       t=0 β ŝt in response to a substantial decline in the
natural rate of interest. The multiplier µ can be interpreted as a measurement of how much the government deviates
from Ricardian policy.


                                                              28
decline in the natural rate of interest, and then discuss monetary and fiscal policy rules to implement
them. Based on this analysis, we compare the optimal policy rules with the actual policy decisions

made by the Japanese central bank and the government in 1999—2004.
   Our main findings are as follows. First, we find that the optimal commitment solution can be
implemented through history dependent inflation targeting in which the target inflation rate is revised

depending on the past performance of monetary policy. We compare this optimal rule with the Bank

of Japan’s policy commitment of continuing monetary easing until some conditions regarding the

inflation rate are satisfied, and find that the BOJ rule lacks history dependence in the sense that the
BOJ had no intention of revising the target level of inflation in spite of the occurrence of various
additional shocks to the Japanese economy. Second, the term structure of the interest rate gap (i.e.,

the spread between the actual real interest rate and its natural rate counterpart) was not downward
sloping, suggesting that the BOJ’s commitment failed to have a suﬃcient influence on the market’s

expectations about the future course of monetary policy. Third, we find time-series evidence that
the primary surplus in 1999-2002 was higher than predicted by the historical regularity. Also, by

comparing the private sector’s forecasts with the corresponding actual values, we find a combination

of an unexpectedly low government debt and an unexpectedly small fiscal deficit. Such evidence
on the government’s behavior suggests that the Japanese government deviated from Ricardian fiscal

policy toward fiscal tightening. The optimal commitment solution obtained under the assumption of

non-Ricardian fiscal policy implies that, given such government’s behavior, the central bank should

continue a zero interest rate policy longer.




                                                  29
References

 [1] Aoki, Kosuke (2001), “Optimal Monetary Policy Responses to Relative-price Changes,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics 48, 55—80.

 [2] Barro, Robert J. (1986), “U.S. Deficits Since World War I,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics
    88, 195—222.

 [3] Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein (2004), “Happy News from the Dismal Science: Re-
    assesing Japanese Fiscal Policy and Sustainability.” Columbia University.

 [4] Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, and Martin Uribe (2002), “Avoiding Liquidity Traps,”

    Journal of Political Economy 100, 535—563.

 [5] Benigno, Pierpaolo (2003), “Optimal Monetary Policy in a Currency Area,” Journal of Interna-

    tional Economics, forthcoming.

 [6] Bohn, Henning (1998), “The Behavior of U.S. Public Debt and Deficits,” The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 113, 949—963.

 [7] Calvo, Guillermo (1983), “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
    Monetary Economics 12, 383—398.

 [8] Christiano, Lawrence J., (2004), “The Zero Bound, Low Inflation, and Output Collapse,” North-
    western University.

 [9] Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford (2003a), “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and

    Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 2003, 139—211.

[10] Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford (2003b), “Optimal Monetary Policy in a Liquidity

    Trap,” NBER Working Paper No. 9968.

[11] Fuchi, Hitoshi, and Tsutomu Watanabe (2002), “Measuring the Stickiness of Prices in the

    Japanese Industries (in Japanese),” Kin-yu Kenkyu 21(1), 35—70.

[12] Fukui, Toshihiko (2003), “Challenges for Monetary Policy in Japan,” Speech at the Japan Society

    of Monetary Economics, June 1, 2003.


                                                 30
[13] Hicks, John (1967), Critical Essays in Monetary Theory, London: Oxford University.

[14] Ihori, Toshihiro, Takeo Doi, and Hironori Kondo (2001), “Japanese Fiscal Reform: Fiscal Recon-
    struction and Fiscal Policy,” Japan and the World Economy 13, 351—370.

[15] Iio, Jun (2004), “Two Aspects of the Japanese Bureaucracy in the Budget Process (in Japanese),”

    RIETI Discussion Paper Series No. 04-J-007.

[16] Iwamura, Mitsuru, and Tsutomu Watanabe (2002), “Price Level Dynamics in a Liquidity Trap,”
    RIETI Discussion Paper Series No. 03-E-002.

[17] Jung, Taehun, Yuki Teranishi, and Tsutomu Watanabe (2003), “Optimal Monetary Policy at the

    Zero-Interest-Rate Bound,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, forthcoming.

[18] Keynes, John Maynard (1936/1971), The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,
    Volume VII of The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes (1971, Macmillan Press).

[19] Krugman, Paul (1998), “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,”

    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1998, 137—187.

[20] Krugman, Paul (2000), “Thinking about the Liquidity Trap,” Journal of the Japanese and In-

    ternational Economies 14, 221—237.

[21] Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,” The

    Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 1063—1070.

[22] Leeper, Eric M. (1991), “Equilibria under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal Policies,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 27, 129—147.

[23] Neiss, Katharine S., and Edward Nelson (2003), “The Real Interest Rate Gap as an Inflation

    Indicator,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 7, 239-262.

[24] Oda, Nobuyuki, and Jun Muranaga (2003), “On the Natural Rate of Interest: Theory and

    Measurement (in Japanese),” The Bank of Japan Working Paper Series, No. 03-J-5.

[25] Okina, Kunio, and Shigenori Shiratsuka (2003), “Policy Commitment and Expectation Forma-
    tions: Japan’s Experience under Zero Interest Rates,” IMES Discussion Paper Series, No. 2003-

    E-5.

                                                31
[26] Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (2000), Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy,
    The MIT Press.

[27] Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a
    Low Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32, Part 2, 936—966.

[28] Rogoﬀ, Kenneth (1998), “Comment on Krugman, ‘It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return
    of the Liquidity Trap’,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1998, 194—199.

[29] Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace (1981), “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,” Federal

    Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 5(3), 1—17.

[30] Shinotsuka, Eiko (2000), “Japan’s Economy and the Role of the Bank of Japan,” Speech at the

    Japan Society of Monetary Economics, May 27, 2000.

[31] Svensson, Lars E. O. (2001), “The Zero Bound in an Open-Economy: A Foolproof Way of

    Escaping from a Liquidity Trap,” Monetary and Economic Studies 19, 277—312.

[32] Taylor, John B. (2000), “Recent Developments in the Use of Monetary Policy Rules,” in C. Joseph

    and A. H. Gunawan eds., Monetary Policy and Inflation Targeting in Emerging Economies, Bank

    Indonesia and International Monetary Fund.

[33] Ueda, Kazuo (1993), “Japanese Monetary Policy during 1970—1990: Rules versus Discretion?”

    in Kumiharu Shigehara ed., Price Stabilization in the 1990s: Domestic and International Policy
    Requirements, Basingstoke: Macmillan Press.

[34] Ueda, Kazuo (2000), “The Transmission Mechanism of Monetary Policy Near Zero Interest Rates:

    The Japanese Experience 1998—2000,” Speech at a Conference Sponsored by the National Bureau

    of Economic Research, European Institute of Japanese Studies, Tokyo University Center for
    International Research on the Japanese Economy, and the Center for Economic Policy Research,

    September 22, 2000.

[35] Woodford, Michael (1995), “Price-Level Determinacy without Control of a Monetary Aggregate,”
    Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43, 1—46.

[36] Woodford, Michael (1998), “Comment on John Cochrane, ‘A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation’,”
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual 13, 390-418.

                                                32
[37] Woodford, Michael (1999), “Commentary: How Should Monetary Policy Be Conducted in an
    Era of Price Stability?” in New Challenges for Monetary Policy, Kansas City: Federal Reserve

    Bank of Kansas City.

[38] Woodford, Michael (2001), “Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability,” Journal of Money, Credit,
    and Banking 33, 669—728.

[39] Woodford, Michael (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,

    Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                                33
           Table 1: Chronology of Monetary Policy Decisions in 1999—2004

Dates         Events
09/09/98      The BOJ reduces the target O/N rate to 0.25 from 0.50 percent
02/12/99      The BOJ introduces a zero interest rate policy (ZIRP)
04/13/99      Governor Hayami announces the BOJ will continue the ZIRP
              until “deflationary concerns are dispelled”
10/13/99      The BOJ expands the range of money market operations
08/11/00      The BOJ terminates the ZIRP.
              The target O/N rate is set at 0.25 percent
02/09/01      The BOJ introduces “Lombard-type” lending facility
              and reduces the oﬃcial discount rate to 0.375 from 0.5 percent
02/28/01      The BOJ reduces the target O/N rate to 0.125 percent
              and the oﬃcial discount rate to 0.25 percent
03/19/01      The BOJ announces to introduce “quantitative monetary easing policy”
              and continue it until “the core CPI records a year-on-year increase of
              zero percent or more on a stable basis.”
              The target current account balance (CAB) is set at 5 trillion yen
08/14/01      The BOJ raises the target CAB to 6 trillion yen
09/18/01      The BOJ raises the target CAB to above 6 trillion yen
12/19/01      The BOJ raises the target CAB to 10—15 trillion yen
10/30/02      The BOJ raises the target CAB to 15—20 trillion yen
04/01/03      The BOJ raises the target CAB to 17—22 trillion yen
04/30/03      The BOJ raises the target CAB to 22—27 trillion yen
05/20/03      The BOJ raises the target CAB to 27—30 trillion yen
10/10/03      The BOJ raises the target CAB to 27—32 trillion yen.
              The BOJ announces more detailed description of its commitment
              regarding the timing to terminate “quantitative easing policy”
01/20/04      The BOJ raises the target CAB to 30—35 trillion yen




                                        34
Table 2: Fiscal Adjustments in the Discretionary and Commitment Solutions

                                   θ = 0.1   θ = 0.4   θ = 0.8   θ = 1.0
   Nominal adjustments
   P∞ t
     t=0 β [P̂t + ŝt ]

   Commitment solution (A)          -7.174    -6.569    -3.937     0.001
   Discretionary solution (B)       -5.345    -4.749    -2.581     0.035
   (A)-(B)                          -1.829    -1.820    -1.356    -0.034
   Real
   P∞ adjustments
          t
     t=0 β ŝt

   Commitment solution (C)         -11.009   -10.404    -7.771    -3.832
   Discretionary solution (D)       -0.465     0.132     2.300     4.916
   (C)-(D)                         -10.544   -10.535   -10.071    -8.748




                                   35
             Table 3: Estimates of Fiscal Policy Rules

                                 [1]       [2]       [3]       [4]

Constant                        -0.021    -0.012    -0.079    -0.052
                               (0.021)   (0.016)   (0.008)   (0.005)
GV AR                           -1.904    -1.810    -1.640    -1.546
                               (0.842)   (0.818)   (0.311)   (0.410)
Y V AR                          -1.549    -1.256    -2.334    -2.453
                               (0.719)   (0.649)   (0.205)   (0.220)
Gross public debt               0.017
                               (0.029)
Net public debt                           0.012
                                         (0.062)
Gross debt interest payments                        2.279
                                                   (0.260)
Net debt interest payments                                    3.559
                                                             (0.454)

R2                             0.330     0.322     0.815     0.746
σ                              0.022     0.023     0.012     0.014
DW                             0.237     0.243     0.515     0.363

Note: Dependent variable is the primary surplus (relative to GDP).
      Figures in parenthesis represent standard errors.




                                36
           Table 4: Private Sector’s Forecast about Fiscal Policy

                                  Forecast                           Actual
Net saving of the general government
[Relative to the nominal GDP]
FY1999                            -0.085                             -0.077
FY2000                            -0.095                             -0.066
FY2001                            -0.105                             -0.066
FY2002                            -0.113                             -0.081
FY2003                            -0.117                             -0.081
Gross debt of the general government at the beginning of each year
[Relative to the nominal GDP]
FY1999                             1.200                             1.218
FY2000                             1.300                             1.329
FY2001                             1.510                             1.430
FY2002                             1.620                             1.527
FY2003                             1.790                             1.619
GDP deflator
[FY1998=100]
FY1999                             99.93                             98.28
FY2000                             99.44                             96.39
FY2001                             98.98                             95.18
FY2002                             98.59                             93.01
FY2003                             98.25                             91.35

Note: Forecast was published in December 1998 by the Japan Center for
Economic Research (JCER).




                                    37
   Table 5: Private Sector’s Forecast about Public Investment
                     The amount of public investment in
                FY1999 FY2000 FY2001 FY2002 FY2003
Forecasted in
  1999.03         115.2     116.5
  1999.06         112.6     113.8
  1999.09         108.0     111.1
  1999.12         106.3     110.4     110.4
  2000.03         104.6     104.6     104.4
  2000.06         100.8      99.4      98.6
  2000.09                   100.2      99.5
  2000.12                    94.2      90.8      83.7
  2001.03                    96.8      95.0      87.3
  2001.06                    92.9      90.1      81.7
  2001.09                              88.9      83.0
  2001.12                              87.3      86.6      81.8
  2002.03                              87.9      87.5      83.3
  2002.06                              88.1      87.0      77.4
  2002.09                                        89.0      79.8
  2002.11                                        82.9      76.7
  2003.02                                        83.4      79.3
  2003.05                                        83.7      77.5
  2003.09                                                  77.2
  2003.11                                                  75.4
  2004.02                                                  74.1

 Note: Figures represent forecasts made by the Nomura Research
       Institute. Index, FY1997=100.
 Source: The NRI Short-term Forecast, various issues




                               38
                                                                                                                                          Annual change, percent




                                                                                                                           -1.5
                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                       -0.5
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                  1994:1
                                                                                                                  1994:4
                                                                                                                  1994:7
                                                                                                                 1994:10
                                                                                                                  1995:1
                                                                                                                  1995:4
                                                                                                                  1995:7
                                                                                                                 1995:10
                                                                                                                  1996:1
                                                                                                                  1996:4
                                                                                                                  1996:7
                                                                                                                 1996:10
                                                                                                                  1997:1
                                                                                                                  1997:4
                                                                                                                  1997:7
                                                                                                                 1997:10
                                                                                                                  1998:1
                                                                                                                  1998:4
                                                                                                                  1998:7
                                                                                                                 1998:10
                                                                                                                  1999:1
                                                                                                                  1999:4
                                                                                                                  1999:7
                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 1: CPI Inflation




                                                                                                                 1999:10
                                                                                                                  2000:1
                                                                                                                  2000:4
                                                                                                                  2000:7
                                                                                                                 2000:10
                                                                                                                  2001:1
                                                                                                                  2001:4
                                                                                                                  2001:7
                                                                                                                 2001:10
                                                                                                                  2002:1
                                                                                                                  2002:4
                                                                                                                  2002:7
                                                                                                                 2002:10




Source: "Consumer Price Index", The Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and Telecommunications.
                                                                                                                  2003:1
                                                                                                                  2003:4
                                                                                                                  2003:7
                                                                                                                 2003:10
                                                Percent




                                  0
                                      0.5
                                            1
                                                          1.5
                                                                2
                                                                    2.5
                         1994:1
                         1994:4
                         1994:7
                        1994:10
                         1995:1
                         1995:4
                         1995:7
                        1995:10
                         1996:1
                         1996:4
                         1996:7
                        1996:10
                         1997:1
                         1997:4
                         1997:7
                        1997:10
                         1998:1
                         1998:4
                         1998:7
                        1998:10
                         1999:1
                         1999:4
                         1999:7




Source: Bank of Japan
                        1999:10
                         2000:1
                         2000:4
                         2000:7
                        2000:10
                                                                          Figure 2: Uncollateralized Overnight Call Rates




                         2001:1
                         2001:4
                         2001:7
                        2001:10
                         2002:1
                         2002:4
                         2002:7
                        2002:10
                         2003:1
                         2003:4
                         2003:7
                        2003:10
                                        Figure 3: Optimal Responses under Discretion
                            Inflation                                                    Price Level
 0.02                                                              −0.03


    0                                                             −0.035


                                                                   −0.04
−0.02

                                                                  −0.045
−0.04
                                                                   −0.05
        0          5             10            15                          0       5          10         15
                           Output gap                                                    Bond price

  0.2
                                                                    0.15
    0
 −0.2
                                                                     0.1
 −0.4
 −0.6                                                               0.05
 −0.8
  −1                                                                   0
        0          5             10            15                          0       5          10         15
                Short−term nominal interest rate                                       Primary surplus
0.015                                                                0.2
                                                                       0
                                                                    −0.2
 0.01
                                                                    −0.4
                                                                    −0.6
0.005
                                                                    −0.8
                                                                     −1
    0
        0          5             10            15                          0       5          10         15
    Natural rate of interest and short−term real interest rate                         Govenment debt
 0.05                                                                0.2

                                                                    0.15
    0
                                                                     0.1
−0.05              Short−term real rate
                   Natural rate                                     0.05
 −0.1
                                                                       0

                                                                   −0.05
        0          5             10            15                          0       5          10         15
                                      Figure 4: Optimal Responses under Commitment
                            Inflation                                                  Price Level
 0.02                                                             0.05

                                                                  0.04
    0
                                                                  0.03

                                                                  0.02
−0.02
                                                                  0.01

−0.04                                                               0

                                                                 −0.01
        0          5             10            15                        0      5           10         15
                           Output gap                                                  Bond price
                                                                   0.2
  0.2
    0                                                             0.15

 −0.2                                                              0.1
 −0.4
                                                                  0.05
 −0.6
                                                                    0
 −0.8
  −1                                                             −0.05
        0          5             10            15                        0      5           10         15
                Short−term nominal interest rate                                     Primary surplus
0.015                                                              0.2
                                                                    0
                                                                  −0.2
 0.01
                                                                  −0.4
                                                                  −0.6
0.005
                                                                  −0.8
                                                                   −1
    0
        0          5             10            15                        0      5           10         15
    Natural rate of interest and short−term real interest rate                       Government debt
 0.05                                                              0.2

                                                                  0.15
    0
                                                                   0.1
−0.05
                 Short−term real rate
                 Natural rate                                     0.05
 −0.1
                                                                    0

                                                                 −0.05
        0          5             10            15                        0      5           10         15
                    Figure 5: Diﬀerences between the Commitment and Discretionary Solutions
                             Inflation                                              Price Level
                                                                    0.1
  0.04                                                             0.08

                                                                   0.06
  0.02
                                                                   0.04

     0                                                             0.02

                                                                     0
         0          5             10            15                        0   5          10         15
                            Output gap                                              Bond price
                                                                   0.06
   0.4
                                                                   0.04
   0.3
   0.2
                                                                   0.02
   0.1
     0                                                               0
  −0.1
         0          5             10            15                        0   5          10         15
                 Short−term nominal interest rate                                 Primary surplus
  0.01                                                               0

                                                                   −0.2
 0.005
                                                                   −0.4
     0
                                                                   −0.6
−0.005
                                                                   −0.8

 −0.01                                                              −1
         0          5             10            15                        0   5          10         15
     Natural rate of interest and short−term real interest rate                   Govenment debt
  0.01                                                             0.04

                                                                   0.02
     0
                                                                     0
 −0.01
                    Short−term real rate
                                                                  −0.02
                    Natural rate
 −0.02
                                                                  −0.04

 −0.03                                                            −0.06
         0          5             10            15                        0   5          10         15
                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                                                                         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                             8




                                                                                        -1
                                                                                             0
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                         7




         -1.5
                -1
                     -0.5
                            0
                                0.5
                                      1
                                          1.5
                                                                               1982:1                                                                     1982:1
1982:1                                                                                                                                                    1982:3
                                                                               1982:3
1982:3                                                                                                                                                    1983:1
                                                                               1983:1
1983:1                                                                                                                                                    1983:3
                                                                               1983:3
1983:3
                                                                               1984:1                                                                     1984:1
1984:1
                                                                               1984:3                                                                     1984:3
1984:3
                                                                               1985:1                                                                     1985:1
1985:1
                                                                               1985:3                                                                     1985:3
1985:3
                                                                               1986:1                                                                     1986:1
1986:1
                                                                               1986:3                                                                     1986:3
1986:3
                                                                               1987:1                                                                     1987:1
1987:1
                                                                               1987:3                                                                     1987:3
1987:3
                                                                               1988:1                                                                     1988:1
1988:1
                                                                               1988:3                                                                     1988:3
1988:3
                                                                               1989:1                                                                     1989:1
1989:1
                                                                               1989:3                                                                     1989:3
1989:3
                                                                               1990:1                                                                     1990:1
1990:1
                                                                               1990:3                                                                     1990:3
1990:3
                                                                               1991:1                                                                     1991:1
1991:1
                                                                               1991:3                                                                     1991:3
1991:3
                                                                               1992:1                                                                     1992:1
1992:1
                                                                               1992:3                                                                     1992:3
1992:3
                                                                               1993:1                                                                     1993:1
1993:1
                                                                               1993:3                                                                     1993:3
1993:3
                                                                               1994:1                                                                     1994:1
1994:1
                                                                               1994:3                                                                     1994:3
                                                                                                                             Potential growth component

1994:3




                                                Other (stationary) component
                                                                               1995:1                                                                     1995:1
1995:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Estimates of the natural rate of interest




                                                                               1995:3                                                                     1995:3
1995:3
                                                                               1996:1                                                                     1996:1
1996:1
                                                                               1996:3                                                                     1996:3
1996:3
1997:1                                                                         1997:1                                                                     1997:1
1997:3                                                                         1997:3                                                                     1997:3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 6: Estimates of the Natural Rate of Interest




1998:1                                                                         1998:1                                                                     1998:1
1998:3                                                                         1998:3                                                                     1998:3
1999:1                                                                         1999:1                                                                     1999:1
1999:3                                                                         1999:3                                                                     1999:3
2000:1                                                                         2000:1                                                                     2000:1
2000:3                                                                         2000:3                                                                     2000:3
2001:1                                                                         2001:1                                                                     2001:1
2001:3                                                                         2001:3                                                                     2001:3
2002:1                                                                         2002:1                                                                     2002:1
2002:3                                                                         2002:3                                                                     2002:3
2003:1                                                                         2003:1                                                                     2003:1
2003:3                                                                         2003:3                                                                     2003:3
                                                                          Percent




                                                    -2
                                                         -1
                                                              0
                                                                  1
                                                                      2
                                                                            3
                                                                                    4
                                                                                        5
                                                                                            6
                                                                                                7
                                                                                                    8
                                           1982:1
                                           1982:3
                                           1983:1
                                           1983:3
                                           1984:1
                                           1984:3
                                           1985:1
                                           1985:3
                                           1986:1
                                           1986:3
                                           1987:1
                                           1987:3
                                           1988:1
                                           1988:3
                                           1989:1
                                           1989:3
                                           1990:1
                                           1990:3
                                           1991:1
                                           1991:3
                                           1992:1
                                           1992:3
                                           1993:1
                                           1993:3




Estimate of the natural rate of interest
                                           1994:1
                                           1994:3
                                           1995:1
                                           1995:3
                                                                                                        Figure 7: Stance of Monetary Policy




                                           1996:1
                                           1996:3
                                           1997:1
                                           1997:3




Actual real call rate
                                           1998:1
                                           1998:3
                                           1999:1
                                           1999:3
                                           2000:1
                                           2000:3
                                           2001:1
                                           2001:3
                                           2002:1
                                           2002:3
                                           2003:1
                                           2003:3
                                     Figure 8: Term Structure of Interest Rate Gaps


                       3.0




                       1.5




                       0.0
Percent, annual rate




                       -1.5




                       -3.0




                       -4.5
                              Overnight   1 year     2 years    3 years    4 years    5 years




                                1998:12    1999:12    2000:12    2001:12    2002:12    2003:12
                Figure 9: Monetary Policy Rules to Implement the Commitment Solution
                                             Inflation targeting
  0.2

 0.15

  0.1                                                                              target
                                                                                 pi
                                                                                 pitilde
 0.05

   0

−0.05

 −0.1
        0   2           4         6         8            10         12     14             16   18

                                            Price−level targeting
  0.1


 0.05

                                                                                  target
                                                                                 p
   0
                                                                                 ptilde

−0.05


 −0.1
        0   2           4         6         8            10         12     14             16   18

                                                Instrument rule
 0.02

   0

−0.02
                                                                                 itarget
                                                                                 i
−0.04

−0.06

−0.08
        0   2           4         6         8            10         12     14             16   18
                                   Figure 10: Is the BOJ Rule Close to the Optimal Targeting Rule?
0.35



0.30

                                pi_tilde (actual)
                                pi_target
0.25



0.20



0.15



0.10



0.05



0.00



-0.05



-0.10
        99.1


                99.2


                        99.3


                                99.4


                                        00.1


                                                00.2


                                                        00.3


                                                                00.4


                                                                        01.1


                                                                                01.2


                                                                                        01.3


                                                                                                01.4


                                                                                                        02.1


                                                                                                                02.2


                                                                                                                        02.3


                                                                                                                                02.4


                                                                                                                                        03.1


                                                                                                                                                03.2


                                                                                                                                                        03.3


                                                                                                                                                                03.4


                                                                                                                                                                        04.1
 0.05




 0.04


                                pi_tilde (actual)
                                pi_target
 0.03




 0.02




 0.01




 0.00




-0.01
         99.1


                 99.2


                         99.3


                                 99.4


                                         00.1


                                                 00.2


                                                         00.3


                                                                 00.4


                                                                         01.1


                                                                                 01.2


                                                                                         01.3


                                                                                                 01.4


                                                                                                         02.1


                                                                                                                 02.2


                                                                                                                         02.3


                                                                                                                                 02.4


                                                                                                                                         03.1


                                                                                                                                                 03.2


                                                                                                                                                         03.3


                                                                                                                                                                 03.4


                                                                                                                                                                         04.1
                                                           Figure 11: Primary Surplus versus Public Debt, 1970-2003

                                                                                                The simple correlation


                                  0.08


                                  0.06

                                                                                               1990
                                                                                               1991
                                  0.04                                                           1989
                                                                                                   1988
Primary surplus/GDP




                                                                                                    1987
                                  0.02             1973                                          1986
                                                1970                                           1985
                                                                                                 1992
                                                1971                                           1984
                                                 1972
                                                   1974
                                  0.00                                                   1983        1993
                                                                                     1982
                                                                              1981
                                                                          1980                                              1997
                                                                                                           1994
                              -0.02                          1978      1979                                    1995
                                                                                                                    1996
                                                       1976
                                                    1975 1977
                                                                                                                                       1998
                                                                                                                                                            2000
                              -0.04                                                                                                                                  2001
                                                                                                                                                 1999

                                                                                                                                                                                2002 2003
                              -0.06
                                         0.0       0.2              0.4              0.6               0.8                 1.0                 1.2             1.4                 1.6          1.8
                                                                                                     Gross public debt/GDP



                                                                                               The adjusted correlation



                                   0.08


                                   0.06
                                                                                                     1988
                                                                                                 19901987
                                                                                                   1989
                                                                                                 1991
                                   0.04
                                                                                                 1986
                                                                                               1984
            Primary surplus/GDP




                                                                                            19831985 1993
                                                                                                 1992
                                                                                                                        1996
                                   0.02                                                                      1994
                                                                                        1982                     1995
                                                                                                                                                             2000        2001
                                                                                 1981                                           1997                 1999
                                                    1973
                                                                                                                                                                                 2002
                                   0.00                         1978      19791980
                                                                                                                                        1998
                                                  1972
                                                 1971                                                                                                                                    2003
                                                 1970
                                  -0.02                      1977
                                                    1974
                                                         1976
                                                     1975

                                  -0.04


                                  -0.06
                                          0.0        0.2             0.4                0.6                 0.8                1.0              1.2                1.4              1.6          1.8
                                                                                                       Gross public debt/GDP
                                                    Figure 12: Deviations from the Ricardian Fiscal Policy Rule



0.06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.020
                                                                  Residual [Right]
0.04
                                                                  Fitted [Left]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.015
                                                                  Actual [Left]

0.02                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.010


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.005
0.00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.000

-0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.005


-0.04                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.010


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.015
-0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.020


-0.08                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.025
        1970
               1971
                      1972
                             1973
                                    1974
                                           1975
                                                  1976
                                                         1977
                                                                1978
                                                                       1979
                                                                              1980
                                                                                     1981
                                                                                            1982
                                                                                                   1983
                                                                                                          1984
                                                                                                                 1985
                                                                                                                        1986
                                                                                                                               1987
                                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                                             1989
                                                                                                                                                    1990
                                                                                                                                                           1991
                                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                                         1993
                                                                                                                                                                                1994
                                                                                                                                                                                       1995
                                                                                                                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2003
