                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE LABOR MARKET EFFECTS
                         OF RISING HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS

                                           Katherine Baicker
                                           Amitabh Chandra

                                         Working Paper 11160
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11160


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




This paper was prepared for Program Evaluation, Human Capital, and Labor Market Public Policy: A
Research Conference in Honor of Mark C. Berger in Lexington, Kentucky on October 7-8th 2004. Mark was
an extraordinary advisor, friend and mentor, and we will miss his advice, generosity, and insights. We are
grateful to Mark Berger, Jon Gruber, Ellen Meara, Derek Neal, Douglas Staiger, conference participants at
the Research Conference and the annual meetings of the American Economic Association, and especially
Aaron Yelowitz for very insightful comments. We received funding from NIA-P01 AG19783-02. The
opinions in this paper are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the NIA or NBER. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Katherine Baicker and Amitabh Chandra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Labor Market Effects of Rising Health Insurance Premiums
Katherine Baicker and Amitabh Chandra
NBER Working Paper No. 11160
February 2005
JEL No. I1, J0, J3

                                           ABSTRACT

Since 2000, premiums for employer-provided health insurance have increased by 59 percent with
little corresponding increase in the generosity of coverage. The effect of this increase in costs on
wages and employment will depend on workers' valuation of the benefit, the elasticities of labor
supply and demand, and institutional constraints on employers' ability to lower wages. Measuring
these effects is difficult, however, without a source of exogenous variation in the cost of benefits.
We use variation in medical malpractice payments driven by the recent "medical malpractice crisis"
to identify the causal effect of rising health insurance premiums on wages, employment, and health
insurance coverage. We estimate that a 10 percent increase in health insurance premiums reduces
the aggregate probability of being employed by 1.6 percent and hours worked by 1 percent, and
increases the likelihood that a worker is employed only part-time by 1.9 percent. For workers
covered by employer provided health insurance, this increase in premiums results in an offsetting
decrease in wages of 2.3 percent. Thus, rising health insurance premiums may both increase the
ranks of the unemployed and place an increasing burden on workers through decreased wages for
workers with employer health insurance and decreased hours for workers moved from full time jobs
with benefits to part time jobs without.

Katherine Baicker
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
kbaicker@dartmouth.edu

Amitabh Chandra
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
achandra@dartmouth.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        In the United States, two-thirds of the non-elderly population is covered by employer-

provided health insurance (EHI), either directly or as a dependent through a family member’s

coverage.1 According to a national survey conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation, the cost

of EHI has increased by over 59 percent since 2000 with no accompanying increase in the scale

or scope of benefits; between 2003 and 2004 the price of premiums increased 11.2 percent, a

nine percentage point increase over the 2.3 percent increase in workers’ hourly earnings.2

Increases in health insurance premiums may have significant effects on labor markets, including

changes in the number of jobs, hours worked per employee, wages, and compensation packages.

Indeed, it is possible that a significant portion of the increase in the uninsured population may be

a consequence of employers shedding this benefit as health-insurance premiums rise (Porter,

2004). Simple correlations are consistent with this mechanism: despite strong economic growth

in the 1990s, the number of non-elderly uninsured grew by 3 percentage points to 15.7 percent of

the population, while the price of health-insurance premiums grew by 34 percent.

        Understanding how labor market characteristics affect adjustments to increased health

insurance costs is of growing policy importance. Proposals to cover the uninsured often rely on

“employer mandates” that would require employers to cover eligible workers.3 For example,

California’s Senate Bill 2 (also known as Proposition 72, narrowly defeated in November, 2004)

would have required all employers with more than 20 employees to provide health insurance to

their workers (who work more than 100 hours per month. Other policy proposals include the

provision of tax credits for the purchase of non-group health insurance, differentially changing

1
  These tabulations are from the Annual Demographic Files of the Current Population Survey (CPS) for
1988-2003. We define the non-elderly population as those under the age of 65.
2
  These figures are obtained from Kaiser Family Foundation (2003). In Figure 1 we use these data to
illustrate the growth of premiums since 1996 for family and single-person policies.
3
  Yelowitz (2004) provides a thorough discussion of this legislation and estimates its economic impact.


                                                                                                1
eligible employees’ valuation of benefits provided by their employer versus wages.

        The magnitude of the effects of increases in benefit costs on employment, wages, and

health insurance coverage will be driven by the elasticities of labor supply and demand,

institutional constraints on wages and compensation packages, and how much workers value the

increase in health insurance costs. Since employers currently provide such coverage voluntarily,

if workers fully value these benefits then they will bear the cost of the increase in reduced wages,

with no accompanying change in employment, employment costs, or employee utility.4 In a

world where workers value benefits at their cost and are able to sort between firms based on their

preferences, and without other institutional constraints, increases in the costs of benefits should

be fully offset by decreases in wages.

        There are many reasons to believe that firms are limited in their ability to offset increases

in the price of health insurance premiums through lower compensation. Institutional constraints

(such as the minimum wage or IRS non-discriminatory provisions that limit the extent to which

employers can offer differential benefits to their employees) limit a firm’s ability to reduce

compensation. For these reasons, increases in the cost of providing health insurance may not be

neutral in terms of their effects on employment and the structure of work. However, identifying

the magnitude of these effects is difficult. Data on premiums and wages are usually not jointly

available at the individual level. Additionally, most micro-datasets (such as the SIPP and CPS)

do not allow the researcher to control adequately for worker characteristics, such as ability, that

might simultaneously influence the outcome under study. In this paper we uncover the causal


4
  This view is explicitly studied in the literature estimating the wage-fringe tradeoff. A $1 increase in the
value of fringes may offset by a $1 reduction in fringe benefits – or, in the case of most tax-favored
benefits, a $1/(1-t) reduction, where t is the tax rate. For example, Gruber (1994) demonstrates that the
passage of the Pregnancy Discrimination Act in 1978 (that mandated that pregnancies no longer be
treated as a “comparable illness”) resulted in employers shifting the entire cost of the mandate onto
employees.


                                                                                                            2
effect of increases in the cost of benefits on labor market outcomes by exploiting an exogenous

source of variation in the cost of providing health insurance: the recent “medical malpractice

crisis” where malpractice costs for physicians grew dramatically in some states but not in others.

As we discuss in more detail below, the growth of malpractice payments affects both malpractice

insurance premiums and the cost of health insurance: if the demand for health care is relatively

inelastic (because of health insurance or public insurance programs), the increased cost of

malpractice will be borne by consumers in the form of higher health insurance premiums, rather

than primarily by physicians in the form of lower compensation (see Baicker and Chandra,

2005).

         We use malpractice payments as an instrument for health insurance premiums in order to

examine the effect of health insurance premiums on employment patterns, earnings, and health

insurance coverage. We find that the cost of increases in health insurance premiums is borne by

workers through decreased wages (for those with employer health insurance) and by decreased

hours for those moved from full time jobs with benefits to part time jobs without. These results

have strong implications for the distributional impact of many different health care reform

proposals.

         In Section II we outline a conceptual framework for our analysis. Section III examines

econometric challenges to estimating the hypothesized effects that we predict and provides a

justification for our use of malpractice payments as an instrumental variable for health

premiums. In Section IV we describe the data that use. In an appendix we discuss in more detail

several features of the National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB), the dataset that we use to

construct measures of the malpractice liability environment in each state and year. In Section V

we present empirical results, including specification checks that provide validation for our use of




                                                                                                 3
malpractice payments as a plausible instrument for health insurance premiums. Finally, in

Section VI we conclude with a discussion of the policy implications of our findings.



II. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

       Summers (1989) examines the effects of mandated benefits (versus taxes) on wages and

employment, highlighting the importance of the employees’ valuation of the benefit.            The

provision of a benefit that is fully-valued by workers should not change employment – but

should decrease wages by the cost of the benefit. Gruber and Krueger (1991) discuss this model

more formally. In their framework, let Ld = f(W + αC) and Ls = (W + C) be the labor demand

and supply curves respectively. W represents wages and αC represents employees’ monetary

valuation of health insurance. It is straightforward to demonstrate that:

(1)                                   dW/dC = (ηd - αηs)/(ηd - ηs)

where ηd and ηs are the price elasticities of labor demand and supply. If α=1, then wages fall by

the full cost of the mandated benefit, and if α=0, then the results are identical to those obtained

for the incidence of a payroll tax. Additionally, the proportional change in employment will be

given by:

(2)                                   dL/L = ηd (W0 – W1 – ∆C ) / W0

where W0 and W1 represent the initial and final levels of wages. Equation (2) demonstrates that

the effect of rising health insurance costs on employment is inversely proportional to the wage

offset caused by the employer provision of health insurance, and proportional to the elasticity of

labor demand.

       There are several reasons that wages may not respond to an increase in the price of a

health benefit. First, depending on the magnitude of the α parameter, it is not clear how




                                                                                                 4
employees value an increase in health insurance costs if they are not accompanied by increases

in the quality or quantity of benefits. If there has been an increase in benefit provision which

substantially raises the costs of being uninsured (or, for that matter, a relative decrease in the

utility of being covered in the non-group market), it is even possible that labor supply could

increase to the point of raising total employment (formally, this would happen if α>1).

Additionally, workers may be myopic in their perceptions of the value of benefits – Gustman and

Steinmeier (2001) note that survey respondents are often not even aware of the value of their

pension and social-security benefits, and similar ignorance may characterize workers’ valuation

of health benefits. Second, workers may not be perfectly sorted between firms based on their

preferences for benefits, and non-discrimination stipulations in the tax code limit the

differentiation of benefit packages to full-time workers within the same firm. These non-

discrimination constraints create incentives to move workers between “covered” (with benefits)

full time jobs and “uncovered” part time jobs. Third, the ability of firms to reduce wages for

lower-skilled workers is restricted by the minimum wage. For this group (and broader groups

subject to wage rigidities), increases in employers’ costs of providing health insurance will result

in employment reductions or in employers discontinuing health insurance benefits. For these

three reasons, increases in the cost of health insurance could affect both total compensation and

employment.

       This model also does not capture an important dimension of potential employer responses

to increased benefit costs: firms may offer benefits only to their full time employees, and an

increase in the cost of a full time employee relative to a part time employee may induce firms to

substitute towards part time workers. Note that such a substitution could result from benefits not

being fully valued or from institutional constraints to differentially providing benefits or




                                                                                                  5
changing wages. This substitution towards part-time workers could result in a decrease in

employer health insurance coverage and in hours worked, but an increase in employment, as

measured by the number of employees. In contrast, if health insurance is viewed as a fixed cost

per employee, increases in health insurance costs could cause firms to increase the hours of work

per employee but reduce the number of employees.5 This effect ought to be concentrated in

employees who work few hours, because it is precisely this group who would become more

costly as a result of an increase in health insurance premiums. Employers may also find it

attractive to move such workers to part-time positions without health insurance.

        In light of these ambiguous analytical predictions on hours, employment, and the fraction

of full time and part time jobs, assessing the labor market effects of increases in health insurance

premiums is fundamentally an empirical question.6



III. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY

        Evaluating the effect of rising health premiums on employment, wages, hours worked

and the composition of employment (the share of jobs that are full time or part time) empirically

is an exercise with numerous challenges. Datasets such as the Census and the CPS do not


5
  Cutler and Madrian (1998) develop such a model and find that when health insurance costs go up, the
firm will find it advantageous to increase the hours of work per employee and reduce the number of
employees. They find that increased health-insurance costs in the 1980s led to a 3% increase in hours
worked for those with EHI (and a decline in hours worked for those without EHI). However, in the
Cutler-Madrian model it will cost the firm more in wages/benefits to encourage workers to supply more
labor at the intensive margin. Thus, even with their highly stylized model, the net effect of an increase in
the cost of benefits on both hours and employment is ambiguous: The firm will want to increase the
hours worked by its employees if the marginal increase in compensation is less than the average hourly
cost of providing benefits, but it will want to decrease hours worked and hire more workers in if the
opposite is true. Because workers control the composition of the compensation package, the effect of
increases in health insurance premiums on health insurance coverage will depend on whether workers
fully value the health benefits.
6
  In an earlier version of this paper we included a formal model of the effect of health insurance premium
increases on the labor market. As the above discussion notes, such a model is unable to generate
unambiguous comparative statics and we have omitted it here.


                                                                                                           6
contain information on the employer costs of health insurance or the generosity of plans.

Additionally, even if this information were available, such datasets do not allow the researcher to

control adequately for worker characteristics that might also influence the outcome under study.7

In principle, a large-scale social experiment that does not suffer from attrition or agents

attempting to compensate for their treatment regime may solve selection problems of this nature,

and an instrumental variable estimation strategy can reproduce the experimental estimate if the

underlying assumptions behind IV estimation are satisfied.

        To motivate our analysis, consider the following structural equation for a worker i in state

j and in year t:

(3)                     Outcomeijt = β0+ β1 HIi + XiΠ +Sj +Tt +εijt

Here, Outcomei is the labor market outcome of interest (hours worked, wages, wage income,

unemployment, part-time/full-time status, or receipt of health insurance). Xi measures person-

level covariates including controls for family structure, marital status and industry. Sj and Tt are

state and year fixed effects respectively, and εijt is a person-specific idiosyncratic term.8          HIi

measures the employer costs of providing individual i with EHI. Technically, HIi should measure

the difference between employer premiums and premiums for policies purchased in the non-

group market. We note that non-group health insurance (for individuals and families) appears to

be priced nationally, so that controlling for individual characteristics accounts for variation in

non-group prices.9 The above equation can be modified to include interaction effects and


7
  These limitations are identical to those that have plagued the literature on identifying the wage-fringe
tradeoff. Currie and Madrian (2000) provide a comprehensive overview of this literature.
8
  Cutler and Madrian do not include state fixed effects. Yelowitz (1994) examines data from California;
his analysis is therefore comparable to one where state fixed effects are included.
9
  Using data from www.eHealthInsurance.com, an online website that provides insurance quotes from
many carriers, we note that there was less than a 5 percent difference in premiums across states like
Arizona, California, Nebraska and Ohio. We priced premiums for a non-smoking family, comprising two
parents (ages 35 and 37) and two children (ages 9 and 11). Each plan included an annual deductible of no


                                                                                                         7
indicator variables for certain demographic groups that may be of particular interest (for

example, hourly workers, married women, workers near the minimum wage, or workers with

EHI).

        The first problem inherent in OLS estimation of (3) is that cov (Cost of HIi εi) ≠ 0. For

example, workers with high ability may work at firms that offer generous health benefits, and,

therefore, high premiums. Second, datasets such as the SIPP or CPS do not report the value or

generosity of the health-insurance plan received by a worker.             Empirical researchers have

responded to this limitation by imputing health insurance premiums to each respondent based on

industry (Cutler and Madrian, 1998) and based on industry, firm-size and family/single status

(Yelowitz, 2004). These imputations solve the missing data problem and can in principle reduce

the potential endogeneity problem. We first discuss the identification strategy implicit in this

approach, and then contrast it with our alternative strategy.

        Imputed premium data may be thought of as representing premiums that have been

obtained using the match characteristics (such as industry and family structure) as instruments.

That is, assuming that data on HIi was available, we could, in principle, estimate:

(4)                      HIdfs = γ0 + Industryd +Firm Sizef + Family Structures + vdfs

The dfs subscripts make explicit the notion that (4) is estimated at the level of Industry d, Firm

Size f, and Family Structure s and not at the level of a person i. Equation (4) could also be


more than $2,000 in addition to 20% coinsurance. Additionally, each plan had a maximum per-family
out-of-pocket cost of between $4,000 and $10,000 per year.There are differences across states in what the
policy covers (e.g. maternity benefits) and these differences do translate into higher premiums. However,
the inclusion of state fixed-effects captures any residual variation in non-group premiums at the state
level. We are grateful to Derek Neal for suggesting this clarification.
11
   In theory we could also use malpractice premiums as an instrument for health insurance premiums.
However, there is no systematic source of malpractice insurance data. There is an annual survey
conducted by the publication Medical Liability Monitor, but the survey does not rely on administrative
data, does not cover all states or medical specialties, and varies year-to-year in the number of insurers
who are surveyed.


                                                                                                        8
estimated at the state level. One could use the fitted values from (4) HI dfs as the key regressor in

the estimation of (3). Implicity, these fitted values may be thought of as characterizing the

relationship:

(5)                                            HIi ≡ HI dfs + mi

Here, mi represents the portion of health-insurance premiums that are idiosyncratic to person i.

Therefore, it is probably the case that cov(εijt , mi ) ≠ 0 (that is, mi is determined by factors other

than industry, firm-size and family structure). If the instruments are valid, then cov(εijt , HI dfs )

=0, and we may estimate:

(6)                            Outcomeijt= β0+ β1 HI dfs + XiΠ + Sj +Tt +εijt

The central problem with estimating (6) in lieu of (3) is the possibility that cov( HI dfs , εi ) ≠ 0.

This would be true if the “instruments” (industry, firm-size, family structure) are correlated with

εi, the unobservable characteristics of the worker. If workers in a certain sector of the economy,

or those who are married, are systematically more likely to have different levels of unobservable

characteristics that affect health insurance premiums, then such a correlation is possible. This

problem is identical to the standard endogeneity problem in program evaluation, where receipt of

the treatment is correlated with unobservable characteristics of the person receiving treatment.

       A solution to this problem is to instrument for imputed premiums using variables that are

uncorrelated with εi and mi but are correlated with imputed health insurance premiums. In our

analysis we use state level per-capita medical malpractice payments as an instrument for imputed

premiums. For malpractice payments to provide a valid instrumental variable for imputed

premiums, it must be the case that the instruments affect health premiums. Second, it should also




                                                                                                     9
be the case that malpractice payments are not correlated with unobservable characteristics of

workers. In the next subsection, we explore the prima facia validity of these assumptions.


The Medical Malpractice Crisis

       The “medical malpractice crisis” that began at the turn of the 21st century refers to the

dramatic increase in physician premiums for malpractice insurance. Baicker, Chandra and Fisher

(2004), Chandra, Nundy and Seabury (2005), and Mello, Studdert, and Brennan (2003) provide

an overview of this crisis and its underlying causes and consequences. Both the American

Medical Association (AMA) and the Physician Insurers Association of America (PIAA) attribute

the dramatic increase in physician malpractice insurance premiums to the growth in malpractice

payments (see AMA (2004a, 2004b) and Smarr (2003)). Whereas other factors such as declines

in insurers investment income – including the presence of an underwriting cycle, a less

competitive insurance market, and climbing reinsurance rates – are acknowledged to have

contributed to this medical malpractice crisis, insurer losses from increases in malpractice

payments are believed to be the primary contributor to the growth of malpractice premiums.

Indeed, a General Accounting Office (GAO) study of seven states concluded that the growth of

insurer’s losses from payments is the primary driver of the growth of premiums (see GAO,

2003a and 2003b).

       If the demand for health services is inelastic, then the effect of increasing malpractice

payments on malpractice premiums will have little effect on net physician compensation.

Indeed, Baicker and Chandra (2005) argue that because of the nature of health insurance (which

insulates the patient from the marginal costs of seeking care and which is subsidized by the tax

code), the demand for medical services is relatively inelastic. The demand for health services by

Medicare beneficiaries is likely to be even less elastic, as they are further insulated from even a



                                                                                                10
wage-fringe benefit tradeoff. Consumers of health care are therefore likely to bear the brunt of

the cost through increases in the price of health care (and, consequently, health insurance

premiums).11    With this preliminary validation, we use increases in malpractice payments as an

instrument for health insurance premiums to estimate the following first-stage equation:

(7)              HI ijt = γ0+ γ1 Malpractice Paymentsjt + XiΠ + Sj +Tt +vi

where, as discussed below, malpractice payments are broken down by the size and number of

payments for different specialties. Instrumenting for imputed premiums removes the bias from

any residual correlation between εi and HI ijt . This is because the instrument only picks up that

part of the (within-state) variation in imputed premiums that is attributable to (within-state)

changes in malpractice climate. It may be tempting to reason that the correlation of premiums

with the instrument, malpractice payments, is potentially spurious because states with high

malpractice payments may have workers who are systematically more or less abled. This is not

the case, however, as all of our specifications include state fixed effects.

       It is particularly important in the context of this source of variation to understand the way

that workers will value benefits. Our use of this instrument does not rely on the fact that workers

get more or better health care as their premiums rise. Rather, as malpractice costs rise, the price

of purchasing health care through any source – employer insurance, non-group insurance, or out

of pocket – will increase. Workers may be willing to accept lower wages in exchange for

costlier health insurance because they would have to pay more on the open market for it, whether

or not the increase in premiums is associated with higher value health care.




                                                                                                 11
IV. DATA

A. Health Insurance Premiums

       We use annual state-level data on health insurance premiums by type of policy (family or

single) and employer size from the Kaiser Family Foundation/HRET survey for 1996 to 2002

(see Kaiser Family Foundation, 2003).12 We assign premiums to workers based on their state of

residence and year. In most specifications we also match based on family structure (with single

respondents given the single premium) and on firm size (with employees of small firms given the

small firm premium, and unemployed respondents given the average premium) – although we

also test the sensitivity of our results to potential changes in the composition of family size and

employment.

       In Figure 1 we illustrate the steady growth in premiums for family premiums and single

premiums over the time-period of our study. All dollar figures are expressed in year 2001

dollars. Family premiums grew from an average of $5,000 in 1996 to well over $8,000 in 2002.

Premiums for single policies also grew substantially—from an economy-wide average of $2,000

in 1996 to over $3,000 in 2002. In Figure 2 we illustrate the details of family and single policies

for the 10 states with the largest population in 2000— Panel A reports the level of premiums in

1996 and Panel B in 2002. We see that family premiums grew between 40 and 60 percent over

this time period in these states. The growth in single person premiums was relatively smaller but

still considerable: in states such as Florida, Georgia, Michigan and Ohio, premiums for single

people grew by over 40 percent. Both panels also show the share of total premiums that were

12
  The Kaiser Family Foundation/Health Research and Educational Trust 2004 Annual Employer Health
Benefits Survey (Kaiser/HRET) reports findings from a telephone survey of 1,925 randomly selected
public and private employers. Firms range in size from small enterprises with a minimum of three
workers to corporations with more than 300,000 employees. The Kaiser/HRET Employer Health Benefits
Survey is based on previous surveys sponsored by the Health Insurance Association of America from
1986–1991 and Bearing Point (KPMG at the time of the surveys) from 1991–1998.



                                                                                                12
paid for by employee and employer contributions—even though premiums increased

substantially, the share paid by employees remained relatively stable.



B. Labor Market Data

       The Current Population Survey (CPS) is a monthly survey of about 50,000 households

conducted by the Bureau of the Census for the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The survey has been

conducted for more than 50 years and is the primary source of information on the labor force

characteristics of the U.S. civilian non-institutional population. The March (Annual

Demographic Survey) files of the CPS contain information on hours worked, wage and salary

income, unemployment, and health insurance coverage in the past year. In several years the

February Dislocated Worker Supplement asked questions on health insurance eligibility and

employer offering, in addition to actual coverage (for both dislocated and non-dislocated

workers).

       We use data from the 1996-2002 March CPS, supplemented with information from the

1997, 1999, and 2001 February survey. Because individuals are included in the CPS in two 4-

month cycles, our February samples include only three-quarters of the respondents from that

year's March sample. We use information on demographics (such as age, gender, race, marital

status, family size, and education), labor market variables (such as wage and salary, employment

status, firm size, and hours worked), and health insurance coverage (such as source of coverage,

and, from the February supplement, whether coverage was offered by the respondent's employer

and whether the respondent was eligible). Because we expect premiums from last year to affect

current labor market outcomes, we measure hours worked, full-time/part-time status and

unemployment during the reference week of the survey (typically the second week of March).




                                                                                             13
We include all respondents between the ages of 22 and 64, although we further limit the sample

in some of our analyses. Our data are summarized in Table 1.



C. Medical Malpractice Payments

        All malpractice payments made in the United States by or on behalf of a licensed health

care provider must be reported to the National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) within 30 days

under the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986. Noncompliance is subject to civil

penalties codified in 42 U.S.C. 11131-11152. We examine payments that resulted from either a

court judgment against the provider or a settlement made outside of the courts. We use NPDB

information on such payments for 1996-2002.13 We calculate the size and number of payments

resulting from medical treatments (including diagnosis, medication, and other medical

treatment), surgical treatments (including surgery and anesthesia), obstetrical treatment, and

other treatments (including monitoring, equipment, intravenous and blood, and all others). Table

1 shows the growth of per-capita malpractice payments at the state level between 1996-99 and

2000-02. The variability of payments (over time within states) is the source of our identification.

For example, over the 2001-03 period, per-capita payments were highest in the states of New

York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Connecticut, West Virginia and Delaware. In these states the

burden of malpractice liability was almost twice the US average of $13.5 per person. See

Chandra et al. (2005) for more details on the growth of malpractice payments as measured by the

NPDB. We discuss potential limitations of the NPDB in the Appendix.

13
   We exclude payments that were linked to dentists, pharmacists, social workers or nurses. In a small
fraction of payments, there are multiple physician defendants (and thus multiple reports) but only the total
payment by all defendants is reported. In these cases we average the payment by the number of
physicians involved. In the NPDB, 5 percent of payments are made by state funds in addition to other
payments made by the primary insurer for the same incident. We match such payments based on an
algorithm that uses unique physician identifiers, state of work, state of licensure, area of malpractice, type
of payment (judgment or settlement) and year of occurrence.


                                                                                                           14
       In some specifications we calculate malpractice payments per physician by obtaining data

on state level physician counts using data from the 2003 Area Resource File (ARF) published by

the National Center for Health Workforce Analysis.           Data on the physician workforce by

specialty and age are only available for 1989, 1995, 2000, and 2001. Intervening years are

linearly interpolated.




V. RESULTS

       We begin with an examination of the effect of increases in health insurance premiums on

employment, wages, and hours worked. The odd columns of Table 2 show the results of OLS

estimation of equation (6).      All regressions include state and year fixed effects and the

individual-level controls outlined above, and are weighted using the March CPS final weights.

Standard errors are clustered at the state level (clustering at the state-year level yields marginally

smaller standard errors).    Premiums, income, and hours are all measured in logs. The OLS

effect of increases in health insurance premiums on wage and salary income, employment, and

hours is small: a 10 percent increase in premiums leads to a 0.3 percent decrease in wage and

salary income and a 0.04 percent increase in hours worked.

       As discussed above, however, the OLS results are likely to be biased by omitted

individual characteristics (such as ability) and economic conditions. We use medical malpractice

payments (including real per capita dollars and the number of payments per capita, by specialty,

current and lagged) to instrument for health insurance premiums. Similar results are obtained

when payments are measured per doctor, rather than per capita. Table 3 reports first stage

regressions for these instruments as in equation (5). For the two-stage least squares estimates

that follow, we use the most flexible form of the instruments (which provides the greatest power



                                                                                                   15
in the first stage, with a joint F-statistic of 8.75), but here we show more constrained forms to aid

in interpretation (since payments by different specialties are highly correlated). The results

suggest that when per capita malpractice payments double, health insurance premiums increase

by 1 to 2 percent. This is consistent with previous estimates that malpractice payments comprise

around 1 percent of total health expenditures (Kessler and McClellan, 1996). We show the

results of a similar regression at the state-year (rather than individual) level graphically in Figure

3.

       Results from two-stage least squares estimation of equation (6) are shown in the even

columns of Table 2. Here we see a much bigger (although statistically insignificant) decrease in

annual wage and salary income—a 10 percent increase in premiums reduces wages and salary by

1.3 percent. There is a large effect of premiums on usual hours worked – coming partly from

increases in the probability of unemployment but also through increases in the probability of part

time work. This is consistent with our expectation that as the cost of providing health insurance

benefits increases, firms will substitute part time workers with limited benefits for full time

workers with benefits. In fact, in our data only 22 percent of part time workers have employer

health insurance, while 64 percent of full time workers do. Consistent with the reduction in full-

time jobs, there is also an overall decline in employment rates and a (statistically insignificant)

decline in being covered by employer provided health insurance. In contrast to the OLS results,

all the IV results are consistent with the predictions of a model where workers partially value

health benefits or where firms are constrained in their ability to adjust wages.

       As health insurance costs have risen, popular concern has grown over increases in

required employee contributions to health insurance premiums. In fact, between 1996 and 2002,

employee contributions to health insurance premiums remained relatively stable at just under 20




                                                                                                   16
percent. This fraction does not seem to respond to increases in health insurance premiums –

using our IV specification in column 12, the fraction of premiums paid by employees (and

consequently employers) does not respond to increases in premiums. As shown in column 14, the

dollar amount paid by employees and employers increases in the same proportion: We estimate

that a 10 percent increase in premiums results in a 10 percent increase in both employer and

employee contributions.

       As previous models and empirical research have suggested, we might expect certain

groups to be more sensitive in changes in the cost of health insurance. First, workers with health

insurance should see a much bigger offset in their wages than workers without, who should see

none. The first column of Table 4 tests this hypothesis by including the interaction of health

insurance premiums and an indicator for coverage by employer health insurance. We see that, in

fact, all of the reductions in income are borne by employees with health insurance.           The

magnitude of the elasticity of -0.23 is consistent with dollar-for-dollar offset (since premiums

(paid with pre-tax dollars) are about 20 percent of wage and salary income at the mean) –

implying that covered workers bear the full incidence of increases in health insurance premiums.

Similarly, as column (2) shows, part time workers see an increase in wages when health

insurance premiums increase – consistent with workers moving from full time jobs with benefits

to part time jobs with higher wages instead of benefits. These results also suggest that we should

see differential effects of increases in premiums on employer health insurance coverage. The

second panel of Table 4 explores this. Column (4) shows that part time workers are less likely to

have employer health insurance as premiums increase, consistent with the results in column (2).

If our theory’s predictions are correct, we should also see declines in wages and salary income

(and health insurance coverage from an employer) for workers in sectors where the demand for




                                                                                               17
labor is particularly elastic. Because manufacturing goods are nationally traded and the labor

demand for manufacturing workers is a derived demand, we would expect the local demand for

such workers to be particularly sensitive to the price of health insurance. Columns (3) and (8)

verify that this is indeed true.14

        Which workers would be most likely to give up employer health insurance (in exchange

for higher wages) as premiums increase? Married, healthy women are likely to have a lower

value of employer health insurance, as they may have access to insurance though their husbands

and lower utilization of health services. We construct an indicator variable for married women

with self-reported health status of “excellent” or “very good.” As column (5) shows, these

women are indeed more likely to lose employer health insurance when premiums go up.

Another group we might expect to be more likely to lose employer health insurance are workers

facing institutional constraints - such as minimum wage workers whose wages cannot be lowered

to accommodate increased benefits costs. As column (5) shows, workers who are paid hourly

with a wage of less than $8/hour are significantly more likely to lose health insurance as

premiums increase.

        Why do these groups “lose” health insurance? Do their employers stop offering health

insurance (or do they move to jobs that don't offer insurance), or, alternatively, do they stop

taking up health insurance that is offered to them, perhaps because of higher copays or employee

premiums?      While we have limited information on this front, we use the February CPS

supplement to explore the change in employer health insurance offering when premiums

increase. These results are reported in Table 5. Overall (column 1), there is little decrease in


14
  Employment in the manufacturing sector is measured as major industry of employment last year, while
the dependent variable is measured as employment last week. (For this reason, we cannot include
interactions with hours or employer health insurance, also measured currently as opposed to last year,
using this dependent variable.)


                                                                                                    18
employer offering, but for hourly workers, a subgroup that we have identified as more likely to

be affected by premium increases (column 2), we see more significant decline in employer

offering as premiums increase. Here a 10 percent increase in premiums results in a 3.8

percentage point reduction in the probability of being offered health insurance coverage.

        In Table 6 we explore the robustness of our identification strategy. We study the

relationship between predicted heath-insurance premiums and variables that should not be

predicted by our instruments. (The predicted premium captures the variation in our instruments

that is used in the IV estimation.) Columns (1) to (5) of Table 6 demonstrate that the instruments

are unable to predict variation in percent black, educational attainment, gender, marital status and

health. Compositional changes in the levels of these variables could potentially affect the labor

market outcomes that we study, but should not be affected by the increase in malpractice

payments – and they are not. To further test our identification strategy, we also include as a

dependent variable the probability that an employee is included in an employer pension plan,

shown in column (6) of Table 6. This could be viewed as a falsification test – health insurance

premiums might not be expected to affect pension benefits – but it is possible that when health

plan costs go up, all other forms of compensation (wages and other benefits) are reduced to

absorb the cost. This does not seem to be the case: the probability of an employee having a

pension benefit does not respond to increases in health insurance premiums in the IV

specification, with an insignificant coefficient estimate of 0.12 (robust s.e. 0.12). Finally, in the

last three columns, we note the lack of relationship between predicted premiums and health

outcomes (measured at the state-year level).15 This finding rules out a class of explanations

wherein the population of states with relatively higher malpractice payments is relatively


15
  Data on aggregate mortality come from the Area Resource File (reported at the county-year level,
aggregated to the state-year level by the authors)


                                                                                                     19
sicker—and as sickness levels increase, health premiums rise. Population illness levels are not

the driving factor here. Table 6 also notes that predicted premiums are not associated with higher

cesarean-section rates (a procedure that is widely believed to be affected by the use of “defensive

medicine”).16

        We can use our estimates to study the economy-wide impact of the growth of health-

insurance premiums. Using the estimates in Tables 2 and 4, we can calculate the effect of rising

health insurance premiums on the probability of being employed, employed as a full-time

worker, average hours worked and annual income. These estimates are summarized in Table 7.

A 20 percent increase in health insurance premiums (smaller than the increase seen in many

areas in the last 3 years) would reduce the probability of being employed by 3 percentage

points—the equivalent of approximately 4 million workers. A similar number of workers would

move from full time jobs to part time, reducing the average number of hours worked per week by

a little less than 1 hour. Annual (wage) income would be reduced by $2,000 for those who are

employed and have EHI. Together, these estimates demonstrate that the labor market effects of

rising health insurance are far from neutral.



VI. CONCLUSION

        Rising health insurance premiums, unemployment, and uninsurance have led to increased

scrutiny of the labor market consequences of rising benefits costs. These relationships are,

however, difficult to disentangle without a source of exogenous variation. We use variation in



16
  Baicker and Chandra (2005) and Baicker, Fisher and Chandra (2004) demonstrate that increases in
medical malpractice liability are not associated with changes in physician flows or the greater use of
surgical procedures. This finding rules out a situation where increases in malpractice payments affect both
the price and quantity of healthcare received by workers; changes in the malpractice climate appear to
only affect the price of healthcare as measured by health insurance premiums.


                                                                                                        20
medical malpractice payments to derive the causal effect of rising health insurance premiums on

wages, employment, and health insurance coverage.

        We find that the cost of increasing health insurance premiums is borne primarily by

workers in the form of decreased wages for workers with employer health insurance – so that

they bear the full cost of the premium increase, but do not face labor market distortions. Our

analysis implies that workers do at least partially value health insurance benefits, but that there

are impediments to full adjustment through wages, particularly for certain groups.                 Non-

discrimination clauses that prevent firms from discontinuing coverage only for those workers

who value it least mean that firms and workers have an incentive to move from full time jobs

with benefits to part time jobs without as the costs of benefits rise. We see exactly this

adjustment, with an increase in part time work (and increased wages and lower health insurance

coverage rates for those workers). Workers who value coverage the least will have the greatest

incentive to move into jobs that do not offer coverage as premiums rise. We find that groups that

are likely to have low value of health insurance coverage through their employer, such as healthy

married women, are more likely to lose coverage as premiums rise. Some workers, particularly

low wage hourly workers whose wages cannot be reduced, may face even greater risk of

becoming uninsured as the cost of health insurance increases.

        Our results on wage-shifting are consistent with those in Gruber (1994): for workers with

EHI, we observe full shifting of the increased price of health insurance onto wages. In addition,

our results provide further evidence that the effects of increasing costs are borne

disproportionately by particular groups.17 In contrast to Gruber’s study and to the results in

Gruber and Krueger (1991), we find effects on both hours and employment. These results may

17
  Gruber (1994) finds that the cost of the maternity benefits are fully borne by married women. Sheiner
(1995) finds that demographic groups with higher ex ante insurance costs (such as older workers)
experience full wage shifting when the price of health insurance increases.


                                                                                                          21
appear to be contradictory but they are not: in Gruber’s study workers receive new maternity

benefits and in Gruber and Krueger they receive more generous workers compensation. The fact

that these studies find full shifting of increased costs to wages with no effect of the utilization of

labor is thus consistent with the insights of Summers (1989) for the case of benefits that are

valued by workers. In our paper, however, the increase in the price of health insurance premiums

driven by the medical malpractice crisis did not change the generosity of health benefits. It is

therefore unsurprising that workers do not value this increase in costs as highly, and that the

labor market responds with decreased wages and labor utilization.

       These results have strong implications for policies designed to cover the uninsured. For

example, if employer health insurance mandates raise the cost of employing workers, we should

expect most workers to bear the cost through reduced wages. If some classes of workers are

exempt from the mandate (such as part time workers or those at particularly small firms),

employers are likely to substitute uncovered jobs for covered ones, undermining the net effect of

the mandate on insurance rates. More generally, rising health insurance premiums will place an

increasing burden on workers and increase the ranks of both the uninsured and the unemployed.




                                                                                                   22
APPENDIX 1: DISCUSSION OF THE NPDB

        The NPDB has been the subject of much criticism, from the PIAA in particular, and also from

the GAO [GAO (2000) and Smarr (2003)]. One of the major points of criticism is the “corporate shield.”

This is a loophole that makes payments made on behalf of a hospital or other corporation exempt from

inclusion in the NPDB, as long as any individual practitioner is dropped as part of a settlement agreement

(see Hallinan (2004) for a recent commentary on this problem). We assess the potential importance of this

source of bias by comparing jury verdicts reported in the NPDB to those from a proprietary data set

compiled by the RAND Institute for Civil Justice based on the JVR (called the Jury Verdict Database, or

JVDB) for New York and California.18 Between 1991 and 1999 the JVDB data showed an average annual

growth of awards against physicians of 3.9% in New York (and an average of 42 awards) and 4.3% in

California (and an average of 35 awards), while the NPDB reported average annual growth of 13% in

New York (with an average of 53 awards) and 1.6% in California (with an average of 43 awards). These

results seem remarkably consistent, given the very different sampling frames. Nevertheless, we

acknowledge that the corporate shield would result in some large payments not being reported to the

databank. Even if this is true, it is not a source of bias—these omissions would only serve to weaken the

estimated first-stage. A more problematic source of bias would occur if there is state-level variation in the

magnitude of the corporate shield (a hypothesis on which there is no formal or anecdotal evidence). We

include state-fixed effects in our analysis to help ameliorate this potential problem.

        Despite its limitations, the NPDB is the most representative national and publicly available

database on physician malpractice payments. Indeed, according to Hallinan (2004) hospitals rely on its

existence to query the malpractice histories of potential hires; in 2002 the databank was queried 1.12

million times, or over 3,000 times a day.




18
  We are grateful to Aaron Yelowitz for recommending that that we explore the potential limitation of the
NPDB in the context of the corporate shield. We are indebted to Seth Seabury at the RAND Institute for
Civil Justice for facilitating this analysis.


                                                                                                          23
REFERENCES


American Medical Association. The Medical Liability Crisis: Talking Points., 2004a. (Accessed April
       29th, 2004, at http://www.ama-assn.org/ama1/pub/upload/mm/399/mlr_tp.pdf.)

American Medical Association. The Medical Liability Crisis: Why Repealing the McCarran-Ferguson or
       Passing Other Insurance Laws is Not the Answer. 2004b. (Accessed May 2nd, 2004, at
       http://www.ama-assn.org/ama1/pub/upload/mm/399/mlrcrisis.pdf.)

Baicker, Katherine, Elliott S. Fisher and Amitabh Chandra. “Malpractice Liability and the Practice of
        Defensive Medicine in the Medicare Program.” Manuscript, December 2004. Department of
        Economics, Dartmouth College.

Baicker, Katherine and Amitabh Chandra. “The Effect of Medical Malpractice Liability on the Delivery
        of Health Care,” in Alan Garber and David Cutler (Eds.) Frontiers of Health Policy, Vol 8, 2005
        (Cambridge, MIT Press), forthcoming.

Chandra, Amitabh, Shantanu S. Nundy and Seth A. Seabury. “The Growth of Physician Malpractice
       Liability.”Health Affairs 2005, forthcoming.

Currie, Janet and Brigitte C. Madrian. “Health, Health Insurance and the Labor Market,” in Orley
        Ashenfelter and David Card (Eds.) The Handbook of Labor Economics Vol 3C, 2000. (Holland:
        Elseivier Science).

Cutler, David, and Brigitte Madrian. “Labor Market Responses to Rising Health Insurance Costs:
        Evidence on Hours Worked,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol 29, No. 3 (Autumn, 1998), 509-
        530.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Krueger, Alan.B. "The Incidence of Mandated Employer-Provided Insurance:
       Lessons from Workers' Compensation Insurance.'' In Bradford, D. (ed.) Tax Policy and the
       Economy 5, 1991, 111-43. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.

Gruber, Jonathan. “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits,” American Economic Review, June
        1994: 622-41.

Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier. “Imperfect Knowledge, Retirement and Saving.”
      Manuscript, July 2001. Department of Economics, Dartmouth College.

Hallinan JT. Doctor Is Out: Attempt to Track Malpractice Cases Is Often Thwarted; Deleting a
        Physician's Name From a Suit Before Settling Keeps It Out of Data Bank; Dubbed the 'Corporate
        Shield'. Wall Street Journal. August 27, 2004: A1.

Kaiser Family Foundation, Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. Health Insurance
       Coverage in America, 2002 Data Update, December 2003.

Kessler DP, McClellan MB. Do Doctors Practice Defensive Medicine? Quarterly Journal of Medicine.
        1996 1996;111(2):353-390.

Mello MM, Studdert DM, Brennan TA. The new medical malpractice crisis. N Engl J Med. Jun 5
      2003;348(23):2281-2284.


                                                                                                    24
National Center for Health Workforce Analysis, Department of Health and Human Services. Area
       Resource File; 2003.

Peterson MA, Priest GL. The Civil Jury: Trends in Trials and Verdicts, Cook County, Illinois, 1960-
        1979,. Santa Monica: RAND Corporation; 1982. R-2881-ICJ.

Porter, Eduardo, “Rising Cost of Health Benefits Cited as Factor in Slump of Jobs,” New York Times,
         August 19, 2004.

Sheiner, Lousie. “Health Costs, Aging and Wages,” Federal Reserve Board. Washing ton D.C.: 1995.

Sloan F, Bovbjerg RR, Githens PB. Insuring Medical Malpractice. New York, NY: Oxford University
        Press; 1991.

Smarr LE. Statement of the Physician Insurers Association of America before a joint hearing of the
       United States Senate Judiciary Committee and the Heath, Education, Labor and Pensions
       Committee. 2003. (Accessed May 2nd, 2004, at
       http://www.thepiaa.org/pdf_files/February_11_Testimony.pdf.)

Summers, Lawrence H. “Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits,” American Economic Review,
      May 1989: 177-83.

United States. Department of Health and Human Services., Health Resources and Services
        Administration. Bureau of Health Professions., Division of Practitioner Data Banks. National
        Practitioner Data Bank Public Use Data File; 2004.

United States. General Accounting Office. Major Improvements are Needed to Enhance Data Bank's
        Reliability. Washington, D.C.; 2000.

United States. General Accounting Office. Medical Malpractice Insurance: Multiple factors have
        contributed to increased premium rates. Washington, D.C.: U.S. General Accounting Office;
        2003a.

United States. General Accounting Office. Implications of Rising Premiums on Access to Health Care.
        Washington D.C.: U.S. General Accounting Office; 2003b.

Yelowitz, Aaron. The Economic Impact of Proposition 72 on California Employers. Employment Policies
       Institute. Washington DC. September 2004. Available at www.EPIonline.org. Accessed on
       October 1st 2004.




                                                                                                       25
                                                          FIGURE 1

                                                    Growth in Premiums
                              8000
Total Real Premiums ($2001)
                              6000
                              4000
                              2000




                                     1996   1997   1998        1999   2000            2001     2002
                                                               Year

                                                   Family Policy      Single Policy



               Notes:

               Data from Kaiser Family Foundation/HRET survey. Premiums expressed in real year 2001
               dollars.




                                                                                                      26
                                                              FIGURE 2

                                             Health Insurance Premiums in 1996
                              Employer and Employee Shares for Family and Single Policies in Large States
               8,000
               6,000
    Premiums
               4,000
               2,000
               0

                  Si ily


                  Si ily


                  Si ily


                  Si ily


                  Si ily


                  Si ily


                  Si ily


                  Si ily


                  Si ily


                  Si ily
                      le


                      le


                      le


                      le


                      le


                      le


                      le


                      le


                      le


                      le
                    ng


                    ng


                    ng


                    ng


                    ng


                    ng


                    ng


                    ng


                    ng


                    ng
                    m


                    m


                    m


                    m


                    m


                    m


                    m


                    m


                    m


                    m
                  Fa


                  Fa


                  Fa


                  Fa


                  Fa


                  Fa


                  Fa


                  Fa


                  Fa


                  Fa
                                 CA     FL     GA        IL        MI     NJ   NY       OH        PA   TX
                                                  Employer Contribution        Employee Contribution




                                             Health Insurance Premiums in 2002
                              Employer and Employee Shares for Family and Single Policies in Large States
               8,000 10,000
    Premiums
               6,000
               4,000
               2,000
               0

                    Si ily


                    Si ily


                    Si ily


                    Si ily


                    Si ily


                    Si ily


                    Si ily


                    Si ily


                    Si ily


                    Si ily
                        le


                        le


                        le


                        le


                        le


                        le


                        le


                        le


                        le


                        le
                      ng




                      ng


                      ng


                      ng


                      ng
                      ng


                      ng


                      ng


                      ng




                      ng
                      m


                      m




                      m
                      m


                      m


                      m


                      m




                      m


                      m


                      m
                    Fa


                    Fa


                    Fa


                    Fa


                    Fa


                    Fa


                    Fa


                    Fa


                    Fa


                    Fa




                                 CA     FL     GA        IL        MI     NJ   NY       OH        PA   TX
                                                  Employer Contribution        Employee Contribution




Notes:

Data from Kaiser Family Foundation/HRET survey. Premiums expressed in real year 2001
dollars. Ten largest states (by population) shown.




                                                                                                            27
                                                                                FIGURE 3

                                                 Effect of Malpractice Payments on Health Insurance Premiums
                                                                    State-Year Data, Regression Adjusted
                                     .1
    Ln (Health Insurance Premiums)
                                     .05
                                     0
                                     -.05
                                     -.1
                                     -.15




                                            -2        -1.5        -1      -.5       0        .5       1                      1.5   2
                                                              Ln (Per Capita Surgical Malpractice Payments)
                                            Line represents regression-adjusted coefficient of 0.03 (clustered s.e. 0.01).
                                            Controls include population demographics and state and year fixed effects.




Notes:

Sample includes annual observations of 48 continental US states from 1996 to 2002.
Controls include categorical measures of educational attainment, race, age, marital status, health status,
and gender mix (at the state-year level), as well as state and year fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level.
Malpractice payment data from National Practitioner Data Bank. Health insurance premium data from
Kaiser Family Foundation/HRET survey. All dollars expressed in real year 2001 units. Covariates
aggregated to state-year level from annual March CPS.




                                                                                                                                   28
                                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                                             All                              1996-1999                       2000-2002

                                              Mean          Std Dev       Obs       Mean       Std Dev    Obs       Mean        Std Dev    Obs


Health Insurance Variables
         Premiums                                 5,266        1,955      513,068    4,782        1,658   288,900    5,959         2,131   224,168
         HI from Employer                          0.51         0.50      513,068     0.50         0.50   288,900     0.51          0.50   303,628
         Any HI                                    0.82         0.39      513,068     0.81         0.39   288,900     0.82          0.39   303,628
         Employer Offers HI                        0.93         0.26       73,779     0.92         0.27    52,014     0.93          0.26    21,765

Labor Market Outcomes
        Hours                                      32.5          20.1     476,580      30.0        21.2   288,900      36.8         17.1   187,680
        Wage and Salary Income (real)           26,209        35,501      513,068   25,457      35,102    288,900   27,285       36,037    224,168
        Part time (<30 hours per week)             0.16          0.36     377,921      0.16        0.37   212,346      0.15         0.36   165,575
        Employed                                   0.80          0.40     476,580      0.74        0.44   288,900      0.90         0.29   187,680

Malpractice Payments (real per cap $)
         Total                                    12.70            7.46   509,985    12.36         7.07   286,874    12.97          7.74   302,386
         Internal Medicine                         7.38            4.49   509,985     7.15         4.25   286,874     7.57          4.71   302,386
         Ob-Gyn                                    1.75            1.33   493,610     1.66         1.27   278,897     1.82          1.35   292,813
         Surgery                                   3.33            1.97   509,985     3.30         1.90   286,874     3.35          1.97   302,386

Malpractice Payments (number per capita)
         Total                                    0.021        0.008      509,985    0.021        0.008   286,874    0.021         0.008   302,386
         Internal Medicine                        0.094        0.043      509,985    0.095        0.042   286,874    0.091         0.043   302,386
         Ob-Gyn                                   0.033        0.016      493,610    0.033        0.015   278,897    0.033         0.015   292,813
         Surgery                                  0.029        0.011      509,985    0.029        0.011   286,874    0.030         0.011   302,386


Notes:   Individual-level observations from 1996-2002 Current Population Survey. Sample limited to those age 22-64.
         Health insurance premiums from Kaiser/HRET survey (state-year data on premiums by policy type and employer size).
         Malpractice payments from National Practitioner Data Bank.
         Labor market outcomes and employer health insurance information from Current Population Survey (March and February).
                                                            Table 2: Effect of Premiums on Labor Market Outcomes


                           Ln (Wage & Salary            Employed                Ln (Hours)              Part Time         Have HI Through         Employee Share of         Ln (Employee
                                Income)                                                               (if employed)          Employer               HI Premium            Contribution to HI)

                             OLS           IV         OLS          IV         OLS         IV         OLS         IV        OLS          IV         OLS          IV         OLS          IV

                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)         (13)       (14)


Sample: All
                               -0.033      -0.128      -0.004      -0.155      0.004      -0.102      0.005      0.186      -0.027      -0.063      -0.145      -0.020       0.397      1.130
    Ln (HI Premium)             (.020)      (.136)      (.007)      (.071)     (.005)      (.054)     (.007)     (.061)      (.013)      (.092)      (.031)      (.103)      (.122)     (.419)


          R-squared            0.237        0.237       0.161       0.154       0.080      0.075       0.047      0.033      0.111       0.111       0.626       0.616        0.921      0.918
          N                 346,524      346,524     447,883     447,883     368,230    368,230     328,952    328,952    447,883     447,883     368,230     368,230      368,230    368,230
    Covariates and FEs          yes          yes         yes         yes         yes        yes         yes        yes        yes         yes         yes         yes          yes        yes


Notes:

    Individual-level observations from 1996-2002 Current Population Survey. Sample limited to those age 22-64.
    Health insurance premiums from Kaiser/HRET survey (state-year data on premiums by policy type and employer size).
    Malpractice payments from National Practitioner Data Bank.
    Labor market outcomes and employer health insurance information from Current Population Survey (March).
    Part-time workers work less than 30 hours per week.
    Covariates include race, age, age^2, age^3, marital status, education, gender, and health status.
    Instruments include real dollar amount and number of medical malpractice payments per capita for different specialties (surgery, ob-gyn, internal medicine, and other) for current year
    and previous year.
    Premiums assigned based on state, year, family structure (and employer size for employed).
    Regressions weighted by March CPS weights, and standard errors clustered at state level.
             Table 3: First Stage Regressions

                                      Effect of Growth in
                                    Malpractice Payments on
                                   Health InsurancePremiums

                                       (log-log specification)

                                     (1)        (2)         (4)


All Payments                           0.011      0.010
                                      (.007)     (.005)

Surgical Payments                                             0.014
                                                             (.007)
Ob-Gyn Payments                                             -0.003
                                                             (.004)
Internal Med Payments                                         0.006
                                                             (.010)
Other Payments                                              -0.002
                                                             (.001)
Number of Surg Pymts                                        -0.015
                                                             (.012)
Number of Ob-Gyn Pymts                                        0.007
                                                             (.007)
Number of Int Med Pymts                                       0.010
                                                             (.019)
Number of Other Pymts                                       -0.003
                                                             (.003)

F-test significance                   0.125      0.048       0.004
Covariates                               no        yes         yes
State and year effects                  yes        yes         yes


Notes:

Individual-level observations from 1996-2002 Current Population
Survey. Sample limited to those age 22-64.
Health insurance premiums from Kaiser/HRET survey (state-year
data on premiums by policy type and employer size).
Malpractice payments from National Practitioner Data Bank.
Covariates include race, age, age^2, age^3, marital status,
education, gender, and health status.
Standard errors clustered at state level.
Growth of payments measured as change in real payments per
capita or number of payments per capita.
                                             Table 4: Differential Effects of Premium Increases

                                           Health Insurance Premiums Instrumented with Malpractice Payments


                                           Ln (Wage & Salary Income)                                    Employer HI                            Employed

                                          (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)             (8)

Ln (HI Premium)                             -0.114         -0.313         -0.195         -0.040          0.002        -0.102          -0.065         -0.079
                                           (0.196)        (0.166)        (0.134)        (0.103)        (0.109)       (0.100)         (0.102)        (0.068)

Ln (HI Prem) *Employer HI                   -0.225
                                           (0.033)

Ln (HI Prem) *Part Time                                     0.103                        -0.021
                                                          (0.052)                       (0.024)

Ln (HI Prem) *(Female, Married, &                                                                       -0.107
Healthy)                                                                                               (0.028)

Ln (HI Prem) *Low Wage Hourly                                                                                         -0.094
Worker                                                                                                               (0.030)

Ln (HI Prem) *Manufacturing                                               -0.134                                                      -0.020         -0.057
                                                                         (0.033)                                                     (0.035)        (0.015)

Employer HI                                  2.510
                                           (0.289)

Part Time                                                  -1.634                        -0.125
                                                          (0.431)                       (0.202)

Female, Married, & Healthy                                                                               0.770
                                                                                                       (0.244)

Low Wage Hourly Worker                                                                                                 0.625
                                                                                                                     (0.250)

Manufacturing                                                              1.362                                                       0.356         0.502
                                                                         (0.281)                                                     (0.296)         (.125)

R-squared                                    0.33           0.32           0.25            0.12           0.08         0.07            0.08           0.03
N                                        304,744        304,744        304,744         328,952        328,952      328,952         323,899        368,230
Sample                                  Employed       Employed       Employed        Employed       Employed     Employed        Employed             All


Notes:

Individual-level observations from 1996-2002 Current Population Survey. Sample limited to those age 22-64.
Health insurance premiums from Kaiser/HRET survey (state-year data on premiums by policy type and employer size).
Malpractice payments from National Practitioner Data Bank.
Labor market outcomes and employer health insurance information from Current Population Survey (March).
Part-time work defined as less than 30 hours per week. Low wage hourly workers defined as those paid less than $8/hour. Healthy defined as self-reported
Instruments include real dollar amount and number of medical malpractice payments per capita for different specialties (surgery, ob-gyn, internal medicine,
Premiums assigned based on state, year, family structure (and employer size for employed).
              Table 5: Health Insurance Offering


   Health Insurance Premiums Instrumented with Malpractice Payments


                               Offered Employer Health Insurance
                                        Among Employed

                                     (1)                      (2)


Ln (HI Premium)                               0.082                 -0.381
                                             (.200)                  (.169)

N                                          69,120                 10,754
Sample                                     All               Hrly Workers


Notes:

Individual-level observations from Current Population Survey. Sample
limited to those age 22-64 included in both February and March
Supplements, 1997, 1999, 2001.
Health insurance premiums from Kaiser/HRET survey (state-year data on
premiums by policy type and employer size).
Malpractice payments from National Practitioner Data Bank.
Labor market outcomes and employer health insurance information from
Current Population Survey (March and February).
Part-time work defined as less than 30 hours per week.
Low wage hourly workers defined as those paid less than $8/hour.
Healthy defined as self-reported health excellent or very good.
Instruments include real dollar amount and number of medical malpractice
payments per capita for different specialties (surgery, ob-gyn, internal
medicine, and other) for current year and previous year.
Premiums assigned based on state, year, family structure (and employer size
for employed).
                                                                     Table 6: Specification Checks


                                       Black          College        Female         Married        Good Health      Employer            Mortality Rates              C-section
                                                     Education                                                       Pension          Overall      Cancer             Rates
                                        (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)             (9)


Sample: All

         Ln (HI Premium)                    -0.014         0.057          -0.015          -0.081          -0.097            0.122            0.001         0.0003           -0.072
                                           (0.056)       (0.067)         (0.047)         (0.072)         (0.090)          (0.120)          (0.002)       (0.0004)          (0.144)

                      R-squared            0.097     0.076               0.002           0.003            0.108            0.077            0.990           0.091           0.984
                              N         447,883   447,883             447,883         447,883          447,883          447,883              240             206             240
              State and Year FEs            yes       yes                 yes             yes              yes              yes               yes             yes             yes
                         Sample       CPS Micro CPS Micro           CPS Micro       CPS Micro        CPS Micro        CPS Micro        State-year      State-year      State-year


Notes:

Individual-level observations from 1996-2002 Current Population Survey. Sample limited to those age 22-64.
Health insurance premiums from Kaiser/HRET survey (state-year data on premiums by policy type and employer size).
Malpractice payments from National Practitioner Data Bank.
Labor market outcomes and employer health insurance information from Current Population Survey (March).
Instruments include real dollar amount and number of medical malpractice payments per capita for different specialties (surgery, ob-gyn, internal medicine, and other) for current
year and previous year.
Premiums assigned based on state, year, family structure (and employer size for employed).
Regressions weighted by March CPS weights, and standard errors clustered at state level.
Covariates include race, age, age^2, age^3, marital status, education, gender, and health status, excluding dependent variable.
                                   Table 7: Effects of 20 Percent Increase in Premiums

                                                                                Mean     Coefficient   Effect

Probability of being employed (percentage point)                                 73%         -0.155     -3.1%
Probability of working full time, conditional on working (percentage point)      84%         -0.186     -3.7%
Average hours per week, conditional on working                                     41        -0.102       -0.8
Average annual income (insignificant)                                         33,750         -0.128      -864
Average annual income, conditional on working and having employer HI          41,442         -0.225    -1,865
