NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPLAINING RETURNS WITH CASH-FLOW PROXIES
Peter Hecht
Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Working Paper 11169
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11169
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

Earlier drafts of this paper were circulated under the titles “Stock return variation and expected dividends:
a reinterpretation” and “Stock return variation and expected dividends: a comment.” Corresponding author:
Peter Hecht, (617) 495 6171, phecht@hbs.edu. We are indebted to John Cochrane, Eugene Fama, S.P.
Kothari, Jay Shanken, and many anonymous referees for their suggestions. We would also like to thank Tom
Berglund, Randy Cohen, George Constantinides, Campbell Harvey, J. B. Heaton, Jussi Keppo, Owen
Lamont, Eva Liljeblom, Christopher Polk, William Schwert, Vesa Puttonen, Richard Thaler, and the seminar
participants at the Swedish School of Economics and University of Chicago for helpful comments.
Vuolteenaho wishes to thank the Foundation for Economic Education, the Emil Aaltonen Foundation, and
the Oscar Mayer Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Peter Hecht and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Explaining Returns with Cash-Flow Proxies
Peter Hecht and Tuomo Vuolteenaho
NBER Working Paper No. 11169
March 2005
JEL No. E440, G100, G120, G140, G350
ABSTRACT
Stock returns are correlated with contemporaneous earnings growth, dividend growth, future real
activity, and other cash-flow proxies. The correlation between cash-flow proxies and stock returns
may arise from association of cash-flow proxies with one-period expected returns, cash-flow news,
and/or expected-return news. We use Campbell's (1991) return decomposition to measure the relative
importance of these three effects in regressions of returns on cash-flow proxies. In some of the
popular specifications, variables that are motivated as proxies for cash-flow news also track a
nontrivial proportion of one-period expected returns and expected-return news. As a result, the R2
from a regression of returns on cash-flow proxies may overstate or understate the importance of
cash-flow news as a source of return variance.
Peter Hecht
Harvard Business School
Cambridge, MA 02163
phecht@hbs.edu
Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
t-vuolteenaho@harvard.edu

Most valuation theories identify time-varying one-period expected returns, news about cash flows,
and news about future expected returns as the three possible sources of return variation. Barring the
existence of infinitely-lived bubbles in asset prices, if an asset’s return is high, its current one-period
expected return must have been high, expected cash flows must have increased (i.e., cash-flow news must
have been positive), and/or future expected returns decreased (i.e., expected-return news must have been
negative.)
Fama (1990), Schwert (1990), Kothari and Shanken (1992), Liew (1995) and others regress aggregate
stock returns on cash-flow proxies and find that cash-flow proxies explain returns well. The typical
interpretation of these regressions is that cash-flow news are an important source of observed return
variation. For example, Kothari and Shanken (p. 178) state, “In this paper, we find that proxies for the
market’s expectations of future dividends explain a substantial fraction of return variation.” Some also
interpret the high explanatory power of these types of regressions more generally as evidence of market
rationality.
Using firm-level data, an extensive accounting literature focuses on the contemporaneous correlation
of stock returns and earnings. Despite the statistically reliable positive association between stock returns and
earnings, Ball and Brown (1968), Beaver, Clarke, and Wright (1979), Beaver, Lambert, and Morse (1980),
Easton and Harris (1991), Collins, Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan (1994), and others find that the explained
fraction of stock return variation is significantly less than one (typically under 10 percent). Lev (1989) and
others suggest that the relatively low explanatory power stems from earnings’ lack of timeliness and/or
value-irrelevant noise in earnings.
Irrespective of motivation, however, the explanatory power of cash-flow proxies may arise from the
correlation of cash-flow proxies with one-period expected returns, cash-flow news, and/or expected-return
news.

If expected-return variation is responsible for the high explanatory power of the aggregate

regressions, these R2s should not be interpreted as evidence of cash-flow news driving the returns. Similarly,
if expected-return news is highly variable and positively correlated with cash-flow news, the low R2s in
regressions of firm-level returns on earnings do not necessarily imply that earnings are a noisy or delayed
measure of the cash-flow-generating ability of the firm. Even if earnings are a clean signal of cash-flow
news, expected-return effects (due to variation in risk-adjusted discount rates and/or mispricing) can garble
the earnings-returns relation.

The idea that correlation between a cash-flow proxy and stock return may be due to any of the three
components is not novel. Fama (1990), Schwert (1990), Kothari and Shanken (1992), Campbell and Ammer
(1993), and others recognize that when stock returns are regressed on cash-flow proxies, any of the three
effects may be driving the regression coefficients. They do not, however, clearly quantify the relative
importance of these three effects. Thus, in the end, it is still unclear why cash-flow proxies are or are not
related to stock returns.
We measure the significance of the above three effects on various regressions of stock returns on
cash-flow proxies. We empirically reinterpret the regression results by Beaver, Clarke, and Wright (1979),
Fama (1990), Schwert (1990), Easton and Harris (1991), Kothari and Shanken (1992), Collins, Kothari,
Shanken, and Sloan (1994) who regress aggregate or firm-level stock returns on cash-flow proxies. Using
Campbell’s (1991) return decomposition, a regression of returns on cash-flow proxies can be decomposed
into three separate regressions, each corresponding to one component of return. Our procedure first assumes
and estimates a simple return-generating process. This return-generating process then implies realized
values for one-period expected returns, cash-flow news, and expected-return news. Once the three return
components are extracted, we regress them individually on the cash-flow proxies. These three regressions
expose what drives the regression coefficients in the original returns-on-cash-flow-proxies specification.
Our empirical results show that many of the variables in Fama’s (1990) and Schwert’s (1990)
regressions generally proxy the return components in both an intended and unintended way. The default and
term yield spread positively track one-period expected returns. However, the default spread is negatively
related to cash-flow news, making the positive link between stock returns and the default spread
insignificant. While shocks to the default and term yield spread positively track revisions in future expected
returns, i.e., expected-return news, shocks to the term spread are also positively correlated with cash-flow
news, producing an insignificant positive relationship between stock returns and the term spread shocks.
Between the current and future dividend growth rates, only the current dividend growth is significantly
positively correlated with cash-flow news. Since the current dividend growth is also strongly negatively
correlated with expected-return news, the positive relationship between stock returns and the current
dividend growth is much larger in magnitude.
Similar to Fama (1990) and Schwert (1990), many of the variables in Kothari and Shanken (1992)
also proxy the return components in an intended and unintended way. For Kothari and Shanken’s returns-

2

on-dividend growth-rates specifications, the contemporaneous and future dividend growth rates track more
than just cash-flow news. The contemporaneous dividend growth also strongly negatively tracks expectedreturn news while the one-year lead dividend growth positively tracks expected-return news. This result
helps explain the (perhaps surprising) insignificant negative relationship between one-year lead dividend
growth and stock returns. The second- and third-year lead dividend growth also positively track one-period
expected returns, increasing the correlation with stock returns.
The additional measurement-error proxies in Kothari and Shanken’s full specification also play a dual
role in the regression. Because future dividend growth rates may be partially anticipated by the market, the
realized dividend growth is a noisy proxy of new information about dividends. Kothari and Shanken include
lagged dividend yield and future returns to help “clean-up” this measurement error in future dividend growth
rates. In addition to reducing measurement error, our analysis shows that a nontrivial amount of the
incremental explanatory power of the “clean-up” variables is due to expected-return effects. The lagged
dividend yield positively tracks the one-period expected return while the future returns are positively
correlated with expected-return news.
The firm-level results differ from the aggregate results in an interesting way. Consistent with the
findings of Vuolteenaho (2002) and Cohen, Gompers, and Vuolteenaho (2003), our estimated VARs imply
strong positive correlation between firm-level expected-return and cash-flow news. This positive correlation
may in some cases have dramatic effects on firm-level regressions of returns on cash-flow proxies. For
example, Easton and Harris (1991) regress returns on contemporaneous earnings (normalized by lagged
price). Estimating a loosely similar regression equation in our sample yields a regression coefficient of 0.75
and R2 of 10 percent. However, when we regress the estimated cash-flow news on the same earnings
variable, we get a coefficient of 1.30 and R2 of 27 percent. Although the level of earnings variable does a
decent job tracking cash-flow news, it also tracks the negative of expected-return news with a coefficient of 0.70 and R2 of 19 percent and the level of expected returns with a coefficient of 0.15 and R2 of 9 percent. In
the end, the association of the earnings variable with cash-flow and expected-return news partially cancel
each other, leaving the original specification with a low coefficient and R2.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section one presents the framework for decomposing
the stock return and the regression coefficient of returns on cash-flow proxies. Section two decomposes and

3

reinterprets aggregate regressions while section three decomposes and reinterprets firm-level regressions.
Section four concludes.
I.
A.

Framework

Decomposing returns and regressions of returns on cash-flow proxies
Using the log-linear approximation of dividend-price ratio derived by Campbell and Shiller (1988,

refer to Appendix A), Campbell (1991) decomposes the definition of return.
∞

∞

i =0

j =1

rt ≈ Et −1rt + (Et − Et −1 )∑ ρ i ∆d t +i − (Et − Et −1 )∑ ρ j rt + j

(1)

= Et −1rt + N cf ,t − N r ,t
Above, r ≡ log return, ρ ≡ a constant determined by the average dividend yield and set to 0.96 for the
remainder of the paper, and ∆d ≡ log dividend growth. The realized stock return can be split into three
components: One-period expected return (Et-1rt), cash-flow news (Ncf,t), and negative of expected-return
news (-Nr,t). Ignoring the (very small) linearization error, this decomposition accounts for the entire return:
the stock return equals the sum of these three components.
Using the above return decomposition, a regression of returns on cash-flow proxies can be
decomposed into three component regressions, one corresponding to conditional one-period expected return,
cash-flow news, and expected-return news each. Consider a typical regression of returns on cash-flow
proxies:

rt = X t (φT ) β + ε t

(2)

The regression (2) explains returns with cash-flow proxies X t (φT ) , where φT denotes the information set at

the end of the world, recognizing the possibility that some of the variables may not be known at the end of
the return period. Relative to rt , X t can contain past, contemporaneous, and future realizations.
Using Campbell’s (1991) return decomposition, rt ≈ Et −1rt + N cf ,t − N r ,t (defined in equation (1)), the
original regression can be split into three component regressions:
Et −1rt = X t (φT ) β Er + ε Er ,t
N cf ,t = X t (φT ) β Ncf + ε Ncf ,t
− N r ,t = X t (φT ) β − Nr + ε − Nr ,t

4

(3)

Since the explanatory variables in each of the three component regressions are the same as in the original
regression (2), we can think of the original regression (2) as the sum of the three component regressions1:

(

) (

rt = X t (φT ) β Er + β Ncf + β − Nr + ε Er ,t + ε Ncf ,t + ε − Nr .t

)

(4)

From (3) and (4) it is clear that the cash-flow proxies, X t , can explain stock returns well for various reasons,
irrespective of the motivating logic. The X t can explain the level of one-period expected returns, cash-flow
news, or expected-return news – or any combination of the three. Similarly, if the relationship between X t
and cash-flow news is offset by the relationship between X t and expected-return news and/or one-period
expected returns, it is possible for X t to explain cash-flow news but not returns.
For example, returns on a broad stock index, such as the S&P500, are positively correlated with future
industrial production (Fama (1990), Schwert (1990)). This correlation may be driven by any of the three
sources. First, the correlation may arise from high future production being associated with high one-period
expected returns. Second, positive shocks to production may be associated with positive cash-flow news.
Third, positive shocks to production may be associated with negative expected-return news. If the first
and/or third source drives the correlation, concluding from this correlation that changing cash-flow
expectations drive returns would be erroneous.
B.

Estimating one-period expected returns, cash-flow news, and expected-return news

The above regression decomposition requires the estimated series of one-period expected returns,
cash-flow news, and expected-return news as inputs. As demonstrated by Campbell (1991), a vector
autoregressive (VAR) model provides a convenient way to implement this return decomposition and to
calculate estimates of the three series. In particular, the VAR model enables solving the infinite expected
sums in equation (1) with simple, closed-form formulas.
For the aggregate decompositions, we first estimate a VAR to calculate the expected-return and
expected-return news terms2. Let zt be a vector of state variables describing the economy at time t. In
particular, let the first element of zt be the aggregate log stock return. The state vector is assumed to follow
a linear law:

z t = A + Γ z t −1 + u t .

(5)

The error term ut is assumed to have a covariance matrix Σ and to be independent of everything known at

t −1.
5

The VAR implies a return decomposition. Define e1′ ≡ [1 0 L 0] and

λ' ≡ e1′ ρΓ(I − ρΓ)−1 .

(6)

Taking expectations of (5) yields an expression for the one-period expected return, e1' ( A + Γ z t −1 ) . The
definition (6) introduced by Campbell (1991) simplifies the other expressions considerably: Expected-return
news can now be conveniently expressed as λ ' ut . Like Campbell (1991), we then solve for the cash-flownews term as the residual (realized return minus expected return plus expected-return news), (e1′ + λ ') ut . If
returns are unpredictable, i.e., the first row of Γ is zeros, expected-return news is identically zero and the
entire return is due to cash-flow news.
Effectively, Campbell’s (1991) method first computes expected-return news directly and then backs
out the cash-flow news as unexpected return plus expected-return news. It may seem that this indirect
method of calculating cash-flow news as a residual relies on heavier assumptions than does directly
calculating the change in the discounted sum of expected future dividends. This concern turns out not to be
an important one, however: Including dividend growth into the VAR state vector and computing cash-flow
news directly yields very similar results.
The firm-level and aggregate methodologies are slightly different. For the firm-level VAR, zi ,t
represents a vector of firm-specific state variables. The first element of zi ,t is the firm’s market-adjusted log
stock return. An individual firm’s state vector is assumed to follow a linear law:
z i,t = Γ z i,t −1 + u i,t .

(7)

Since the firm-level state variables are cross-sectionally demeaned, we can safely omit the intercept and
aggregate variables present in the aggregate regressions. Similar to the aggregate methodology, the error
term ui ,t is assumed to have a covariance matrix Σ and to be independent of everything known at t − 1 . As

before, the firm-level expected-return and cash-flow news can be expressed as λ ' ui , t and (e1′ + λ ') u i ,t ,
respectively. Most of our firm-level specifications restrict the VAR parameters to be constant over time and
across firms, but some of our firm-level specifications will relax this restriction by allowing for crosssectional variation in the VAR parameters (and including a constant term in (7)). All of our standard-error
computations allow for general correlation structure of errors across firms.
While the VAR framework is convenient for estimating the series of one-period expected returns,
cash-flow news, and expected-return news in an internally consistent manner, it is incapable of

6

distinguishing between rational variation in expected returns and variation due to mispricing. For example,
even if the model of market equilibrium requires constant expected returns and investors thus subjectively
expect constant returns, the actual rationally expected returns might vary over time if investors forecast cash
flows with systematic errors. To the extent that the VAR state vector contains variables that capture
systematic errors in cash flow forecasts, the VAR framework will attribute this portion of the return variation
due to mispricing to the time-varying expected returns and expected return news.3
However, even if expected return variation is due to mispricing, the VAR return decomposition still
provides a means for isolating the relationship between returns and cash flows. Even if some investors have
irrational expectations, there should be other investors with rational expectations, and it is interesting to
understand asset price behavior from the perspective of these investors. For example, if cash flow news and
mispricing (which shows up as expected return news) are not uncorrelated, a simple correlation between
returns and cash flow news or a regression of returns on cash flow news will over- or underestimate the true
relationship between returns and cash flows. The VAR framework provides a means for controlling for the
correlation structure between expected return and cash flow news, irrespective of whether the expected
return variation is rational.
Lastly, the VAR framework has other potential limitations, too. The linear time series structure of the
VAR may not provide a good approximation to the true return data generating process. Even if the linear
assumption were reasonable, the variance decomposition results are conditional on the information set
included in the state vector. Depending on the correlation between the omitted and included state variables,
it is possible to arrive at incorrect conclusions if the VAR is misspecified. While Appendix B addresses
some of the specification concerns by considering alternative state vectors, it is important to interpret all of
our results with these cautions in mind.
II. Empirical decompositions of aggregate regressions
A.

Aggregate data

The main data for the aggregate regressions come from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP), Global Financial Data (GFD), Shiller (2000), Schwert (1990), and Macaulay (1938), 1881 to 2001.
All variables are of annual frequency.

7

Motivated by the vast return predictability literature (see, for example, Fama and French (1989) and
Campbell and Shiller (1988, 1998)), the state vector of our main VAR includes annual log return (LRET),
log price-earnings ratio (LPE), and the spread of the ten-year constant maturity bond log yield over the threemonth commercial paper log yield (LTERM). For 1881-1925, LRET is the log return on the aggregate stock
market index used in Schwert (1990). After 1925, LRET is the log return on the CRSP value-weight index.
LPE is from Shiller (2000), calculated as the price of the S&P 500 divided by the trailing ten-year moving
average of aggregate earnings of companies in the S&P 500. The bond and commercial paper yields come
from GFD.
In addition to the main VAR state variables, we also use cash-flow and expected-return proxies
motivated by previous research. Fama (1990) and Schwert (1990) explain aggregate returns with the lagged
dividend yield, spread between long-term and short-term government bonds, yield spread between low-grade
and high-grade grade corporate bonds (LDEF), shocks to both yield spreads, and contemporaneous and
future industrial-production growth. Similar to Fama (1990) and Schwert (1990), for our set of expectedreturn proxies, we use LDEF, LTERM, shocks to the default spread (LDEFS), and shocks to LTERM
(LTERMS). For our cash-flow proxies, we use the current, one-year lead, two-year lead, and three-year lead
annual log dividend growth rate (LGD, LGDF1, LGDF2, and LGDF3). Default spread is the spread of
Moody’s Baa corporate bond log yield over the Aaa corporate bong log yield obtained from GFD. Since
Moody’s Baa corporate bond yield is unavailable before 1919, for 1881-1918, LDEF is calculated as the
spread of the average top five Macaulay railroad bond log yields (excluding the maximum) over the average
bottom five Macaulay railroad bond log yields (excluding the minimum) obtained from Macaulay (1938).
The shocks are the estimated residuals from a first-order autoregressive process. The dividend growth data
comes from Schwert (1990) for 1881-1925 and CRSP for 1926-2001.
Kothari and Shanken (1992) explain aggregate returns with the lagged dividend yield,
contemporaneous and future dividend growth, and future returns. Similar to Kothari and Shanken (1992),
for our other two sets of cash-flow proxies, we use the annual log dividend yield (LDP), LGD, LGDF1,
LGDF2, LGDF3, one-year lead LRET (LRETF1), two-year lead LRET (LRETF2), and three-year lead
LRET (LRETF3). For 1881-1925, these data are for the aggregate stock market index used in Schwert
(1990). For 1926-2001, these data are for the CRSP value-weight index obtained from CRSP.

8

In Appendix B, we explore alternative aggregate VAR specifications. Additional variables in these
specifications include the default spread (LDEF), annual log dividend yield (LDP), annual log dividendearnings ratio (LDE), log book-to-market ratio (LBM), log return on equity (LROE), and the stochastically
detrended three-month commercial paper log yield (LDTY). Our book-to-market and profitability data are
constructed by Vuolteenaho (2001). LDTY is the spread between the current three-month commercial paper
log yield and the average three-month commercial paper log yield over the previous twelve months.
Throughout the paper, all relevant variables are deflated by the commercial paper/T-bill wealth index
obtained from GFD. The inflation series is unreliable for the early part of our sample.
Table I shows the descriptive statistics for the aggregate data. Each panel shows means, standard
deviations, minimums, percentiles of the variables, and maximums. Panel A shows the descriptives for the
VAR state variables. Panel B shows the descriptives for Fama (1990) and Schwert’s (1990) and Kothari
and Shanken’s (1992) cash-flow and expected-return proxies.
B.

Estimated process for aggregate stock returns

The state vector of our main VAR (equation (8)) includes LRET, LPE, and LTERM.

z t = A + Γ z t −1 + u t ,

z t = [LRETt

LPEt

( )

′
LTERM t ] , Σ = E u t u t'

(8)

This time series model generates our three components of returns: One-period expected return (Et-1rt), cashflow news (Ncf,t), and negative of expected-return news (-Nr,t). We consider alternative VAR specifications
in Appendix B.
Table II contains the VAR parameter estimates and a variance decomposition obtained using a 18811998 sample.4 Consistent with the previous return-predictability findings (e.g., Keim and Stambaugh
(1986), Campbell and Shiller (1988), and Fama and French (1989)), LPE and LTERM are statistically
significant predictors of return. Both LTERM and, especially, LPE are highly persistent. Consistent with
the variance decomposition literature, expected-return news is much more volatile than cash-flow news (e.g.,
Campbell and Ammer (1993)). The ratio of expected-return-news variance to cash-flow-news variance is
5.34. The correlation between the two estimated news series is -0.29. This negative correlation is consistent
with a story where unexpected good economic times are associated with lower than normal investor risk
aversion, producing lower equilibrium expected future returns.

9

C.

Reinterpreting regressions of returns on real activity

Fama’s (1990) and Schwert’s (1990) main cash-flow proxy is current and future industrial-production
growth. We regress LRET and its three estimated components (one-period expected return, cash-flow news,
and negative of expected-return news) individually on explanatory variables (defined above) similar in spirit
to Fama (1990) and Schwert (1990):

LRETt = B0 + B1 LDEFt −1 + B2 LTERM t −1 + B3 LDEFS t + B4 LTERMS t
+ B5 LGDt + B6 LGDF1t +1 + B7 LGDF 2 t + 2 + B8 LGDF 3t +3 + ε t
Et −1rt = BEr ,0 + BEr ,1 LDEFt −1 + BEr , 2 LTERM t −1 + BEr ,3 LDEFS t + BEr , 4 LTERMS t
+ BEr ,5 LGDt + BEr ,6 LGDF1t +1 + BEr , 7 LGDF 2 t + 2 + BEr ,8 LGDF 3t +3 + ε Er ,t
N cf ,t = BNcf , 0 + BNcf ,1 LDEFt −1 + BNcf , 2 LTERM t −1 + BNcf ,3 LDEFS t + BNcf , 4 LTERMS t

(9)

+ BNcf ,5 LGDt + BNcf , 6 LGDF1t +1 + BNcf , 7 LGDF 2 t + 2 + BNcf ,8 LGDF 3t +3 + ε Ncf ,t
− N r ,t = B− Nr ,0 + B− Nr ,1 LDEFt −1 + B− Nr , 2 LTERM t −1 + B− Nr ,3 LDEFS t + B− Nr , 4 LTERMS t
+ B− Nr ,5 LGDt + B− Nr , 6 LGDF1t +1 + B− Nr ,7 LGDF 2 t + 2 + B− Nr ,8 LGDF 3t +3 + ε − Nr ,t
Our regressions deviate from Fama’s and Schwert’s specifications slightly. Fama and Schwert use
quarterly industrial-production growth rates. Due to data availability, we use annual aggregate dividend
growth rates.
As shown in the first row of Table III Panel A, the above explanatory variables explain 53 percent
(adjusted R2, period 1882-1998) of the total return variation. Our adjusted R2 is similar in magnitude to
Fama’s 59 percent (period 1953-1987) and Schwert’s 39 percent (period 1918-1988). Similar to Fama and
Schwert, the term spread and term-spread shock are statistically insignificant. Similar to Schwert but unlike
Fama, we find that the default-spread shock has a negative and significant coefficient in our regression.
Unlike Fama’s and Schwert’s, the default spread is statistically insignificant. Also, our results do not
indicate that stock returns are more related to future than contemporaneous dividend growth. The slope on
the contemporaneous dividend growth is large and highly significant (coefficient 0.51, s.e. 0.09).
Rows two through four of Table III Panel A show the regressions of the individual return
components. The Fama-Schwert proxies explain 67 percent of the time variation of estimated expected
returns. Since the proxies include one of the prediction variables in our VAR, LTERM, this is not too
surprising. It is important to note, however, that LDEF plays a much stronger role in tracking expected

10

returns (coefficient 4.52, s.e. 1.79). This link between LDEF and expected returns is impossible to identify
from looking only at the total return specification.
The Fama-Schwert proxies explain roughly half of the estimated cash-flow-news series (46 percent
adjusted R2). Most of the explanatory power comes from the contemporaneous dividend growth (coefficient
0.16, s.e. 0.05). The future dividend growth rates are only marginally positive. A nontrivial proportion of
the explanatory power is due to LTERMS (coefficient 1.92, s.e. 0.83). This significant positive relationship
partially explains why the shock to the term spread plays almost no role in explaining total return variation.
Furthermore, cash-flow news is statistically negatively related to the lagged default spread (coefficient –2.23,
s.e. 0.87). (No lagged variables would track the news series in sample if all lagged variables in the secondstage regression were included in the VAR.) Similar in spirit to the LTERMS situation, the negative
relationship between LDEF and cash-flow news gives the false impression that LDEF does not track
expected returns when only looking at the total return specification.
Fama’s and Schwert’s proxies explain 41 percent of the estimated expected-return news series. As
expected, the lagged variables are not related to our news series. Both LDEFS (coefficient –17, s.e. 4.1) and
LTERMS (coefficient –0.88, s.e. 1.1) are negatively related to the negative of expected-return news. Even
though LTERM is included in our VAR as a predictor variable, the results for LDEFS are stronger. The
contemporaneous dividend growth is reliably negatively correlated with future expected returns, i.e.
positively correlated with our negative of expected-return news series (coefficient 0.31, s.e. 0.07). This
result explains why the coefficient on LGD in the total return regression is so large relative to the future
dividend growth coefficients. The fact that LGD is negatively correlated with future expected returns makes
the regression coefficient of returns on dividend growth an upward biased estimator of the regression
coefficient of cash-flow news on dividend growth.
In sum, many of Fama’s and Schwert’s proxy variables behave in both an intended and unintended
way. Although their expected return proxies, LDEF and LTERM, capture a large proportion of the expected
return variation, both variables are negatively related to cash-flow news and the negative of expected return
news. This additional relationship breaks their link with expected returns when looking at total return
variation. The dividend growth variables track cash-flow news, but most of the contemporaneous dividend
growth’s explanatory power in the total returns regression originates from its large positive correlation with
the negative of expected return news. Shocks to the default and term spread are negatively correlated with

11

the negative of expected return news. However, LTERMS is positively related to cash-flow news, reversing
the relationship between LTERMS and total returns. In general, measuring a variables relationship (or lack
of relationship) with total returns provides a distorted picture on whether that variable is (or is not) tracking a
particular component of total return. Empirically, this distortion is of first order importance.
D.

Reinterpreting regressions of returns on dividend growth rates

Instead of general economic activity, Kothari and Shanken (1992, KS hereafter) use dividend growth
rates as their main cash-flow proxies. As above, we individually regress the three estimated components of
return on the cash-flow proxies used in KS’s dividends-only specification:

LRETt = b0 + b1 LGDt + b2 LGDF1t +1 + b3 LGDF 2 t + 2 + b4 LGDF 3t +3 + ε t
Et −1rt = bEr ,0 + bEr ,1 LGDt + bEr , 2 LGDF1t +1 + bEr ,3 LGDF 2 t + 2 + bEr , 4 LGDF 3t +3 + ε Er ,t
N cf ,t = bcf , 0 + bcf ,1 LGDt + bcf , 2 LGDF1t +1 + bcf ,3 LGDF 2 t + 2 + bcf , 4 LGDF 3t +3 + ε cf ,t

(10)

− N r ,t = b− Nr , 0 + b− Nr ,1 LGDt + b− Nr , 2 LGDF1t +1 + b− Nr ,3 LGDF 2 t + 2 + b− Nr , 4 LGDF 3t +3 + ε − Nr ,t
The results are shown in Table III Panel B1. We find that the contemporaneous and future dividend
growth rates explain 39.21 percent of the return variation (first row of Table III Panel B1). Most of the
explanatory power comes from the contemporaneous dividend growth rate (coefficient 0.73, s.e. 0.12).
Although two out of the three future dividend growth rates are positive, only LGDF3 is mildly significant
(coefficient 0.14, s.e. 0.09).
Rows two through four of Table III Panel B1 show the regressions on the individual return
components. The KS proxies explain 12 percent of the time variation of estimated expected returns. Except
for the LGDF1 slope, each of the coefficients is of the same sign as the coefficients estimated in the total
return regression. In particular, both LGDF2 (coefficient 0.09, s.e. 0.04) and LGDF3 (coefficient 0.09, s.e.
0.04) are significant and similar in size to their corresponding slopes in the total return regression.
With respect to the expected-return news series (row four of Table III Panel B1), the KS proxies
explain 26 percent of the time variation in expected-return news. The contemporaneous dividend growth is
highly significant and positive (coefficient 0.45, s.e. 0.09), explaining over 60% of the slope size estimated
in the total return regression. This result is consistent with the aggregate VAR variance decomposition
(bottom of Table II): Good news about cash flows is associated with lower future returns (higher negative
expected return news). Relative to its slope in the other regressions, the magnitude of the LGDF1 coefficient

12

is large and negative (coefficient -0.13, s.e. 0.09), explaining its negative relationship with total returns in
row 1.
The VAR estimated cash-flow news is marginally related to the contemporaneous and future dividend
growth rates. Row three of Table III Panel B1 reports an adjusted R2 of 24 percent. Although all of the
dividend growth variables are positively related to cash-flow news, only the LGD coefficient is
economically and statistically significant (coefficient 0.20, s.e. 0.07). However, the slope on LGD still only
accounts for approximately one quarter of its positive relationship with total returns. The magnitudes of the
other slopes are all less than 0.06.
The above results are simultaneously good and bad news for KS's dividends-only specification. On a
positive note, KS’s cash-flow proxies do partially explain the cash-flow-news series estimated from the
VAR. All of KS’s cash-flow proxies are positively related to cash-flow news. However, similar to the
results using the Fama-Schwert proxies, KS’s total returns on dividend growth regressions hides the fact that
contemporaneous and future dividend growth are also significantly related to expected-return news. In
addition, contemporaneous and future dividend growth rates are also correlated with one-period expected
returns for KS’s total returns on dividend growth regressions. This interaction distorts the overall and
relative “cash-flow” importance of each cash-flow proxy when looking only at the coefficients from the total
return on dividend growth regressions. The coefficients from the total return regression tend to be two to
five times as large as their counterparts measured in the cash-flow news regression.
E.

Reinterpreting regressions of returns on dividend growth rates and clean-up variables

KS point out that using realized dividend growth rates as proxies for changes in expectations induces
an errors-in-variables bias. The portion of realized dividend growth that was expected is measurement error.
Also, the portion of realized dividend growth representing information that arrived after the return period is
measurement error. In light of these errors-in-variables problems, KS introduce “clean-up variables.” In
order to account for the market’s expectation at the beginning of the return period, KS use the lagged, annual
log dividend yield (LDP). In order to control for the information that is contained in the future dividend
growth rates but arrived after the return period, KS add future returns 3 years out (LRETF1, LRETF2, and
LRETF3) to the final time-series regression.
We examine the explanatory power of a regression similar in spirit to KS’s full specification:

13

LRETt = b0 + b1 LDPt −1 + b2 LGDt + b3 LGDF1t +1 + b4 LGDF 2 t + 2 +
b5 LGDF 3t +3 + b6 LRETF1t +1 + b7 LRETF 2 t + 2 + b8 LRETF 3t +3 + ε t
Et −1 rt = bEr ,0 + b1 LDPt −1 + bEr , 2 LGDt + bEr ,3 LGDF1t +1 + bEr , 4 LGDF 2 t + 2 +
bEr ,5 LGDF 3t +3 + bEr ,6 LRETF1t +1 + bEr ,7 LRETF 2 t + 2 + bEr ,8 LRETF 3t +3 + ε Er ,t

(11)

N d ,t = bNd ,0 + bNd ,1 LDPt −1 + B Nd , 2 LGDt + bNd ,3 LGDF1t +1 + bNd , 4 LGDF 2 t + 2 +
bNd ,5 LGDF 3t +3 + bNd ,6 LRETF1t +1 + bNd , 7 LRETF 2 t + 2 + bNd ,8 LRETF 3t +3 + ε Nd ,t
− N r ,t = b− Nr ,0 + b− Nr ,1 LDPt −1 + b− Nr , 2 LGDt + b− Nr ,3 LGDF1t +1 + b− Nr , 4 LGDF 2 t + 2 +
b− Nr ,5 LGDF 3t +3 + b− Nr ,6 LRETF1t +1 + b− Nr ,7 LRETF 2 t + 2 + b− Nr ,8 LRETF 3t +3 + ε − Nr ,t

Including the “clean-up variables” increases the full regression R2 from 39 percent to 45 percent (row
one of Table III Panel B2). Both LDP (coefficient 0.12, s.e. 0.07) and LRETF2 (coefficient -0.25, s.e. 0.09)
play a significant role. Although statistically insignificant, the slopes on LRETF1 (coefficient -0.05, s.e.
0.11) and LRETF3 (coefficient -0.15, s.e. 0.09) are similar in sign to LRETF2. Like the results from KS’s
“dividends only” specification (Table III Panel B1), contemporaneous dividend growth (coefficient 0.74, s.e.
0.11) plays an important role. Including the “clean-up variables” increases the economic and statistical
significance of the future dividend growth variables LGDF2 (coefficient 0.29, s.e. 0.11) and LGDF3
(coefficient 0.22, s.e. 0.11).
Rows two through four of Table III Panel B2 decompose KS’s full regression. First, the point
estimates indicate that lagged dividend yield tracks one-period expected returns (coefficient 0.11, s.e. 0.04).
Its relationship with one-period expected returns almost completely explains the positive correlation between
the lagged dividend yield and total returns. Second, all of the future return explanatory variables are
negatively correlated with the negative of expected-return news, i.e. future realized returns are positively
correlated with future expected returns. Of the three future return explanatory variables, the two-year lead
return is the most economically and statistically significant (coefficient –0.26, s.e. 0.08).

Third, the

coefficients on the dividend growth variables exhibit a pattern similar to those found in KS’s “dividends
only” specification (Table III Panel B1). Although they are all positively related to the cash-flow news
series (LGD: coefficient 0.20, s.e. 0.07, LGDF1: coefficient 0.01, s.e. 0.05, LGDF2: coefficient 0.04, s.e.
0.05, LGDF3: coefficient 0.04, s.e. 0.05), the relationship between dividend growth rates and total returns is
still mainly a result of the strong positive correlations between dividend growth and expected returns and/or
dividend growth and the negative of expected-return news. Relative to the other dividend growth variables,
LGD has the strongest positive relationship with one-period expected returns and the negative of expected-

14

return news (coefficient 0.10, s.e. 0.05 and coefficient 0.44, s.e. 0.09, respectively).

Although less

significant, LGDF2 and LGDF3 are positively related to one-period expected returns and the negative of
expected-return news too (LGDF2: coefficient 0.08, s.e. 0.05 and coefficient 0.17, s.e. 0.10, LGDF3:
coefficient 0.05, s.e. 0.04 and coefficient 0.13, s.e. 0.10, respectively). In sum, the picture emerging from the
regression decomposition is that a nontrivial amount of the increased explanatory power gained by adding
the clean-up variables comes from expected-return effects. The relationship between the dividend growth
variables and cash-flow news does not appear to be materially affected by the inclusion of the clean-up
variables.
We would also like to make the point that adding clean-up variables can in many cases obscure the
interpretation of regressions of returns on cash-flow proxies. In Appendix C, we use an analytical and
simulation argument to show why, for example, Kothari and Shanken’s (1992) main specification and other
specifications that include future returns as explanatory variables are especially prone to track not only cashflow news but also one-period expected returns and expected-return news. As a part of their empirical
evidence, Kothari and Shanken (1992) estimate a regression, which explains returns with lagged dividend
yield, contemporaneous and future dividend growth rates, and future returns. Via the Campbell-Shiller
(1988) log-linear framework, we illustrate in Appendix C that this specification is one future dividend yield
short of an approximate identity. As more and more future dividend growth rates and returns are added to
the regression, the future dividend yield becomes less important to the identity, producing a higher and
higher population regression R2. Therefore, in the limit, a regression of returns on the lagged dividend yield,
contemporaneous and future dividend growth rates, and future returns is guaranteed to track all three
components of returns, irrespective of the true drivers of stock return variation.
III. Empirical decompositions of firm-level regressions
A.

Firm-level data

The basic data come from the CRSP-COMPUSTAT intersection, 1954 to 1998. The Center for
Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) monthly stock file contains monthly prices, shares outstanding,
dividends, and returns for NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks. The COMPUSTAT annual research file
contains the relevant accounting information for most publicly traded U.S. stocks. All variables are of annual
frequency.

15

In order to be included in the VAR sample, a firm-year must satisfy the following CRSP and
COMPUSTAT data requirements. We require all firms to have a December fiscal-year end of t-1, in order
to align accounting variables across firms. A firm must have t-1, t-2, and t-3 book equity available, where t
denotes time in years. We require t-1 and t-2 net income and long-term debt data. A valid market-equity
figure must be available for t-1, t-2, and t-3. We require that there is a valid trade during the month
immediately preceding the period t return, ensuring that any return predictability is not spuriously induced
by stale prices or other similar market micro-structure issues. We also require at least one monthly return
observation during each of the preceding five years, from t-1 to t-5. We screen out clear data errors and
mismatches by excluding firms with t-1 market equity less than $10 million and book-to-market more than
100 or less than 1/100. We carefully avoid imposing any COMPUSTAT or CRSP requirements on year t
data, because these data are used in the dependent variables in our VAR.
The stock return is defined as the annual value-weight return on a firm’s common stock issues
(typically one). If no year t return data are available, we substitute zeros for both returns and dividends.
Annual returns are compounded from monthly returns, recorded from the beginning of May to the end of
April. If a firm is delisted but the delisting return is missing, we investigate the reason for disappearance. If
the delisting is performance-related, we assume a -30 percent delisting return. Otherwise, we assume a zero
delisting return.
Market equity (combined value of all common stock classes outstanding) is taken from CRSP as of
the end of April. If the year t market equity is missing, we compound the lagged market equity with return
without dividends.
For book equity, we prefer COMPUSTAT data item 60, but if it is unavailable we use item 235.
Also, if short- and/or long-term deferred taxes are available (data items 35 and 71), we add them to book
equity. If both data items 60 and 235 are unavailable, we proxy book equity by the last period’s book equity
plus earnings, less dividends. If neither earnings nor book equity is available, we assume that the book-tomarket ratio has not changed and compute the book equity proxy from the last period’s book-to-market and
this period’s market equity. We treat negative or zero book equity values as missing.
ROE is the earnings (COMPUSTAT data item 172) over the last period’s book equity. When
earnings are missing, we use the clean-surplus formula to compute a proxy for earnings; i.e., earnings equals
the change in book equity plus dividends. In every case, we do not allow the firm to lose more than its book

16

equity. That is, we define the net income as a maximum of the reported net income (or clean-surplus net
income, if earnings are not reported) and negative of the beginning of the period book equity. Hence, the
minimum ROE is truncated to –100 percent.
Campbell’s (1991) return decomposition uses log returns.

The log transformations may cause

problems if some stock returns are close to –100 percent. We follow Vuolteenaho (2002) and solve this
complication by redefining the firm as a portfolio of 90 percent common stock and 10 percent Treasury-bills
using market values. Every period, the portfolio is rebalanced to these weights. This affects not only stock
return and accounting return on equity, but also the book-to-market equity, pulling this ratio slightly towards
one. After adding this risk-free investment, the ratios and returns are sufficiently well-behaved for log
transformations. Simple market and accounting returns on this portfolio closely approximate simple returns
on the firm’s common stock only.

The accounting identities hold for the transformed quantities.

Furthermore, this transformation method is superior to purely statistical transformations (such as the BoxCox transformation), because the transformed quantities still correspond to an investment strategy. The
results are robust to moderate perturbations (+/- 0.025) of the T-bill weight.
In addition to the VAR state variables, we also construct cash-flow proxies motivated by previous
research. Beaver, Clarke, and Wright (1980) explain returns with simple earnings growth. We construct a
similar variable as the ratio of year t earnings per share (COMPUSTAT data item 58) over year t-1 earnings
per share (EPS). We set values outside the [exp(-1), exp(1)] range to these range endpoints. When
regressing returns on this variable, we also exclude firm-years with either year t or year t-1 EPS less than
zero.
Easton and Harris (1991) regress returns on earnings and earnings change normalized by lagged stock
price. We compute these variables as EPS(t)/P(t-1) and (EPS(t)-EPS(t-1))/P(t-1), where P(t-1) is the end-ofApril price of the common share class with highest market capitalization. Following Easton and Harris, we
exclude firm-years with EPS(t-1)/P(t-1), EPS(t)/P(t-1), or (EPS(t)-EPS(t-1))/P(t-1) outside the range [-1.5,
1.5], when regressing returns on these variables.
Collins, Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan (1994) explain returns with contemporaneous and future log
earnings growth, future returns, and lagged earnings-price ratio. When regressing returns on these variables,
we truncate the data for firm-years with any of the right-hand-side log return or log earnings-growth

17

variables outside the [-1, 1] range. Also, we delete firm years with any of the t-1, t, t+1, t+2, t+3 EPS data
negative.
Table IV shows the time-series means of cross-sectional descriptive statistics.5 Each panel shows
means, standard deviations, minimums, percentiles of the variables, and maximums. Panel A shows the
descriptives for the VAR state variables. A notable feature of the descriptive statistics is that firm-level log
ROE is almost as variable as firm-level log returns (standard deviation of 0.20 vs. 0.27). Panels B, C, and D
show the descriptives for Beaver, Clarke, and Wright’s (1980), Easton and Harris’s (1991), and Collins,
Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan’s (1994) cash-flow proxies, respectively.
B.

Estimated processes for firm-level stock returns

Our firm-level VAR is designed to capture the following empirical return-predictability results.
Historically, past long-term losers have outperformed past long-term winners (“long-term reversal,”
DeBondt and Thaler (1985)), while past short-term winners have outperformed past short-term losers
(“momentum,” Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)).

High book-to-market-equity firms have earned higher

average stock returns than low book-to-market-equity firms (“book-to-market anomaly,” Rosenberg, Reid,
and Lanstein (1985)). Controlling for other characteristics, firms with higher profitability have earned
higher average stock returns (Haugen and Baker (1996)). Also, high-leverage firms have historically
outperformed low-leverage firms (Bhandari’s (1988) “leverage effect”). We avoid modeling corporate
dividend policy by excluding any dividend-based variables from the VAR.
In estimating the VAR coefficient matrix, we concentrate on robustness and simplicity. We estimate
the VAR from the panel using the weighted least-squares (WLS) approach and one pooled prediction
regression per state variable. Instead of using the optimal but unknown GLS weights or unit OLS weights,
we weigh each cross-section equally, much like the Fama-MacBeth (1973) procedure does. In practice this
means deflating the data for each firm-year by the number of firms in the corresponding cross-section. The
OLS and WLS point estimates are similar, and the results are not sensitive to the choice between OLS and
WLS. We use Shao and Rao’s (1993) jackknife method to calculate cross-correlation consistent standard
errors.
First, we consider a parsimonious VAR specification that includes market-adjusted log stock return,
log book-to-market, and log return on equity as the state variables. Only one lag of each is used to predict
the state-vector evolution. The parameter estimates (presented in Table V) imply that expected market18

adjusted returns are high when past one-year return, the book-to-market ratio, and profitability are high.
Expected profitability is high when past stock return and past profitability are high and the book-to-market
ratio is low. The expected future book-to-market ratio is mostly affected by the past book-to-market ratio.
As expected, unexpected profitability and stock return covary positively (approximately 0.3 correlation).
The variance decomposition implied by the VAR is also shown in Table V, and cash-flow news is the
main driver of market-adjusted firm-level stock returns. The expected-return-news standard deviation is 16
percent (variance 0.026 with 0.0074 standard error) and the cash-flow-news standard deviation is 36 percent
(variance 0.13 with 0.012 standard error). The ratio of expected-return-news variance to total-unexpectedreturn variance is approximately 1/5. The correlation between the two estimated news series is 0.56 and
more than five standard errors from zero.
The firm-level variance-decomposition results differ from the aggregate results in an interesting way.
Consistent with the findings of Vuolteenaho (2002) and Gompers, Cohen, and Vuolteenaho (2003), our
estimated VARs imply strong positive correlation between firm-level expected-return and cash-flow news.
This positive correlation may in some cases have dramatic effects on firm-level regressions of returns on
cash-flow proxies, as discussed below.
C.

Reinterpreting regressions of returns on cash-flow proxies

We consider linear regressions with six sets of explanatory variables in our analysis of firm-level
regressions. These selected specifications are motivated by classic earnings-returns association studies in the
accounting literature.
specifications.

More recent accounting literature has explored more elaborate earnings-returns

Hughes and Ricks (1987) and others study earnings announcements and proxy for

unexpected earnings with analysts’ forecast errors. Easton and Zmijewski (1989), Collins and Kothari
(1989), Ball, Kothari, and Watts (1993), and others allow for cross-sectional and time-series variation in the
earnings-response coefficients and relate it to economically motivated instruments. Lang (1991) studies the
relation of the earnings-response coefficients to investor learning about the earnings process. Cheng,
Hopwood, McKeown (1992), Freeman and Tse (1992), Das and Lev (1994), Beneish and Harvey (1998),
and others relax the linearity assumption of the earnings-return relation. We leave the task of investigating
the effect of expected returns, cash-flow news, and expected-return news on these more refined
specifications to future research.

19

The explanatory variable in Table VI Panel A, GEPS, is the gross earnings per share (EPS) growth
rate, EPS(t)/EPS(t-1). This explanatory variable is motivated by a study by Beaver, Clarke, and Wright
(1980). Following Beaver, Clarke, and Wright, we exclude firm-years with EPS(t) or EPS(t-1) missing, as
well as observations with negative EPS(t-1). To ensure that outliers do not dominate the regression results,
we set EPS(t)/EPS(t-1) greater than exp(1) to exp(1) and EPS(t)/EPS(t-1) less than exp(-1) to exp(-1).
Consistent with the previous literature, the explanatory power of earnings growth is tiny with a pooled
R2 of about one percent. Some of the literature obtains slightly higher estimates, e.g., four percent in Collins,
Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan’s (1994) Table IV Panel C. The discrepancy between our results and theirs can
be explained by the sample composition: Their sample includes only large, surviving firms, while our pooled
data set is dominated by small firms, most of which disappear during our sample period. The explanatory
power of earnings growth is also very limited in the component regressions: One-period expected returns
zero percent, cash-flow news 1.8 percent, and minus expected-return news 0.10 percent.
The explanatory variable used in Table VI Panel B1 is the normalized level of earnings, motivated by
Easton and Harris (1991). We drop firm years with either EPS(t) or EPS(t-1) missing are exclude outliers.
Estimating the total-return regression equation in our sample yields a regression coefficient of 0.75 (s.e.
0.08) and R2 of 10 percent. However, when we regress the estimated cash-flow news on the same earnings
variable, we get a coefficient of 1.3 (s.e. 0.17) and R2 of 27 percent. Although the level of earnings variable
does a decent job tracking cash-flow news (a high R2 of 27 percent), it also tracks the negative of expectedreturn news with a coefficient of -0.70 (s.e. 0.17) and R2 of 19 percent and the level of expected returns with
a coefficient of 0.15 (s.e. 0.05) and R2 of 9 percent. In the end, the association of the earnings variable with
cash-flow and expected-return news partially cancel each other, leaving the original specification with a
lower coefficient and R2. Including the normalized change in earnings (Panel B2) results in generally similar
patterns. Since both cash-flow proxies negatively track the negative of expected-return news, the cash-flownews R2 of 31 percent is much higher than the total-return R2 of 10 percent.
Panels C1-3 use variables similar to those of Kothari, Collins, Shanken, and Sloan (1994). Kothari,
Collins, Shanken, and Sloan regress returns on subsets of the following variables: Contemporaneous and
three leads of future log earnings growth rates, three leads of future returns, and the lagged earnings-price
ratio. In our sample, specifications that include only earnings growth rates (Panel C1 and C2) yield R2s from
2.1 to 4.4 percent in returns regressions and R2s from 6.4 to 8.0 percent in cash-flow-news component

20

regressions.

Consistent with these results, the earnings growth coefficients from the cash-flow news

regression are almost always larger than their total returns regression coefficient counterparts. This is a
result of the negative relationship between earnings growth and minus expected returns.
Following Kothari and Shanken (1992), Kothari, Collins, Shanken, and Sloan (1994) include future
returns and lagged earning-price ratio to “clean up” the measurement error due to the expected component of
earnings growth. Adding these variables (Panel C3) increases the return-regression R2s from 4 to 11 percent
in our sample. The component regressions show, however, that a significant fraction of the improvement in
the R2s is due to correlation of these clean-up variables with one-period expected returns; the one-period
expected-return regression R2 increases from under one percent to 51 percent. Most of this increased
explanatory powers is due to the lagged earning-price ratio (coefficient 0.51, s.e. 0.16). All else equal, firms
with higher (lower) earning-price ratios have higher (lower) expected stock returns.
In sum, the firm-level regression results illustrate how the correlation between total returns and cashflow proxies can understate or overstate the importance of cash-flow news as a source of return variance. In
the case of Easton and Harris (1991), the importance of cash-flow news is understated. In contrast, the
specification of Kothari, Collins, Shanken, and Sloan (1994) overstates the importance of cash-flow news.
IV. Conclusions

The Campbell-Shiller present-value formula enables one to divide stock returns into three
components: one-period expected returns, changes in cash-flow expectations (i.e., cash-flow news), and
changes in expected returns (i.e., expected-return news). Stock return volatility must originate from volatile
one-period expected returns, cash-flow news, and/or expected-return news.

Similarly, the correlation

between stock returns and various cash-flow proxies must originate from three sources: association of cashflow proxies with one-period expected returns, cash-flow news, and/or expected-return news.
Previous research has found that selected aggregate cash-flow proxies, such as contemporaneous and
future dividens growth rates, explain a large fraction of aggregate stock return variance. Our empirical
analysis shows that cash-flow proxies explain aggregate stock returns well (i.e., with a high R2), because
high realizations of cash-flow proxies are associated with declines in expected stock returns.
In contrast, at the individual stock level, earnings and other cash-flow proxies explain a relatively
small fraction of annual stock returns. Our empirical results help explaining this perhaps surprising finding:

21

High realizations of cash-flow proxies are associated with increases in expected returns, depressing the
explanatory power in regressions of stock returns on cash-flow proxies in disaggregate data. Although the
level of earnings variable does a decent job tracking cash-flow news at the individual stock level, it also
tracks the negative of expected-return news with an opposite sign. In the end, the association of the earnings
variable with cash-flow and expected-return news partially cancel each other, leaving the original returns-onearnings specification with a low R2.

22

Appendix A: Campbell-Shiller log-linear approximation of return

This appendix represents the log-linear approximation of dividend-price ratio derived by Campbell
and Shiller (1988, CS hereafter). The intuition behind this linearization is the following: If prices rise
(decline) today, then there must be a rise (decline) in subsequent dividends and or a decline (rise) in
subsequent returns. Otherwise, the price increase today has set off an infinitely-lived bubble. Because we
rule such bubbles out by assumption, today’s return must be justified by future dividends and/or returns.
Following CS, define log return rt by
rt ≡ log( Pt + Dt ) − log( Pt −1 )
= log(1 + Pt / Dt ) + log( Dt / Dt −1 ) + log( Dt −1 / Pt −1 )

(A1)

where Pt and Dt denote the period t ex-dividend price and dividend payment, respectively. Substituting the
log dividend-price ratio, δ t = log( Dt ) − log( Pt ) , and log dividend growth rate, ∆d t = log( Dt ) − log( Dt −1 ) ,
into (1) yields
rt = log(exp(−δ t ) + 1) + ∆d t + δ t −1

(A2)

Equation (A2) is the exact definition of a one-period log return. It can be approximated by a firstorder Taylor-series expansion around δˆ :
rt ≈ k − ρδ t + ∆d t + δ t −1 , where

(A3)

exp( −δˆ )
k ≡ log(exp(−δˆ ) + 1) + ρδˆ and ρ ≡
exp( −δˆ ) + 1
While any δˆ can be used, the mean δ provides an accurate approximation if the variability of δ is small.
Reasonable values lead to a discount-coefficient (ρ) close to 0.96. In the extreme case of constant dividend
yield, the linearization becomes exact.
The one-period approximation can be iterated to yield a multi-period approximation. Solving for δ t
from (A3) and iterating forward N − 1 times generates

δt ≈ k

N −1
1 − ρ N N −1 i
− ∑ ρ ∆d t + i +1 + ∑ ρ j rt + j +1 + ρ N δ t + N .
ρ − 1 i =0
j =0

Substituting (A4) back into (A3) gives a linearized return identity

23

(A4)

rt ≈ k

N
N
1 − ρ N +1
+δ t −1 + ∑ ρ i ∆d t + i − ∑ ρ j rt + j − ρ N +1δ t + N .
1− ρ
i =0
j =1

(A5)

If there are no infinitely-lived bubbles, the discounted future dividend yield converges to zero as N
approaches infinity. Then, the log return is a linear function of current log dividend yield and discounted
contemporaneous and future dividend growth rates and future returns:

rt ≈

∞
∞
k
+δ t −1 + ∑ ρ i ∆d t + i − ∑ ρ j rt + j .
1− ρ
i =0
j =1

(A6)

All of the terms in (A6) are realized values. The above mathematics is just accounting. As stated by CS (p.
200), the above result “…has been obtained only by the linear approximation… There is no economic
content to [(A6)].” The above return formulas hold for all assets: stocks, bonds, portfolio trading strategies,
etc. As long as the dividend-price ratio does not explode, the dynamic accounting identity in (A6) holds.
Appendix B: Additional robustness checks
A.

Aggregate stock returns

In order to gauge how sensitive our aggregate results are to the state vector used to generate the oneperiod expected return, cash-flow news, and expected-return news series, this appendix briefly summarizes
our results from repeating the analysis of sections II.C, II.D, and II.E using eight different state vectors
motivated by the return predictability literature. The tables we refer to in this appendix are not included in
this published version to save space; however, they are available on the home pages of the authors as well as
that of the NBER.
An unpublished table (Table BI) summarizes the results for alternative state vectors by reporting the
adjusted R2 from each of the three component regressions using the three sets of “cash-flow proxy”
explanatory variables. Using the original state vector (LRET, LPE, and LTERM), the Fama-Schwert
variables produced R2’s of 67, 46, and 41 percent for one-period expected returns, cash-flow news, and
expected-return news, respectively. Across all of the various state vectors, the mean R2 is 52, 37, and 43
percent for one-period expected returns, cash-flow news, and expected-return news, respectively. For the
KS “dividends only” variables, the original R2’s (12, 24, and 26 percent) are close to the mean values across
alternative state vectors (39, 10, and 7 percent). Similarly, for the KS “dividends only” and “clean-up”
variables combined, the original R2’s (36, 26, and 34 percent) are close to the mean values (40, 17, and 31

24

percent). In general, our results appear to be reasonably robust across various sets of return predictor
variables suggested by the literature.
B.

Firm-level stock returns

We also estimate a cross-section of VAR models allowing for firm-specific variation in the VAR
parameters. Since we do not impose any forward-looking survival requirements, many of our firms have
very short time series. Estimating separate VAR parameters for each firm using OLS or WLS is, therefore,
infeasible.
Instead of computing firm-by-firm OLS or WLS estimates, we follow Swamy’s (1970) randomcoefficient-model (RCM) approach. RCM is based on the assumption that firms’ VAR parameters are
random variables drawn from a common distribution. The parameters of this common distribution, dubbed
hyperparameters, are estimated with maximum likelihood.

Given these hyperparameters, maximum-

likelihood predictors of individual firms’ VAR parameters can be computed using the prior-likelihood
approach of Lee and Griffiths (1979).

The prior-likelihood approach uses the estimated population

distribution of coefficients as the prior information and uses the Bayes rule to compute posterior-mean
predictions of the firm-specific coefficients.
An unpublished table (Table BII) shows the results obtained from these random-coefficient-model
specifications. Independent of methodological specifics, our earlier results appear robust to possible firmspecific variation in the parameters.
An unpublished table (Table BIII) investigates the sensitivity of our results to variations in the firmlevel VAR’s lag length. Across the three alternative specifications, the results are very similar to the results
for a first-order VAR. In addition, the firm-level results are robust to adding aggregate state variables to the
VAR forecasting firm-level stock returns.
Appendix C: The danger in adding clean-up variables to the regression

In this Appendix, we use Campbell and Shiller’s (CS hereafter) log-linear framework (refer to
Appendix A) to illustrate one possible explanation of why KS’s additional clean-up variables are prone to
tracking one-period expected returns and expected-return news. Using lagged dividend yield and future
realized returns to “clean-up” measurement error from realized dividend growth rates is one future dividend
yield short of mapping out the CS realized return identity. With enough future dividend growth rates and

25

returns, the future dividend yield becomes irrelevant, and KS’ full regression mechanically produces a
population R2 that tends to 100 percent.
Compare the CS linearized return identity to the KS full regression:
rt = k

3
3
1− ρ 4
+δ t −1 +∑ ρ i ∆d t +i −∑ ρ j rt + j − ρ 4δ t +3 + κ 3,t
1− ρ
i =0
j =1

3

3

i =0

j =1

rt = B0 + B1δ t −1 + ∑ Bi + 2 ∆d t +i + ∑ B j +5 rt + j + ε t

(C1)

(C2)

r is log return, δ log dividend yield, and ∆d log dividend growth. The first of the two equations, (C1), is
just a first-order Taylor series approximation of the definition of log return iterated forward three times,
where κ 3,t denotes the linearization error. (C2) is very similar to KS’s full regression. The only differences
between the CS identity and the KS regression are the future log dividend-price ratio term, δ t +3 ,
linearization error, κ 3,t , and error term ε t .
Our analysis (in Table CI of an unpublished appendix) shows that the linearization error is small. In
regressions that include the future dividend yield, one minus the regression R2 can be interpreted as the size
of the linearization error. With one forward iteration, the CS linearization produces an R2 of 99.8761
percent. Even after iterating forward 15 times, the compounded approximation error is extremely small – the
regression still produces an R2 of 99.5134 percent. It is, therefore, safe to assume that κ t is constant and
does not affect the regression R2.
Even if the linearization error is trivially small, KS’s full regression is not a perfect identity, because
the future dividend-yield term is omitted. The size of this omitted variable error depends on the number of
future returns and dividend growth rates included in the regression. As we add leads to the regression but
omit the future dividend yield, the adjusted R2 increases steadily from 39.95 percent with one lead up to
62.66 percent with fifteen leads. Analytical arguments suggest that in a large sample with covariance
stationary dividend yield, the omitted variable error converges to zero as more terms are included.
Taking the 15-lead regression with 105 data points as an example, the first seven future dividend
growth and the first seven future return terms are significant at the 5 percent level. Furthermore, the
dividend coefficients and future return coefficients tend to decay at an exponential rate, as predicted by the
CS linearization. Although the empirical work of KS (1992) focuses on the parsimonious three-lead model,
KS’s stated theoretical motivation for the “clean-up variables” does not constrain the number of leads in
26

their regression. Thus, if KS's stated theoretical motivation is taken literally (and perhaps out of context,
since KS never include more than three leads), the return in the 15-lead regression is caused by significant
revisions of long-term expected future dividend growth rates.

In our opinion, this interpretation is

implausible, considering the difficulties in predicting dividend growth rates one year ahead with a timeseries model (see, e.g., Cochrane (1994)). We see this result as a manifestation of the linearized identity,
which helps to possibly explain why explanatory variables similar to KS’s “clean-up” variables are prone to
picking up expected-return effects, such as those documented in Table III Panel B2.
To further explore regressions with only a small number of leads, we calibrate various realistic
economies and examine the large-sample properties of these regressions with simulated data. Specifically,
we estimate a number of return-generating processes with a conditional maximum-likelihood method, while
constraining the ratio of expected-return-news variance to cash-flow-news variance to values ranging from
1/5 to 5. As a result, we have a set of calibrated simulation economies in which the significance of cash-flow
news as a driver of stock returns varies by construction. Note that these economies are not otherwise
perverse, since the constrained maximum-likelihood procedure chooses parameters to best match the data
while satisfying the constraint.
These simulation results are summarized in the unpublished Figure C1. The x-axis of the graph varies
the var(Nr)/var(Ncf) ratio implied by the calibrated VAR model. For each var(Nr)/var(Ncf) value, we estimate
the VAR model parameters from the data with constrained maximum likelihood, constraining
var(Nr)/var(Ncf) to the particular pre-specified value. The var(Nr)/var(Ncf) values range from 0.2 to 5. In
addition, we constrain the model to be stationary by limiting the maximum absolute eigenvalue of the
transition matrix. After this calibration exercise, we have 31 points in the VAR parameter space, each
corresponding to a single simulation economy.
In our simulations, we concentrate on KS’s dividends-only and full specifications, because the
required variables can be conveniently computed from the VAR data. The figure plots five population R2s
as functions of the ratio of expected-return-news variance to cash-flow-news variance. First, we plot KS’s
full regression R2. The regression R2s (marked with plus signs) flat-line at around 40 to 45 percent. Second,
we plot KS’s dividends-only specification R2. Again, the R2 is roughly constant at 23 percent (the solid
line). This clearly illustrates that it can be erroneous to interpret either KS R2 as measuring the relative
importance of cash-flow news as a driver of realized stock return variation. Both R2s are insensitive to the

27

importance of cash-flow news. These R2s can also be misleading as measures of a regression R2 of returns
on cash-flow news. The dashed line plots the R2 of returns on cash-flow news in these economies. Unlike
the KS R2s, these R2s do not flat-line. Instead, the dashed line slopes down as the importance of cash-flow
news decreases.
The poor performance of both KS R2s as measures of the importance of cash-flow news may be due
to a nonzero correlation between the cash-flow and expected-return news process.

Even if the KS

explanatory variables were tracking the cash-flow-news series, a nonzero correlation between the two news
series would bias both KS R2s. KS briefly discussed this point. To examine this possibility, we repeat our
simulation procedure by imposing an additional constraint corr(Nr, Ncf)=0. The results (which correspond to
the unpublished Figure C2) suggest that none of the above conclusions change because of this additional
constraint, highlighting a deeper problem for KS-type regression specifications.
From the general perspective of any returns on cash-flow proxies regression, some of our calibration
results may be somewhat surprising. For example, how can the returns-on-dividend-growth R2 be so
completely disconnect from the returns-on-cash-flow-news R2, even when corr(Nr, Ncf)=0? We conjecture
that the data can simultaneously be very informative about the correlation of dividend growth and stock
return and not very informative about the significance of cash-flow news as a driver of stock returns. We
suspect that this phenomenon roots from the fact that the cash-flow news depend on not only the
contemporaneous correlation of returns and dividend growth but also on the infinite-horizon predictability of
dividend growth. The latter is estimated imprecisely from the data and, therefore, the maximum-likelihood
calibration method matches the var(Nr)/var(Ncf) constraint by altering the long-horizon predictability of
dividend growth. More specifically, when the var(Nr)/var(Ncf) constraint is high (low), positive cash-flow
shocks lead to downward (upward) revisions in future cash-flow growth expectations. This interaction
between the cash-flow shock and the revisions in future cash-flow growth expectations disconnects the
returns-on-dividend-growth R2 from the returns-on-cash-flow-news R2.
On the positive side, one of KS’s diagnostics regression behaves as expected in both figures. As the
importance of expected-return news increases, the large-sample R2 of returns on clean-up variables only
increases steadily. However, the large-sample properties of these regressions do not answer the question of
whether KS’s diagnostics regression is useful. To examine the “power” of KS’s diagnostics regression, on
top of the large-sample R2s in the unpublished figures, we indicate the fraction of F-tests that reject at the 5%

28

level in samples of 71 observations. The rejection probability increases with the population R2s, but even for
large R2s, KS’s pre-test diagnostics is hardly perfect. In the calibrated economies in which the variance of
expected-return news is higher than that of cash-flow news, the pre-test rejects only approximately 40 to 25
percent of the samples depending on whether the constraint is imposed on the news correlation.
Nevertheless, these small-sample experiments suggest that KS’s diagnostic helps in ruling out the samples
that would lead to the most misleading inferences.

29

References

Ball, R. and P. Brown, 1968. An empirical investigation of accounting income numbers, Journal of
Accounting Research 6, 159-178.
Ball, R, S. P. Kothari and Ross L. Watts, 1993. Economic determinants of the relation between earnings
changes and stock returns, The Accounting Review 68, 622-638.
Beaver, W., R. Clarke, and W. Wright, 1979. The association between unsystematic security returns and the
magnitude of earnings forecast errors, Journal of Accounting Research 17, 316-340.
Beaver, W., R. Lambert and D. Morse, 1980. The information content of security prices, Journal of
Accounting and Economics 2, 3-28.
Beneish, M. D., and C. R. Harvey, 1998. Measurement error and nonlinearity in the earnings-returns
relation of large firms, Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting 11, 219-247.
Bhandari, L. C., 1988. Debt/equity ratio and expected common stock returns: empirical evidence, Journal of
Finance 43, 507-528.
Campbell, J. Y., 1991. A variance decomposition for stock returns, Economic Journal 101, 57-179.
Campbell, J. Y., Ammer J., 1993. What moves the stock and bond markets? a variance decomposition for
long-term asset returns, Journal of Finance 48, 3-37.
Campbell, J. Y., Mei J., 1993. Where do betas come from? Asset price dynamics and the sources of
systematic risk, Review of Financial Studies 6, 567-592.
Campbell, J. Y., Shiller R. J., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future dividends and
discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.
Cheng, C. S., William S. Hopwood, and James C. McKeown, 1992. Non-linearity and specification
problems in unexpected earnings response regression model, The Accounting Review 67, 579-598.
Cochrane, J. H., 1994. Permanent and transitory components of GNP and stock prices, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 109, 241-265.

Cohen, R., P. Gompers, and T. Vuolteenaho, 2003. Who underreacts to cash-flow news? Evidence from
trading between individuals and institutions, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 409-462.
Collins, D. and S.P. Kothari, 1989. An analysis of intertemporal and cross-sectional determinants of earnings
response coefficients, Journal of Accounting and Economics 11, 143-181.
Collins, D., S. P. Kothari, J. Shanken and G. Sloan, 1994. Lack of timeliness versus noise as explanations for
low contemporaneous return-earnings association, Journal of Accounting and Economics 18, 289324.
Das, Somnath and Baruch Lev, 1994. Nonlinearity in the returns-earnings relation: tests of alternative
specifications and explanation, Contemporary Accounting Research, vol. 11, no. 1-II, 353-379.
DeBondt, Werner F. M. and Richard H. Thaler, 1985. Does the stock market overreact?, Journal of Finance
40, 557-581.
Easton, P. and T. Harris, 1991. Earnings as an explanatory variable for returns, Journal of Accounting
Research 29, 19-36.
Easton, P. and Mark E. Zmijewski, 1989. Cross-sectional variation in the stock market response to
accounting earnings announcements, Journal of Accounting and Economics 11, 117-141.
Fama, E. F., 1990. Stock returns, expected returns and real activity, Journal of Finance 45, 1089-1108.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1989. Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of
Financial Economics 25, 23-49.
Fama, Eugene F. and James MacBeth, 1973. Risk, return and equilibrium: empirical tests, Journal of
Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Freeman, Robert N. and Senyo Y. Tse, 1992. A nonlinear model of security price responses to unexpected
earnings, Journal of Accounting Research 30, 185-209.
Haugen, Robert A., and Nardin L. Baker, 1996. Commonality in the determinants of expected stock returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 41, 401-439.

Hughes, J. and William E. Ricks, 1987. Associations between forecast errors and excess returns near to
earnings announcements, The Accounting Review LXII, 158-175.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993. Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
Keim, D. B., Stambaugh, R. F., 1986. Predicting returns in the stock and bond markets, Journal of Financial
Economics 17, 357-390.
Kothari, S. P., Shanken, J., 1992. Stock return variation and expected dividends: a time series and crosssectional analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 177-210.
Lang, M., 1991. Time-varying stock price response to earnings induced by uncertainty about the time-series
process of earnings, Journal of Accounting Research 29, 229-257.
Lee, L. and W. Griffiths, 1979. The Price likelihood and best linear unbiased prediction in stochastic
coefficient linear models, University of New England Working Papers in Econometrics and
Applied Statistics No. 1.
Lev, B., 1989. On the usefulness of earnings and earnings research: lessons and directions from two decades
of empirical research, Journal of Accounting Research 27, 153-202.
Liew, J., 1995. Global stock returns, money, and inflation, Unpublished dissertation, University of Chicago,
Graduate School of Business.
Rosenberg, Barr, Kenneth Reid, and Ronald Lanstein, 1985. Persuasive evidence of market inefficiency,
Journal of Portfolio Management 11, 9-17.
Schwert, G. W., 1990. Stock returns and real activity: a century of evidence, Journal of Finance 45, 12371257.
Shao, Jun, and J. N. K. Rao, 1993. Jackknife inference for heteroscedastic linear regression models,
Canadian Journal of Statistics 21, 377-385.
Swamy, P. A. V. B., 1970. Efficient inference in a random coefficient regression model, Econometrica 38,
311-323.

Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 2001. Understanding the aggregate book-to-market ratio and its implications to
current equity-premium expectations, working paper, Harvard University Department of
Economics.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 2002. What drives firm-level stock returns?, Journal of Finance 57, 233-264.

Table I: Descriptive statistics of the aggregate data

Panel A shows descriptives of the VAR state variables. LRET is the annual log stock return on the
Schwert (1881-1925) or CRSP value-weight index (1926-present), LPE is the log price-earnings ratio,
and LTERM is the spread of the ten-year constant maturity bond log yield over the three-month
commercial paper log yield. All relevant variables are deflated by the commercial paper/T-bill wealth
index. Sample period is 1881-1998.
Panels B shows descriptives of the explanatory variables in aggregate regressions of returns on
cash-flow and expected return proxies. The variables in Panel B are motivated by Fama’s (1990),
Schwert’s (1990), and Kothari and Shanken’s (1992) cash-flow and expected return proxies. Expected
return proxies are the log dividend-price ratio (LDP, also considered a cash-flow proxy), the spread of
Moody’s Baa corporate bond log yield over the Aaa corporate bond log yield (LDEF), and the spread of
the ten-year constant maturity bond log yield over the three-month commercial paper log yield (LTERM).
From 1881-1918, LDEF is the spread of the average top five Macaulay railroad bond log yields
(excluding the maximum) over the average bottom five Macaulay railroad bond log yields (excluding the
minimum). Expected-return news proxies are shocks to the default (LDEFS) and term (LTERMS)
spread. The shocks are the estimated residuals from a first-order autoregressive process. Cash-flow
proxies are current and future dividend growth rates and future returns. LGD, LGDF1, LGDF2, and
LGDF3 are the current, 1-year, 2-year, and 3-year leads of the annual log dividend growth rate. LRETF1,
LRETF2, and LRETF3 are the 1-year, 2-year, and 3-year leads of LRET. All relevant variables are
deflated by the commercial paper/T-bill wealth index. Sample period is 1881-2001.
Panel A: VAR state variables
VARIABLE:
mean
std.dev.
min
25%-tile
LRET
0.0474
0.1888
-0.6151
-0.0638
LPE
2.7581
0.3105
1.8478
2.5875
LTERM
-0.0022
0.0175
-0.0626
-0.0131

median 75%-tile
0.0567
0.1866
2.7072
3.0024
-0.0001
0.0115

max
0.4388
3.6235
0.0310

Panel B: Fama’s (1990), Schwert’s (1990), and Kothari and Shanken’s (1992) variables
VARIABLE:
mean
std.dev.
min
25%-tile
median 75%-tile
max
-3.1196
0.2866
-4.0785
-3.2810
-3.1301
-2.9403
-2.4188
LDP
0.0103
0.0066
0.0030
0.0063
0.0077
0.0124
0.0441
LDEF
-0.0022
0.0175
-0.0626
-0.0131
-0.0001
0.0115
0.0310
LTERM
-0.0000
0.0037
-0.0077
-0.0017
-0.0006
0.0004
0.0247
LDEFS
0.0003
0.0152
-0.0700
-0.0061
0.0011
0.0087
0.0537
LTERMS
LGD
-0.0073
0.1631
-0.6646
-0.0811
-0.0022
0.0637
0.6706
LGDF1
-0.0072
0.1632
-0.6646
-0.0811
-0.0022
0.0637
0.6706
LGDF2
-0.0097
0.1661
-0.6646
-0.0849
-0.0022
0.0637
0.6706
LGDF3
-0.0088
0.1660
-0.6646
-0.0849
-0.0011
0.0637
0.6706
LRETF1
0.0491
0.1891
-0.6151
-0.0638
0.0787
0.1866
0.4388
LRETF2
0.0484
0.1898
-0.6151
-0.0638
0.0787
0.1866
0.4388
0.0486
0.1895
-0.6151
-0.0638
0.0787
0.1866
0.4388
LRETF3

Table II: Aggregate VAR

This table shows the parameter estimates and some implied properties of a VAR(1) specification
with the following variables: LRET is the annual log stock return on the Schwert (1881-1925) or CRSP
value-weight index (1926-present), LPE is the log price-earnings ratio, and LTERM is the spread of the
ten-year constant maturity bond log yield over the three-month commercial paper log yield. All relevant
variables are deflated by the commercial paper/T-bill wealth index. Sample period is 1881-1998. The
VAR specification has the structure

z t = Α + Γz t −1 + ut , Σ = E (ut ut′ )

In each cell, the first number is an OLS point estimate.
bootstrapped standard error.

The second number (in brackets) is a

Coefficient estimates for the first order VAR
Α
Γ
Σ
LRET
0.4842
0.0641 -0.1575
2.4005
0.0323
[0.1573] [0.0909] [0.0561] [1.0560] [0.0050]
LPE
0.4253
0.1185
0.8483
1.7012
0.0302
[0.1562] [0.0894] [0.0557] [1.0464] [0.0047]
LTERM
0.0105 -0.0139 -0.0039
0.5073
0.0003
[0.0132] [0.0078] [0.0047] [0.0815] [0.0002]
Covariances and
correlations (shaded)
One-period
expected return
Cash-flow
news
Expected-return
news

0.0302
[0.0047]
0.0314
[0.0048]
0.0003
[0.0002]

0.0003
[0.0002]
0.0003
[0.0002]
0.0002
[0.0001]

One-period
Cash-flow
Expected-return
expected return news
news
0.0042
0.0000
0.0000
[0.0022]
[0.0000]
[0.0000]
0.0000
0.0041
-0.0027
[0.0000]
[0.0012]
[0.0019]
0.0000
-0.2875
0.0219
[0.0000]
[0.2028]
[0.0051]

Table III: Decomposing aggregate regressions of returns on cash-flow and expected-return
proxies

This table decomposes aggregate regressions of returns (r) on cash-flow and expected return
proxies into three components: (1) the regression coefficient of one-period expected return (Er) on cashflow and expected return proxies, (2) the regression coefficient of cash-flow news (Ncf) on cash-flow and
expected return proxies, and (3) the regression coefficient of minus expected-return news (-Nr) on cashflow and expected return proxies. The table shows estimated regression coefficients and R2s.
One-period expected returns, cash-flow news, and expected-return news are computed from the
VAR model in Table II. In each cell, the first number is an OLS point estimate. The second number (in
brackets) is a bootstrapped standard error. The standard errors account for the fact the dependent
variables are computed from an estimated VAR model.
The explanatory variables in Panel A are motivated by Fama (1990) and Schwert’s (1990) cashflow and expected return proxies. Expected return proxies are the spread of Moody’s Baa corporate bond
log yield over the Aaa corporate bond log yield (LDEF) and the spread of the ten-year constant maturity
bond log yield over the three-month commercial paper log yield (LTERM). From 1881-1918, LDEF is
the spread of the average top five Macaulay railroad bond log yields (excluding the maximum) over the
average bottom five Macaulay railroad bond log yields (excluding the minimum). Cash-flow proxies are
the current, 1-year, 2-year, and 3-year leads of the annual log dividend growth rate (LGD, LGDF1,
LGDF2, and LGDF3). Expected-return news proxies are shocks to the term (LTERMS) and default
(LDEFS) spread. The shocks are the estimated residuals from a first-order autoregressive process. All
relevant variables are deflated by the commercial paper/T-bill wealth index. Sample period for the
dependent variable is 1882-1998.
The explanatory variables in Panels B1 and B2 are motivated by Kothari and Shanken’s (1992)
cash-flow proxies. LDP is the log dividend-price ratio. LGD, LGDF1, LGDF2, and LGDF3 are the
current, 1-year, 2-year, and 3-year leads of the annual log dividend growth rate. LRETF1, LRETF2, and
LRETF3 are the 1-year, 2-year, and 3-year leads of LRET (return). All relevant variables are deflated by
the commercial paper/T-bill wealth index. Sample period for the dependent variable is 1882-1998.
Panel A: Fama (1990) and Schwert’s (1990) variables
const.
LDEF LTERM LDEFS LTERMS
0.0462
0.6954
1.1748 -20.7046
0.5613
r
Er
Ncf
-Nr

[0.0285]
0.0064
[0.0261]
0.0238
[0.0098]
0.0160
[0.0205]

[2.4631]
4.5169
[1.7855]
-2.2281
[0.8680]
-1.5934
[1.9572]

[0.7295]
1.9816
[1.0443]
-0.2359
[0.2667]
-0.5709
[0.5738]

[4.4417]
-0.7997
[2.2219]
-2.7035
[2.6044]
-17.2014
[4.0903]

[0.7983]
-0.4822
[0.4901]
1.9213
[0.8347]
-0.8777
[1.0739]

Panel B1: Kothari and Shanken’s (1992) variables
const.
LGD LGDF1 LGDF2 LGDF3
0.0548
0.7278 -0.0119
0.0945
0.1367
r
Er
Ncf
-Nr

[0.0083]
0.0502
[0.0084]
0.0025
[0.0018]
0.0021
[0.0026]

[0.1156]
0.0828
[0.0551]
0.1963
[0.0693]
0.4488
[0.0915]

[0.0935]
0.0632
[0.0449]
0.0574
[0.0374]
-0.1325
[0.0870]

[0.0911]
0.0932
[0.0440]
0.0403
[0.0346]
-0.0390
[0.0768]

[0.0892]
0.0948
[0.0408]
0.0272
[0.0338]
0.0146
[0.0744]

LGD LGDF1 LGDF2 LGDF3 % R2
0.5138
[0.0886]
0.0425
[0.0417]
0.1608
[0.0497]
0.3105
[0.0728]

% R2
39.21
[6.82]
12.19
[5.27]
23.81
[9.96]
25.76
[6.43]

-0.0957
[0.0833]
0.0299
[0.0355]
0.0289
[0.0334]
-0.1546
[0.0831]

-0.0025
[0.0776]
0.0358
[0.0327]
0.0339
[0.0297]
-0.0722
[0.0704]

0.0732
[0.0771]
0.0279
[0.0301]
0.0286
[0.0286]
0.0167
[0.0670]

53.18
[7.49]
66.64
[17.01]
46.07
[15.73]
41.08
[8.14]

Panel B2: Kothari and Shanken’s (1992) variables
const.
LDP
LGD LGDF1 LGDF2
0.4664
0.1238
0.7387
0.0544
0.2901
r
Er
Ncf
-Nr

[0.2217]
0.4049
[0.1314]
0.0802
[0.0570]
-0.0188
[0.1120]

[0.0670]
0.1143
[0.0402]
0.0256
[0.0168]
-0.0161
[0.0326]

[0.1116]
0.0978
[0.0493]
0.1963
[0.0709]
0.4447
[0.0918]

[0.1272]
0.0882
[0.0497]
0.0094
[0.0471]
-0.0431
[0.1093]

[0.1142]
0.0755
[0.0474]
0.0441
[0.0477]
0.1705
[0.0966]

LGDF3 LRETF1 LRETF2 LRETF3
0.2214
[0.1120]
0.0546
[0.0442]
0.0381
[0.0462]
0.1287
[0.0956]

-0.0528
[0.1097]
-0.0065
[0.0438]
0.0651
[0.0425]
-0.1114
[0.0989]

-0.2535
[0.0906]
0.0089
[0.0384]
-0.0000
[0.0406]
-0.2624
[0.0811]

-0.1535
[0.0923]
0.0286
[0.0384]
-0.0285
[0.0398]
-0.1537
[0.0817]

% R2
45.25
[7.04]
36.25
[13.93]
26.34
[10.25]
33.88
[7.24]

Table IV: Descriptive statistics of the firm-level data

This table presents the time-series averages of selected cross-sectional descriptive statistics. First,
the descriptive statistics are computed for each cross-section, and then the time-series of descriptive
statistics are averaged. Sample period is 1954-1999.
The variables are defined as follows. Panel A shows descriptives of the VAR state variables.
LRET is the log stock return, LBM log book-to-market equity, and LROE log accounting return on
equity. Variables in Panel A have been transformed by unlevering the firm 10 percent (see text for
details).
Panels B, C, and D show descriptives of the explanatory variables in firm-level regressions of
returns on cash-flow proxies. The variable in Panel B is motivated by Beaver, Clarke, and Wright’s
(1980) cash-flow proxy. GEPS is the gross earnings per share (EPS) growth rate, EPS(t)/EPS(t-1).
Observations with EPS(t) or EPS(t-1) missing are excluded, as well as observations with EPS(t-1)<1.
EPS(t)/EPS(t-1) greater than exp(1) are set to exp(1) and EPS(t)/EPS(t-1) less than exp(-1) to exp(-1).
Panel C shows descriptives for variables similar to Easton and Harris’s (1991) cash-flow proxies.
EPL is EPS(t) normalized by P(t-1). DEPL is the change in earnings, EPS(t)-EPS(t-1), normalized by
price, P(t-1). Observations with either EPS(t) or EPS(t-1) missing are excluded. Observations with
EPS(t)/P(t-1), EPS(t-1)/P(t-1), or (EPS(t)-EPS(t-1))/P(t-1) outside the range [-1.5,1.5] are excluded.
Panel D uses variables similar to those of Kothari, Collins, Shanken, and Sloan (1994). LGEPS is
the log EPS growth rate, ln(EPS(t)/EPS(t-1)). LGEPSF1, LGEPSF2, and LGEPSF3 are 1-year, 2-year,
and 3-year leads of LGEPS. LRET is the log return. LRETF1, LRETF2, and LRETF3 are 1-year, 2-year,
and 3-year leads of LRET. ELPL is EPS(t-1)/P(t-1). Observations of LGEPS, LGEPSF1, LGEPSF2,
LGEPSF3, LRET, LRETF1, LRETF2, and LRETF3 greater than 1 are set to 1, and observations less than
-1 are set to -1. Observations with t-1, t, t+1, t+2, or t+3 return missing or EPS negative or missing are
excluded.
Panel A: VAR state variables, 42075 firm years
VARIABLE:
mean
std.dev.
min
LRET
0.0848
0.2651
-1.0775
LBM
-0.2627
0.5553
-2.3873
LROE
0.0751
0.1952
-1.5908

25%-tile
-0.0590
-0.5757
0.0628

median
0.0873
-0.2184
0.1024

75%-tile
0.2307
0.0841
0.1391

max
1.2356
2.1378
0.9249

Panel B: Beaver, Clarke, and Wright’s (1980) variable, 36237 firm years
VARIABLE:
mean
std.dev.
min
25%-tile
median
GEPS:
1.0631
0.4670
0.3678
0.7870
1.0342

75%-tile
1.2147

max
2.6782

Panel C: Easton and Harris’s (1991) variables, 41279 firm years
VARIABLE:
mean
std.dev.
min
25%-tile
median
EPL
0.0649
0.0969
-0.8256
0.0469
0.0784
DEPL
-0.0019
0.0984
-0.8149
-0.0194
0.0032

75%-tile
0.1063
0.0195

max
0.5156
0.8429

Panel D: Collins, Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan’s (1994) variables, 23225 firm years
VARIABLE:
mean
std.dev.
min
25%-tile
median 75%-tile
LGEPS
0.0134
0.3744
-0.9945
-0.1426
0.0538
0.1905
LGEPSF1
0.0078
0.3740
-0.9952
-0.1488
0.0538
0.1870
LGEPSF2
-0.0025
0.3769
-1.0000
-0.1631
0.0469
0.1793
LGEPSF3
-0.0113
0.3848
-1.0000
-0.1813
0.0420
0.1781
LRETF1
0.1193
0.2260
-0.6687
-0.0159
0.1134
0.2489
LRETF2
0.1094
0.2267
-0.6738
-0.0248
0.1058
0.2410
LRETF3
0.1011
0.2356
-0.7665
-0.0368
0.0996
0.2380
ELPL
0.0879
0.0414
0.0064
0.0634
0.0851
0.1068

max
0.9791
0.9660
0.9676
0.9702
0.8740
0.8625
0.8681
0.4487

Table V: Firm-level VAR

This table shows a firm-level VAR specification parameter estimates and some implied properties
of the model. The state vector includes log stock return (LRET), log book-to-market ratio (LBM), and
log ROE (LROE) as state variables. All variables are market-adjusted (i.e., cross-sectionally demeaned.)
The VAR has the structure
z i ,t = Γz i ,t −1 + u i ,t , Σ = E (u i ,t u i′,t )
In each cell, the first number is a pooled-OLS point estimate. The second number (in brackets) is a crosscorrelation-consistent robust jackknife standard error computed using the jackknife method of Shao and
Rao (1993).
Coefficient estimates for the first order VAR, market-adjusted data
Γ
Σ
0.1376
0.0507
0.0891
0.0917
-0.0711
LRET
[0.0202]
[0.0141]
[0.0314]
[0.0062]
[0.0049]
0.1470
0.8691
0.1016
-0.0711
0.1126
LBM
[0.0297]
[0.0178]
[0.0471]
[0.0049]
[0.0152]
0.1858
-0.0055
0.6042
0.0212
0.0172
LROE
[0.0114]
[0.0060]
[0.0533]
[0.0021]
[0.0021]
Covariances and
correlations (shaded)
One-period
expected return
Cash-flow
news
Expected-return
news

One-period
expected return
0.0044
[0.0011]
0
[0]
0
[0]

Cash-flow
news
0
[0]
0.1315
[0.0121]
0.5620
[0.1075]

0.0212
[0.0021]
0.0172
[0.0021]
0.0594
[0.0059]

Expected-return
news
0
[0]
0.0330
[0.0068]
0.0262
[0.0074]

Table VI: Decomposing firm-level regressions of returns on cash-flow proxies

This table decomposes firm-level regressions of returns (r) on cash-flow proxies into three
components: (1) the regression coefficient of one-period expected return (Er) on cash-flow proxies, (2)
the regression coefficient of cash-flow news (Ncf) on cash-flow proxies, and (3) the regression coefficient
of minus expected-return news (-Nr) on cash-flow proxies. The table shows estimated regression
coefficients and R2s.
One-period expected returns, cash-flow news, and expected-return news are computed from the
VAR model in Table V. Regressions are estimated by pooling the sample. In each cell, the first number is
a pooled-OLS point estimate. The second number (in brackets) is a cross-correlation-consistent robust
jackknife standard error computed using the jackknife method of Shao and Rao (1993). The standard
errors account for the fact the dependent variables are computed from an estimated VAR model.
The cash-flow proxies are defined as follows. The variable in Panel A, GEPS, is the gross earnings
per share (EPS) growth rate, EPS(t)/EPS(t-1). Observations with EPS(t) or EPS(t-1) missing are
excluded, as well as observations with EPS(t-1)<1. EPS(t)/EPS(t-1) greater than exp(1) are set to exp(1)
and EPS(t)/EPS(t-1) less than exp(-1) to exp(-1).
The variables in Panels B1 and B2 are the normalized level and change of earnings. EPL is EPS(t)
normalized by P(t-1). DEPL is the change in earnings, EPS(t)-EPS(t-1), normalized by price, P(t-1).
Observations with either EPS(t) or EPS(t-1) missing are excluded. Observations with EPS(t)/P(t-1),
EPS(t-1)/P(t-1), or (EPS(t)-EPS(t-1))/P(t-1) outside the range [-1.5,1.5] are excluded.
Panels C1-3 use variables similar to those of Kothari, Collins, Shanken, and Sloan (1994). LGEPS
is the log EPS growth rate, ln(EPS(t)/EPS(t-1)). LGEPSF1, LGEPSF2, and LGEPSF3 are 1-year, 2-year,
and 3-year leads of LGEPS. LRET is the log return. LRETF1, LRETF2, and LRETF3 are 1-year, 2-year,
and 3-year leads of LRET. ELPL is EPS(t-1)/P(t-1). Observations of LGEPS, LGEPSF1, LGEPSF2,
LGEPSF3, LRET, LRETF1, LRETF2, and LRETF3 greater than 1 are set to 1, and observations less than
-1 are set to -1. Observations with t-1, t, t+1, t+2, or t+3 return missing or EPS negative or missing are
excluded.
Panel A: Beaver, Clarke, and Wright’s (1980) variable, 36237 firm years
const.
GEPS
% R2
0.0773 0.0302
1.03
r
[0.0258] [0.0036]
[0.26]
0.1096 0.0009
0.03
Er
[0.0333] [0.0014]
[0.12]
-0.0049 0.0341
1.79
Ncf
[0.0225] [0.0041]
[0.37]
-0.0275 -0.0048
0.10
-Nr
[0.0161] [0.0029]
[0.11]
Panel B1: Easton and Harris’s (1991) variables, 41279 firm years
const.
EPL
% R2
0.0375 0.7521
9.61
r
[0.0261] [0.0784]
[1.88]
0.0959 0.1466
8.74
Er
[0.0312] [0.0475]
[3.61]
-0.0927 1.3015
27.28
Ncf
[0.0308] [0.1720]
[4.10]
0.0343 -0.6960
19.48
-Nr
[0.0118] [0.1690]
[3.18]

Panel B2: Easton and Harris’s (1991) variables, 41279 firm years
const.
EPL
DEPL
% R2
0.0417 0.6850 0.1233
9.78
r
[0.0263] [0.1101] [0.0775]
[1.74]
0.0862 0.2987 -0.2797
29.27
Er
[0.0297] [0.0852] [0.0821]
[4.22]
-0.0714 0.9659 0.6170
31.24
Ncf
[0.0284] [0.1259] [0.1357]
[4.61]
0.0270 -0.5796 -0.2140
20.67
-Nr
[0.0114] [0.1386] [0.1041]
[3.81]
Panel C1: Collins, Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan’s (1994) variables, 23225 firm years
LGEPS
% R2
const.
0.1240 0.0742
2.11
r
[0.0231] [0.0115]
[0.79]
0.1168 -0.0050
0.41
Er
[0.0344] [0.0048]
[0.72]
0.0314 0.1018
6.36
Ncf
[0.0222] [0.0120]
[1.74]
-0.0242 -0.0226
0.89
-Nr
[0.0150] [0.0098]
[0.75]
Panel C2: Collins, Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan’s (1994) variables, 23225 firm years
LGEPS LGEPSF1 LGEPSF2 LGEPSF3
% R2
const.
0.1228 0.0761 0.0379 -0.0482 -0.0408
4.35
r
[0.0232] [0.0138] [0.0171] [0.0117] [0.0123]
[1.34]
0.1168 -0.0051 -0.0003 -0.0003 -0.0008
0.42
Er
[0.0344] [0.0040] [0.0042] [0.0040] [0.0029]
[0.65]
0.0307 0.1005 0.0178 -0.0393 -0.0303
8.06
Ncf
[0.0222] [0.0125] [0.0126] [0.0084] [0.0080]
[1.94]
-0.0247 -0.0193 0.0204 -0.0086 -0.0097
2.04
-Nr
[0.0152] [0.0102] [0.0079] [0.0058] [0.0063]
[0.63]
Panel C3: Collins, Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan’s (1994) variables, 23225 firm years
LGEPS LGEPSF1 LGEPSF2 LGEPSF3 LRETF1 LRETF2 LRETF3
const.
0.0205 0.1273 0.0719 -0.0243 -0.0288 -0.0898 -0.0029 -0.0442
r
[0.0326] [0.0124] [0.0191] [0.0125] [0.0155] [0.0622] [0.0475] [0.0543]
0.0666 0.0140 0.0091 0.0063 0.0033 0.0034 0.0023 0.0034
Er
[0.0270] [0.0062] [0.0062] [0.0053] [0.0034] [0.0051] [0.0034] [0.0033]
-0.0341 0.1323 0.0389 -0.0252 -0.0236 -0.0597 0.0077 -0.0272
Ncf
[0.0209] [0.0123] [0.0152] [0.0098] [0.0104] [0.0418] [0.0353] [0.0354]
-0.0120 -0.0191 0.0238 -0.0054 -0.0085 -0.0334 -0.0129 -0.0204
-Nr
[0.0127] [0.0115] [0.0099] [0.0054] [0.0070] [0.0258] [0.0161] [0.0206]

ELPL
1.2425
[0.2341]
0.5092
[0.1642]
0.7773
[0.1923]
-0.0440
[0.1122]

% R2
11.16
[2.61]
51.03
[9.40]
12.51
[2.07]
3.04
[1.06]

1

This approach is similar in spirit to Campbell and Mei (1993).

2

We do not consider the effects of model uncertainty.

3

We thank the referee for motivating this example.

4

Since some of our specifications have three year leads of LGD and LRET as explanatory variables, in order
to be consistent with our reinterpretation regressions, we estimate the VAR only through 1998. For this
reason, the dependent variable series for each of our future regressions ends in 1998.

5

The methodology of time-series means of cross-sectional descriptives implicitly adds time dummies. Thus,
the statistics should be compared to pooled estimates computed from market-adjusted data.

