NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF RIGHT—TO—WORK LAWS ON UNIOf'T ORGANIZING

David T. Eliwood
Glenn A. Fine

Working Paper No. 1116

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

May 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1116
May 1983

The Impact of Right—to—Work Laws on Union Organizing

ABSTRACT

In contrast to previous studies which have examined the impact of
Right—to—Work (RTW) laws on the level or stock of union membership, this
paper examines their impact on the most updated flow into membership and

the organizing of workers through certified elections. Since detailed
annual data are available by state, we are able to estimate an accelerator
model of the flow into unionism, and adjust for possible omitted variable

and simultaneity bias. The results show dramatic falls in organizing
immediately after the passage of a RTW law, with more moderate declines

in later years, just as an accelerator model could predict. Overall, the
results are consistent with a 5—10 percent reduction in unionism as a
result of the passage of RTW laws.

David T. Ellwood
Glenn A. Fine
Harvard University
Kennedy School of Government
79 Bolyston Street
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
(617) 495—1121

Perhaps no controversy in recent American labor relations has

catalyzed such confrontation or stirred such strong emotions as the

battle over 'right-to-work" (RTW) laws. The 1947 Taft-Hartley amendments
to the Wagner Act granted states the power to pass laws which outlaw the
union shop -- a contract provision which requires new employees to join

and pay dues to the union.1 Table 1 displays the states where laws have
been passed and the date of passage. A few states passed laws prior to
1947 but their legal status ws in jeopardy until Taft-Hartley.
The philosophical debate turns on the classic confrontation between
freedom and free riders. Unions certified by the National Labor Relations
Board (NLRB) as the bargaining acient for a group of workers known as the

bargaining unit must represent all the employees in the unit in negotiations

and grievance handling, whether or not they join the union. Dependinci
on one's perspective then, union security clauses either ensure that
workers pay their fair share of representation costs or force them to
join an organization which they do not necessarily favor.
The controversy over these laws is a puzzle to many labor economists
because most recent studies have found that RTW laws have little real
•

.

.

•

impact on the level of union membership in a state.

2

Most authors

conclude, to paraphrase the words of Fredrick Meyers in l959, that the
laws are symbol not substance.

The important academic question involves the quantitative impact of

RIW laws on unions. Most previous studies have examined the impact of
these laws on the level (or stock) of union membership in a state.
In contrast we explore the impact of the laws on union organizing -a flow into organizing. By focusing on the flows rather than stocks, we

TABLE 1

States With Right-to-Work Laws

STATE

YEAR OF ADOPTION

Alabama

1953

Arizona

1946

Arkansas

1944

Florida

1944

Georgia

1947

Indiana

(repealed in 1965) 1957

Iowa

1947

Kansas

1958

Louisiana

1976

Mississippi

1954

Nebraska

1946

Nevada

1951

North Carolina

1947

North Dakota

1947

South Carolina

1954

South Dakota

1946

Tennessee

1947

Texas

1947

Utah

1955

Virginia

1947

Wyoming

1963

-3—

can simultaneously examine two questions. We can of course collect
evidence of the impact of RTW laws on organizing itself. And we can qain
considerable insight into the impact of the laws on the level of unionism

since adjustments to the stock must come in the form of flows. Moreover
our emphasis on organizing provides us with an opportunity to overcome
some of the methodological problems which have confronted previous authors.
It is our finding that the number of workers in newly organized

bargaining units is substantilly reduced in the first decade after
passage of a right-to-work law, particularly in the first five years.
The reduction arises largely from a shrinking in the number of certification elections held and from a reduction in the average number of workers
in each new unit.

In later years the effects are relatively small.

Our results suggest that a decade after passacie, the reduced organizing

will have lead to a 5% reduction in the number of union members, and our
results are consistent with a prediction that the 5% reduction is permanent.

Nonetheless our data does not allow definitive statements about the long
term effects the laws have on the level of unionism in a state partially

because we do not observe flows out of unionism and partially because
of uncertainty about the exact size of the long term impact on new organizinq.
We begin with a discussion of stock models of union membership and
a discussion of some of the problems which have confronted previous authors.

We discuss an alternative approach which focuses on flows. We describe
our model and its specification. We present results for all fifty states
and then for seven states where data are available to allow controls
for fixed effects and for a rough test for simultaneity/exogeneity.
Next we decompose our dependent variable into several components to

-4-

examine the mechanisms whereby unionism is reduced. We conclude with
a discussion of the results and their implications.

Stock Models of Unionism

We take as our starting point the standard reduced form' model of the
stock of union membership which 'is common in the literature on the level

of union membership and which has been used commonly in the right-to-work
research. The proportion of workers who are union members in a state
is thought to be a function of a variety of exogenous variables including
demographic characteristics of the labor force, the tastes and preferences

of both workers and employers, economic conditions, and the presence

or absence of a right-to-work law. For simplicity of exposition we
represent this function as linear. Obviously this function could be
modeled as a logistic or any other non-linear fashion.

(1)

where

U1t/LFt =

XtB

+

RTW

+

U.,
= Number of union workers in state i
1

attimet

LF1t =

=

Size of the labor force

Vector of exogenous variables

RTW.t
= Dummy variable equal to one if the
1
state has a right-to-work law

=

Error

term

This equation can be easily estimated in cross section even if data

are available for only a single year. When such equations are estimated the

-5—

RTW coefficient is typically moderately sized (around -.10) and significant.
There are several obvious problems with such a specification, most notably
omitted variable bias and simultaneity.

Omitted Variable Bias
The first problem is that measured variables included in the specification may not fully capture differences across states in attitudes

toward unions. Since a populous with strong anti-union attitudes is likely
to resist union organizing attempts and is also more likely to support
the passage of a RTW law, the RTW coefficient may spuriously capture the

impact of omitted attitudes, tastes, and preferences. The law itself
might have no impact, but states with such laws tend to be hostile toward
unions and thus we see a non-zero coefficient.
The obvious solution to this problem is to exploit time-series

cross sectional data and allow for fixed state effects.4 In a two
period regression this amounts to a before/after type experiment. Unfortunately, comparable data on the stock of union membership before and

after the passage of RTW laws are not available in most states. Membership
data published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) become available
only after 1964, nearly twenty years after the passage of many of the laws.
Prior to that the only state data available are those created by Troy

for 1939 and 1953. Comparisons between the BLS and Troy data are difficult
because Troy gathered his data from the financial records of unions whereas

the BLS data are based on union self-reporting of their membership. The
BLS figures are likely to overstate union membership relative to Troy,

particularly in RN states where many workers are covered under collective

bargaining contracts negotiated by unions but do not pay union dues.

Indeed, Troy specifically cautions against comparison of his data and
BLS information in assessing the impact of RTW laws.5
Even ignoring these comparison problems, it seems unreasonable to
assume that omitted state differences in attitudes were roughly constant

between 1936 and 1964. Small impacts caused by the law might easily be
lost in the changing attitudes of the populous.

Simultaneity
Other authors have wrestled with issues of causality and simultaneity.

The fear is that in states where unions command a larger share of the
work force, their political power is greater and thus they can influence

whether or not a right-to—work law is passed. Although this is arguably
similar to the omitted variable bias problem, it is conceptually distinct,
The solution proposed by several authors is to estimate cross sectional,
simultaneous equations models where the level of union membership and the
probability of the state having a RTW law is estimated simultaneously.

The problem with these models is that identification is achieved either
through

the exclusion of one or several variables or by exploiting functional

form assumptions. Both methods have troubling implicatons. For example,
Moore and Newman6 include the percentage of the work force which is nonagricultural and the population density in their equation which predicts
the presence or absence of a RTW law, but exclude these in their second

equation which explains the level of union membership. This exclusion
does not have obvious economic appeal. By contrast Warren and Strauss7
estimate a mixed logit model which requires no exclusions where identifica-

tion can be made by exploiting non-linearities in the system. Identification

-7-

through functional form is always troubling. And in this case the estimation technique constrains the coefficient on the RN variable to be
exactly equal to the coefficient on union membership in the RTW equation
times the variance of the error term in the union equation, a restriction
which also lacks economic appeal.

A Flows Approach

We propose an alternative to the stock approach which exploits the
fact that data are available annually on the number of workers organized
under union certification elections certified by the National Labor Relations

Board (NLRB). Because our data are consistent over time, and because
flows can be a very sensitive indicator of a changed environment, this
approach allows us to conduct a more powerful test of the impact of RTW

laws than might be achieved with stock models. We are able to control
for omitted variable bias and to test for simultaneity bias.

Potential bargaining units are established by the NLRB in particular

plants or for particular crafts. A union is certified by the NLRB as
the sole bargaining agent for a unit either by winning a certification

election or, much less comonly, through voluntary recognition of a union
by the employer. Under the election process, when at least 30% of the
workers in a potential bargaining unit sign organization cards asking to
be represented by a union, the NLRB will supervise a certification election.
If the union captures a majority of the votes cast, the union is certified
as the sole bargaining agent for all the workers in the unit regardless

of whether or not they join the union. Data on the number of elections
are available yearly by state after 1946, and on the number of workers
in newly certified bargaining units after 1950.

-8-

Once established, these units remian unionized until the firm moves,

goes out of business, is sold to an employer who does not recognize the
union, or until a union decertification election is held.

In a state

with a constant labor force, unions can grow either by having new units
certified, or by growing along with firms that have already been organized.
Unions

to

decline when they are decertified and when the firms or trades

which they are linked shrink. If the

will

labor force is growing, unions

decline relatively if tftey are unsuccessful in organizing the new

workplaces and the workers in them. Even in steady state equilibrium
then there will be a need for new organizing since declines caused by
old firms shrinking or closing must be offset by organizing.

When conditions change, and the equilibrium level of union membership
is higher or lower than the existing level, the stock must adjust somehow.
In many ways, the adjustment process is similar to that in a putty-clay

model of capital. Once established, bargaining units tend to remain in
place and decay or depreciate slowly because the units fortunes are largely

tied to the fortunes of the firm. Each year a few union plants go out
of business. The stock would be reduced if organizing did not compensate.
Just as in such models of capital, organizing (or new investment in union

capital stock) will be sensitive to changes in the union climate. And
changes which lead to a permanent reduction in the equilibrium level

of unionism will lead to dramatic falls in new organizing until the
stock has adjusted.

We envision a partial adjustment accelerator model whereby:

-9-

(2)

where

0RGIt/LFt =

e(Ut/LFt

ORGt = Newly

-

Ut1/LFt1)

organized workers

=

Rate of adjustment

=

Equilibrium

LFt =

Labor force

U11 =

Actual

*

U.1

=

-

level of unionization
[similar to equation (1)]

level of unionization

"Decay" rate of existing units

Suppose for example that passage of a RTW law actually caused the

equilibrium level of union membership as a percent of the labor force

to fall by 3 percentage points, say from 33% to 30%. Suppose the decay
rate was 5%, and that the size of the labor force is unchanaing. Then
prior to passage of the RTW law, 1.65% of the workforce would have to be

organized each year to maintain a steady state. After the law is passed,
if the rate of adjustment was .4, we would expect to see new organizing
fall to .45% in the year immediately following passage. (See Figure 1).
After the initial fall, organizing would increase slowly and would ultimately

stabilize at a new level of 1.5%. Thus in the first five years after
passage, organizing would be depressed by nearly 40% on average.

In the

next five organizing would be reduced about 20%. And ultimately it ought to
be 10% lower overall than previously. Such large changes in organizing
ought to be easy to observe and measure.

By contrast the stock of union workers would decline by just

-10FIGURE 1

V

PASSAGE CAUSES FALL IN UNIONISM

0.026
0.024
0.022
0.020
0.018

0.016
V

0

0.014

0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006

z

0.004
0.002

0.000
—10

—6

2

—2
Years

6

10

14

From RTW Law Passage

FIGURE 2

RAPID UNION DECLINES ALLOW PASSAGE

0.026 V

IN

0

'

0.024

-

0.022

-

0.020

0.018

-

0.018

-

0.014

-

V

0

0.012 0.0100.008•

0.006-

0.0040.002
0.000

I

—10

—6

I

I

—2

2

I

I

6

Years From RTW Law Passage

10

14

—l 1—

.6 percentage points or 2% in the first years and the decline would reach

10% only asymtotically. These smaller changes will be much harder to
detect. A primary advantage of the organizing data then is the much
greater sensitivity of flows to a changed environment. In addition, the
fact that annual data are available starting in 1951 means that in seven
states we can perform strong tests for omitted variable bias and simultan-

eity. We can easily allow for fixed effects over a relatively short time

series to control for omitte variable bias. And we can exploit the basic
ideas behind Granger/Sims causality tests to explore the seriousness of
simultaneity problems in the specification.

We can estimate a model of new organizing and allow for fixed

state effects. This controls for any time invariant state to state
differences in tastes which might account for the passage of RTW laws in

some states, but not in others. Data are available on oroanizing both
before and after passage of RTW laws in the seven states which passed

such laws after 1955. For these states, we can estimate a fixed effects
model to examine the importance of omitted taste variables in the results
of the 50 state equation.
It is possible, though, that tastes had changed over time in these

seven states or that unions lost power. These changes could explain why
a RTW law was finally passed. Thus, we might expect to see less organizing
in the period following passage of a RTW law because the mere passage

of the law indicates that anti-union sentiments were rising. Here again,
the law need have no real impact; it might merely reflect omitted variables

which influence union organizing. Since the omitted variables are changing
over time, fixed effects models will not adequately capture them.

-12-

The basic idea behind Granqer/Sims type causality tests is that events
cannot have an impact before they have occurred. If RTW laws have a real
impact on unionization, then their impact ouqht to be felt only after

the passage of the laws. By contrast, if passage of a RTW law indicates
the culmination of growing anti-union sentiments, organizing declines ought
to be as significant in the years just prior to passage as just after

passage. Assuming these new anti-union sentiments level off and a new
lower equilibrium level of union membership exists, the alternative pattern

is illustrated in Figure 2. So the important test is whether or not
organizing was diminished in the period just prior to passage as well
as the period just afterward.

With annual data, then, we can impose rather strict tests of both

omitted variable bias and simultaneity. Fixed effects can be used to

test for omitted variable bias. A leading indicator of impending RN
passage can be used to test for simultaneity. If we do in fact observe
the pattern displayed in Figure 1, rather than some other pattern, it

is powerful evidence that RN laws do in fact have real impact.
In fact since stock and flow models always have a correspondence,
these same methods could be applied to accurate annual data on the stock

of membership. The advantages to using an organizing model rather than
one based on stocks is that annual data are available and thiss flow

ought to be very sensitive to changes in the union environment. A 50%
change in a measured variable is much easier to capture than a 5% change.

A Model of Union Organizing
We can begin with a simplistic model derived from equations (1) and
(2).

If we assume instantaneous adjustment we can derive:

-13-

(3)

ORGIt/LFt = LXitB + &RTW +

(LLFt/LFt

+

5)XtB

+

uft

Although this instantaneous adjustment model is unrealistic, it
does point out that new organizaton is influenced by changes in exogenous

variables (including RTW), by the need to organize new workers when
the labor force is growing, and by the need to replace members lost to

the various flows out of unionism. A model that allows for non-instantaneous adjustment would look stmilar but it would include many lagged values
of X and RTW and LF.

We experimented with a variety of specifications involving a considerable number of laqged independent variables, non-linear functional forms,

and multiple interactions. Ultimately we found a straightforward loglinear specification, which included both levels of the explanatory
variables (the Xs) and the change in these variables in the previous
five years as the independent variables, to be the most stable and intelliq-

ible. For obvious reasons, we concentrated particular attention on our
RTW variable.

We ran state cross-section annual time-series regressions for the

period from 1951 to 1977. Our primary dependent variable is the natural
log of ORG/LF --

the number of employees in bargaining units where unions

won an NLRB election divided by the non-agricultural labor force in the

state. As independent variables we have included variables which measure
demographic and industrial structure, local tastes and preferences, economic
conditions, and the governmental/legal environment.

Demographic characteristics of workers are emphasized as important
determinants of the levels of union membership by virtually every student
of union membership.

-14-

The most commonly cited factors are sex and race. Women typically display
weaker labor force attachment than men. If their expected tenure is
shorter than that of their male counterparts, the present value of long
term gains to unionism is reduced so that the up-front organizational
costs are likely to be a greater deterrent to organizing a union.8
Blacks, on the other hand, may be more inclined toward unions as a defensive
reaction to employer discrimination.9 In addition, urban residents are

generally considered more likely to organize)0 Apparently, small towns
suffer diseconomies of scale and/or different attitudes toward unionism.
In our models, %FEMALE and %BLACKS and %URBAN represent the proportion of
the non-agricultural labor force which is female, black, living in urbanized
areas, respectively.
Structural differences in the nature of the product or factor markets,

the nature of technology, and the "strategic position" of workers is the
cornerstone of the work of Dunlop, Shuster, and many others who analyze
union

These variables have obvious impact on the short and

long-run elasticity of demand for labor plus important implications for the

dynamics of relations between labor and management. The proportion of workers
in each one digit industry and occupation was therefore included in many of

our regressions. We also tested a more crude structural variable --

%BCW

the percentage of the state's non-agricultural work force which is in
blue—collar occupations.

None of the demographic and structural variables are available

annually in the early period of our sample. Therefore, we collected the
information from the decennial Census of Population and used straight

line extrapolation to fill in the missing data. This methodology is

--

—l 5-

unlikely to create a severe errors in variables problem since these
measures change only slowly over time.
Local tastes and preferences have generally been cited to account
for the large differences in the level of unionization across states.
Studies of right-to-work laws have emphasized the importance of local
attitudes in stimulating RTW laws and in holding down the level of unionism.
This is the heart of the simultaneity issue and requires particular attention
in any RTW study even though o-ur methodology allows for a correction of these

problems. Ashenfelter and Pencavel used the percentage of a state's
Congressional delegation which was Democratic as a measure of attitudes

towards unions.12 We chose to use a similar but more sophisticated proxy.
The AFL-CIO publishes a so-called COPE rating for each Congressman based

on his/her voting record. Using this information, we derived our
own COPE rating for each state over five year periods based on the voting
behavior of a state's Congressional delegation on key labor issues over

that five year time. The variable was detrended so that the variable measures
preferences in the state relative to the national average over any five

year period. Changes in organization caused by movements in the national
average will be picked up on our time dumies as described below.
Freeman and Medoff have pointed out that an important feature of
local tastes and preferences which has been ignored in most empirical

work, is local employer oppostion.' In our work we include a variable,
TOUGH, which represents the number of unfair labor practice charges

filed against employers divided by the number of elections in each state. We also
include a five year average change in both TOUGH and COPE in our models.

-16-

Finally, in our fifty state regression, region dummy variables are
also included to attempt to capture any differences in attitudes prevalent

in a particular region. The unique environment of the South may negatively
influence union organizing. This region may be difficult to organize
because of the nature, composition, and location of industry, the surplus
of low—income agricultural workers, the influence of racial prejudice,

the prevailing ideology, and the strong anti-union attitude existinq among
Southern workers, employers, .and the community at large. We include

four region dummies to control for any geographic variation. In later
seven state reqressions we allow for individual state effects eliminating
any stationary differences across states.

Commons and Davis both pointed to economic conditions and cyclical

swings in employment and prices to explain union growth.14 Davis
postulated that grievances built up in downturns and could be acted upon

in the upswing. Both Davis and Ashenfelter—Pencavel suggested that sharp
price rises contributed to union growth. This latter finding is present
in several other works including Dunlop, Adams, and Krisklov.15 The
usual explanation for this findinc is that real wages fail to keep pace

with inflation and workers organize as a "defensive reaction." Price
changes may also be capturing business conditions or they may be colinear with the periods of "fundamental unrest," as emphasized by Dunlop.
Individual year dummies were included to capture effects of national

business cycle swings. It is difficult to capture the business cycle by
state because unemployment rate data are not available until late in the

period. Our principal proxy is the percentage change in the manufacturing

—17-

weekly wage. Presumably this variable captures relative tightness of the

labor market in an area. We used two versions of this variable. The
five year average rate of growth in wages, TRENDW, is an attempt to

capture something of the long-run tightness of the market. %CHGW is
the change in wage relative to this lonq-run trend. This latter variable
is introduced to capture the cycle within the state.
No price indexes are available by state until late in our sample

period, thus we cannot test the hypothesis that rapid price increases

spur union organization. The impact of differences over time in the
national rate of inflation are captured by the individual year dummy
variables.

In states where there is long term employment growth, unions will

have to engage in more organizing if they are to keep pace. Thus we
created a long term growth rate of employment, EMRATE. To minimize
the cyclical component of any measure of employment growth we created
five year moving average annualized growth rates.

A partial adjustment accelerator model predicts a sharp fall in

organizing imediately after a RN law is passed and smaller declines
from the pre-law level in later years. We have separated the RTW
variable into a series of mutually exclusive dunrty variables designed to

capture the impact in five year intervals following passage of the law.

RTW1-5YR was 1 if and only if a RN law had been passed in the state
in the past five years. RTW6-1OYR was unity if a law was passed between
6 and 10 years previously and so on.

-18-

We began by running regressions for all fifty states without additional
controls for fixed effects or a leading RTW

indicator

to test for simul-

taneity. We then explored the potential problems that omitted variables
or simultaneity could be causing in these fifty state results by running
a separate set of regressions on the group of seven states where data
are available both before and after passage of a RTW law.

Fifty State Empirical Results

The results presented on Table 3 are consistent with the model we

have advanced. The dernooraphic variables performed as expected. In
states with fewer women or more blacks in the labor force there is

more organizing. A five percentiqe point change in these variables
will lead to a ten and three percent increase in organizing respectively.

Similarly, states with five percentage points more urban workers have four
percent more organization.

When structural variables representing the percentage of the work force
in one digit occupations or industries are included in the equation,
their coefficients are erratic and their effect on other variables minor.

The simple variable %BCW, representing the proportion of the work force
in blue collar occupations, performed better and was therefore included
instead of the more detailed measures.
The

taste and preference variables captured a sizable proportion of

the explained variations in organizing. TOUGH performed exceptionally

well.

States with one standard deviation higher level of TOUGH show

organization rates almost 10% lower. Morever, changes over time are
also quite important. States where employers are becoming increasingly

-19-

TABLE 2

Variables Used in Empirical Work

ORG/LF

employees in units choosing representation/non-agricultural
labor force in thousands

ELECT

NLRB elections/non—agricultural labor force in thousands

PERC

union victories/elections

WINSIZE

employees in units choosing representation/union victories

EMPGROWTH

average annual rate of growth of the non-agricultural work
force over five years

%BLACK

percent of the labor force that is black

FEMALE

percent of the labor force that is female

%URBAN

percent of the population living in urban areas

%BCW

percent of the labor force that is blue-collar

TOUGH

number of employer unfair labor practices per election

COPE

rating of the congressional delegation's votes on labor issues

NORTH

dummy variable for Northern states

SOUTH

dummy variable for Southern states

CENTRAL

dummy variable for Central states

TRENDW

average annual growth in the manufacturing weekly wages
over five years

CHGW

difference between the proportionate change in wages in a
given year and TRENDW.

PRERTW

dummy variable which is 1 in the 5 year period prior to
passage of a RTW law

RTWO-5YR

dumy variable which is 1 only in the first 5 year period
after passage of a RTW law

RTWt-5YR

dummay variable which is 1 only in the period t to 5 years
after a RTW law was passed

XXXX

five year change in variable XXXX

TABLE 3

Fifty State Regression Results on LN(MEMB)

MEAN
(Standard Deviation)

Ln ORG/LF

COEFFICIENT
(Standard Error)

1.33

-

(0.79)
BLACK

9.89
-.

%FEMALE

%URBAN

BCW

(13.03)
33.29
(4.84)

TOUGH
COPE

LCOPE

SOUTH

CENTRAL

TRENDW

.008
(.002)

48.09

1.42

.023
(.003)

-.106

(0.86)

(.035)

0.21

-.098

(0.86)

(.030)

-0.56
(29.18)

(.001)

-0.23

.185
(.388)

.001

.000
(.001)
.049

(.070)

.326

.148

(.469)

(.070)

.246
(.431)

.150
(.054)

.049
(.032)

%CHGW

.027

(.011)

62.83

(24.72)

NORTH

-

(15.30)

(7.13)

TOUGH

.007
(.002)

-

.509

(.933)

.011

1.68

(.066)

(6.77)

—21—

TABLE 3 (cont.)
Fifty

State

Regression Results on LN(MEMB)

1EAN
(Standard Deviation)
RTW1-5YR

RTW6-1OYR

RTW11-15YR

RTW16-2OYR

(.209)

-.531
(.093)

.070

-.262

.046

(.255)

(.078)

.070

.040

(.253)

(.080)

.065

-.026
(.084)

(.247)

RTW21tYR

EMPGROWTH

N

COEFFICIENT
(Standard Error)

(.316)

-.075
(.071)

.021

1.75

(.068)

(0.39)

1364

1364

.113

SEE

.638

R2

.367

All regressions include A%FEMALE, %BLACK, A%BCW, L%URBAN, an intercept
and individual year dummies

-"hostile

to unionism, according to this measure, show reduced organiza-

tion. COPE, on the other hand, performed poorly. Neither levels or
changes seemed to affect organizing. TOUGH appears to dominate COPE.
If TOUGH is removed from the equation, COPE's performance improves cons iderably.

The region dumies show a surprising pattern. When controls,
we used for demographics, structure, tastes and preferences, and the
presence of a RTW law were included, SOUTH no longer has a negative

coefficient. Indeed the coefficient was higher than those for North
or West. Without these controls the variable was strongly negative.
The lower rate of organizing in the South therefore can apparently be
'explained" by the factors included in the equation.

The short run cyclical variable %CHGW, the difference between the

annual wage change and the long run trend, had the expected positive

sign d was significant. Wage growth which is 6% higher than average,
yields a 10% increase in organizing. The long run trend in wages had
no influence here. Je experimented with a variety of functional forms
using lagged values of %CHGW; none yielded satisfactory results.

As expected states with greater employment growth had higher levels

of organizing. A 10% growth rate in employment caused organizing to
grow by l7%.16 The yearly time dummies are not reported here, but
they show a strong negative trend. Relative to 1950, the 1977 dummy
shows that organization has fallen by 40%, other things equal.

Finally we turn to examine the impact of RN laws based on the
fifty state regression.

-23-

The Effects of RTW
The coefficients on the RTW variables are quite consistent with

the hypothesis that the passage of a RTW law diminishes the equilibrium
level of unionism and that a partial adjustment model characterizes the

resulting changes in organizing. In the first five years following
passage of a RTW law in a state, organizing is reduced by 50%.
the next five years, it is reduced by roughly 25%.

In

In later years it

appears to be reduced somewh&t, though we do not have sufficient data
to conclude that the reduction is statistically significant.
Over our sample period, employees in new bargaining units average
2% of all union workers --

i.e.

the flow is roughly 2% per year. If

organizing falls by 50% for five years and 25% during the next five,

then after 10 years, membership will be roughly 7% lower than it would

have been otherwise. If 7% was the true long run reduction, then once
the new equilibrium is achieved organizing should be permanently depressed
by 7%.

In our data, the standard errors on the dumy variables capturing

the impact of the laws after 10 years are typically around 8%. Thus
the modest 7% long term reduction could not show up as statistically

significant. The actual coefficients for the later years average closer
to 3 or 4%, though the coefficient designed to capture the period after
20 years is almost exactly what we would predict if RTW laws ultimately
caused a 7% decline in unionism (and organizing).
Thus, these results seem to be consistent with an interpretation

that RTW laws ultimately diminish membership by 5 to 10% --

or

union

workers as a fraction of the total work force falls by between one and

three percentage points in most states. (This impact would be in addition
to the loss of membership that might occur if members of existing bargaining

_2i1..

units choose not to be union members when union shop rules are eliminated.)
It is possible, however, that organizing is depressed only in the short

run. Then the stock would also be diminished only in the short-run. We
think it is more plausible that the stock is permanently reduced by 5 to 10%,
but other interpretations of the lonq-tern impact are possible.
If there is a permanent reduction in the stock, it is easy to

see that with the relatively small sample sizes available for the stock
equations estimated by previous authors, a statistically significant

impact amounting to 5% might not be detected. After all, the standard
errors in our equations which have considerably more observations make
measurements that precise impossible.

It is possible, however, that the results reported in these fifty

state regressions are spurious, and that either omitted variable bias

or simultaneity contaminates the results. We turn then to an examination
of these issues by exploring the impact of RTW laws in the seven states
where sufficient data on organizing is available both before and after
passage of the law to allow fixed effects and simultaneity tests.

Seven State Empirical Results
It seems unlikely that time invariant differences across states

could account for the results we have observed. Generally we would not
expect

that fixed state differences could generate the pattern of a

declining impact of RTW laws as time

since

passage increases. Nonetheless

our first step was to determine the impact of fixed effects on a regression
based only on these seven states. Those results appear on Table 4.

-25-

TABLE 4

Seven State Results on RTW Coefficients

FIXED EFFECTS SIMULTANEITY TEST
.255

PRGRTW

(.198)
-.321

-.318

(.121)

(.125)

RTW11+

.054
(.177)

.012
(.245)

SEE

1.03

RTW1-1OYR

.642

Note: All other variables included in Table 3 are included
here except YEAR variables which have been collapsed
to cover five year intervals.

-toBecause of the smaller number of observations, we needed to make some
minor changes in our specification. We collapsed our RTW variables to
cover a longer interval. We allowed five year time dummies rather than
the individual year dummies we used in the fifty state regression. As
an additional test, in these regressions we also controlled for first
order serial correlation and for heterskedasticity using the Parks method.
The

fixed effect results are remarkably similar to those found in

the fifty state regressions. In the first 10 years after passage, organ-

izing is

diminished 32% -- a figure very similar to the 39% average for

the first decade obtained by averaginq the first two five year coefficients

in the fifty state regression. After a decade, the impact is insignificant,
as in the fifty state case. And once again a large standard error
leaves open the possibility that organizing remains depressed by
5 or 10% in the long run.

Thus, time invariant state differences do not seem to account for

the results we find. A second concern is that declining union strength
may allow passage of a RTtJ law. Thus reduced organizing and passage of
the law are both indications of recently reduced union power.

In this

case, a leading indicator of impending passage of a RTW law provides

an important test. If declining union strength leads to reduced organizing
and to the passage of the law, then the period prior to its passage
ought to be one where organizing is depressed reflecting the declines

in union power. If the RTW law itself causes the declines, then there
ought to be no reduction in organizing in the period prior to passage.
We included a leading indicator, labeled PRE-RTW, as a exogeneity/

causality indicator in our seven state regression. This dummy variable

-27-

took on the value of one only in the period five years before the passage
of a RTW law.

It thus captures any changes in organizing just prior to

passage of a RTW law.

The results shown on Table 4 are quite striking. In the period
before the passage of RTW laws, organizing is not depressed. Indeed,
in these seven states, organizing was actually somewhat above average,

though the coefficient on PRE-RTW is not significant. The decline in
organizing seems to follow the passage of a RTW law, not precede it.

Indeed it is even possible that RN laws are passed when unions appear
to be becoming stronger (as evidenced by increased organizing) in order
to diminish their strength.

A look at two states where RTW laws were recently passed or repealed

offers some final evidence. In the three years prior to passage of
Louisanaa RTW law in 1976, an average of 4,024 workers were organized
each year; in the three years after, the figure averaged 2,380.
Indiana offers an ideal natural experiment because it is the only

state where a law was first passed and later repealed. Figure 3 reveals
a final bit of evidence that the effects of the law are real. Displayed
is

the number of workers in newly certified bargaining units per 1,000

non-agricultural workers. Two year moving averages were used to reduce

the variability of year-to-year fluctuations. There is a clear downward
trend

in organizing in the state over the period before the RN law

was passed. The trend was interrupted by a sudden drop in organizing
in the period when the law was in effect. It promptly resumed after
the law was repealed.

-28-

FIGURE 3

in Indiana
Organizing
Two Year Moving Averages

20-

19 -

18-

17-

1312-

I

Passed

RTW

SI

RTW Repealed

I

..5.
I

I

III..
I

I

I

I

1

I

5051525354555657585960616263646566676869707172737475767778
Year

-29-

Thus it appears that the results presented earlier are not the

product of omitted variable bias or simultaneity. They strongly sucigest
that organizing is dramatically depressed for roughly a decade after
passage of a right-to-work law and quite possibly is slightly reduced

permanently. The stock of union memberhsip falls between 5 and 10%
initially and this reduction may be permanent.
The obvious question remains as to how or why RTW laws have the

impact they do. We cannot infer the exact reasons why laws diminish
organizing so sharply in the short run. We can, however, decompose
the decline and shed some light on the mechanism.

Decomposition of RN Laws Impact
It is possible to decompose MEMB into several components and consider

the impact of RTW laws on each of these. The decomposition can be performed as follows:

ORG/LF = #ELECTIOS/LF X WON/ELECTIONS X ORG/#WON

ORG/LF = ELECT X PERC X WINSIZE

The number of new members (per 1,000 non-agricultural workers)

obtained through elections is the product of the number of elections
times the percent of elections won by the union times the average size

of the bargaining unit where elections are won. We ran separate regres-

sions on all fifty states for each of these variables. The RN coefficients from the fifty state regression are provided in Table 5.

Right—to—work laws seem to have their most important impact in

reducing the number of elections held. Over half of the decline in

-30-

TABLE 5

Fifty State Regressions - Decomposition
of Components in Ln ORG/LF

Ln(ORG/LF)

RTW5YR

-

.531

ln(ELECT)
-

.288

ln(PERC)
- .054

ln(WINSIZE)
-.189
(.079)

(.093)

(.045)

(.025)

-.263

-.130
(.038)

.015
(.021)

-.148

(.078)
.040
(.080)

.055
(.039)

.004
(.022)

-.019

-.026

-.024
(.041)

.018

-.020

(.023)

(.072)

-.135
(.034)

.040

(.071)

(.019)

.019
(.061)

SEE

.638

.308

.173

.543

R2

.367

.444

.371

.410

RTW1OYR

RTW15YR

RTW2OYR

(.084)

RTW25+YR

-.075

(.067)

(.068)

Note: All regressions included all the variables listed in Table 3.

-31-

new membership in the ten years after passage can be attributed to a

decline in elections. The remainder of the effect is accounted for
largely by a reduction in the average size of units won. Over the
first decade after passage WINSIZE is reduced by roughly 16%.

Interest-

ingly, the laws have only a small effect on the proportion of elections
won.

If employees are oraanied up to some threshold where expected benefits
equal expected costs, an increase in costs or reduction in benefits
will surely cause a decrease in elections.

If larger bargaining units

are more difficult to organize, presumably a change in the organizational

environment could result in the medium and smaller units being organized
first.

In general, we would not expect much change in the winning per-

centage. Presumably, unions organize plants up to some point where they
have a certain probability of winning. Organizers almost never call
elections until they have 65 percent of the workers to sign cards in

support of the unions. If this is the stopping rule, then the winning
percentage is unlikely to vary substantially.

Thus organizing is clearly reduced in the short-run with fewer

elections and smaller winning unit sizes. The ultimate question is
why? The most obvious explanation is simply that passage of a RTW
law makes union membership less attractive. Without the ability to
enforce payment of dues or to fine those who cross the picket line,

unions may prove less powerful. Their strike threats are diminished
both by reduced financial resources and by less certain participation.
As a result after a right-to-work law is passed, membership is sharply

-32-

reduced as plants formerly at the margin are now far removed from it.
There is a second interpretation which arose in discussions with

those on both sides of the controversy. A major part of the law's
impact may be through the pyschological/symbolic effect passage of a

RTW law may have on workers. Successful organization requires that a
few workers inside a plant take a highly visible and activist role.

The costs to these activists can be enormous, ranging from harrassment

to loss of their jobs. Even those who are not activists must take the
highly visible step of signing an authorization card. And in considering
whether or not to vote for a union, workers often fear they will lose

their jobs or suffer other costs if their company is hostile. Thus
the perceived strength of the union may be critical to the willingness

of activists and others to become involved in an organizing drive. A
highly visible defeat such as the passage of a RTW law (or the crushing
of PATCO) may severely damage the union's credibility and appeal to

workers. There is at least some evidence that the psychological impact
may be important. In Missouri, for example, after a RTW law was defeated,
new organizing jumped dramatically.

Conclusion

Our results show a strong short-run reduction in union organizing

following the passage of a RTW law. Ommitted variable bias and simultaneity problems do not skew our findings. Organizing is reduced by
nearly 50% in the first five years after passage of a RN law and by
half that amount in the subsequent five. Overall our results suggest
that membership in unions is reduced between 5 and 10% after passage.
The findings are consistent with a permanent reduction of this magnitude

—33-

in the stock though it is also possible that the stock gradually recovers
over many decades.

It appears that right-to-work laws are not merely

symbols. They have real significant effects.

-34-

Reference List

Adams, Arvil and Joseph Krislov, "New Union Organizing: A Test of the AshenfelterPencavel Model of Trade Union Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
(May, 1974): 304-311.
Ashenfelter, Orley and John Pencavel, "American Trade Union Growth: 1900-1960,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, (August, 1969): 434—338.
Bain, G.S. and T. Elsheikh, Union Growth and the Business Cycle, London:
Oxford Press, 1976.
Barbash, Jack, "The Labor Movement in the Changing Industrial Order,"
Labor Management Relations: The Forensic Quarterly, vol. 39,
(1965): 97—112.
Bernstein, Irving, "The Growth of American Unions: 1945-1960," Labcr History,
vol. 2, no. 2, (1961): 131-157.

Bok, Derek and John Dunlop, Labor and the American Community, New York: Simon
and Schuster, 1970.
Brotslaw, Irving, "Attitudes of Retail Workers Toward Union Organization,"
Labor Law Journal, vol. 18, no. 3, (1957): 149—171.
Commons, John R., A Documentary History of American Industrial Society, Vol. V,
Cleveland: A.H. Clark Co., 1911.
Davis, Horace B., "The Theory of Union Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. IV, (1941): 611-637.

Dunlop, John T., "The Merican Industrial Relations System in 1975," In
Stieber, Jack, ed., U.S. Industrial Relations: The Next Twenty Years,
East Lansing, Michigan: Michigan State University Press, 1958.

"The Development of Labor Organizations: A Theoretical
,
Framework," In Lester, R.A. and Joseph Shister, eds., Insights
Into Labor Issues, New York: MacMillan, 1948.
Farber, Henry and Daniel Saks, "Why Workers Want Unions: The Role of Relative
Wages and Job Characteristics," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 88,
no. 2, (1980): 349-369.
Freeman, Richard and James Wedoff, What Do Unions Do?, Forthcoming in Basic
Books.
Kochan, Thomas A., "How American Workers View Labor Unions," Monthly Labor
Review, vol. 102, no. 4, (1979): 23-31.
Kuhn, James W., "Right-to-Work Laws--Symbols or Substance?", Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, (July, 1961): 587—594.

-35-

Reference List (continued)

Kupferberg, Seth, "The Right-to-Work Fad," The New Republic, vol. 178,
(1978): 20-23.
Lumsden, Keith and Craig Peterson, "The Effect of Right-to-Work Laws on
Unionization in the United States," Journal of Political Economy,
(December, 1975): 1237-1248.
McKersie, Robert and Montague Brown, "Nonprofessional Hospital Workers
and a Union Organizing Drive," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. LXXVII, no. 3, (1963): 372-404.
Meyers, Frederic, Right-to-Work in Practice, New York: Fund for the Republic,
1959.

Moore, William 3. and Robert 3. Newman, "On the Prospects for American
Trade Union Growth: A Cross Section," Review of Economics and Statistics,
(November, 1975): 435-445.
Shister, Joseph, "The Logic of Union Growth," Journal of Political Economy,
vol. LXI, no. 5, (1953): 413-433.
Troy, Leo, "Trade Union Membership 1897-1962," Occasional Paper No. 92,
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1965.

Warren, Ronald S. Jr. and Robert P. Strauss, "A Mixed Logit Model of the
Relationship Between Unionization and Right—to-Work Legislation,"
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 87, no. 3, (1979): 648-655.
Witney, Fred, "The Indiana Right—to-Work Law," Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, (July, 1958).

-36-

Footnotes

1.

The Taft-Hartley ammendments also outlawed the 'closed shop" which
required that workers be union members before they are hired,
although the legal status of such arrangements in construction was
ambiguous until the passage of the Landrum-Griffith Act in 195?.

2.

Lumbsden, Keith and Craig Peterson, "The Effect of Right-to-Work
Laws on Unionization in the United States," Journal of Political
Economy, (December, 1975): 1237-1248.

Moore, William J. and Robert J. Newman, "On the Prospects for American
Trade Union Growth: A Cross Section," Review of Economics and Statistics,
(November, 1975): 435-44.
Warren, Ronald S. Jr. and Robert P. Strauss, "A Mixed Logit Model
of the Relationship Between Unionization and Right—to—Work Leqislation,"
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 87, no. 3, (1979): 648-655.
3.

Meyers, Frederic, Riqht-to-Work in Practice, New York: Fund for the
Republic, (1959): 21—40.

4.

This is essentially the method used by Lunisden and Peterson.

5.

Troy, Leo, "Trade Union Membership 1897—1962," Occasional Paper No. 92,
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, (1965): 18.

6.

Moore and Newman, bc. cit.

7.

Warren and Strauss, bc. cit.

8.

See for example:

Brotslaw, Irving, "Attitudes of Retail Workers Toward Union Organization,"
Labor Law Journal, vol. 18, no. 3, (1967): 167.
Dunlop, John T., "The Development of Labor Organizations: A Theoretical
Framework," In Lester, R.A. and Joseph Shister, eds., Insights into
Labor Issues, New York: MacMillan, (1948): 163-193.

Barbash, Jack, The Labor Movement in the Changing Inudstrial Order,"
Labor Management Relations: The Forsenic Quarterly, vol. 39, (1965): 111.
For the opposite result--that women are just as likely to desire
unions as are men, see:
Farber, Henry and Daniel Saks, "Why Workers Want Unions: The Role
of Relative Wages and Job Characteristics," Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 88, no. 2, (1980): 349-369.

-37-

Footnotes (continued)

Kochan, Thomas A., 'How American Workers View Labor Unions," Monthly
Labor Review, vol. 102, no. 4, (1979): 23-31.

9.

Farber and Saks, bc. cit.
McKersie, Robert B. and Montague Brown, "Nonprofessional Hospital
Workers and a Union Organizing Drive," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. LXXVII, no. 3, (1963): 372-404.

Bernstein, Irving, "The Growth of American Unions 1945-1960," Labor
Histy, vol. 2, no.2, (1961): 131-157.

10.

Moore and Newman, bc. cit.

Dunlop, bc. cit.

11.

"The American Industrial Relations System in 1975,'
Twenty
In Stieber, Jack, ed., U.S. Industrial Rela
Lansing,
Michigan:
Michigan
State
University
Press,
East
Years,
(1958): 27-54.
Dunlop, John T. ,

t

Shister, Joseph, "The Logic of Union Growth," Journal_of Political
Econoniy, vol. LXI, no. 5, (1953): 433.

Bernstein, bc. cit.
Ashenfelter, Orley and John Pencavel, "American Trade Union Growth:
1900-1960," Quarterly Journal of Economics, (August, 1969): 434-448.

12.

13.

-

Freeman, Richard and James Medoff, What Do Unions Do?, Forthcoming
in Bantam Press.

14.

David, Horace, "The Theory of Union Growth," Quarterjy Journal of
Economics, vol. IV, (1941): 611-637.
Commons, John R., A Documentary History of the American Industrial
Society, Vol. V, Cleveland: A.H. Clark Co., (19JTJTJ9.

15.

Ashenfelter and Pencavel, bc. cit.
Dunlop, The_Devebopment_of

Labor9fanizatiOfl, op.

cit.

Adams, Arvil and Joseph Krislov, "New Union Organizing: A Test of
the Ashenfelter-Pencavel Model of Trade Union Growth," Quartly
Journal of Economics, (May, 1974): 304-311.

Bain, G.S. and T. Elsheilch, Union Growth and the Business Cycle,

London: Oxford Press,, 1976.

-38-

Footnotes (continued)

16.

This result does not imply that new organization is more common
among new workers. On the contrary, it suggests a very low rate of
organizing among new workers. With no employment growth, roughly
2 percent of the work force are organized each year. With 10 percent
annual growth in employment, unions should organize a third of the
new workers—-or 3 percent of the labor force—-in addition to the previous 2 percent, just to maintain their relative share of the work
force. Instead organizing rises only to 2.5 percent. This result
may in part reflect simultaneity. Firms are moving to the areas
where organizing is difficult.

