NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRIVATE BENEFITS OF CONTROL, OWNERSHIP,
AND THE CROSS-LISTING DECISION
Craig Doidge
G. Andrew Karolyi
Karl V. Lins
Darius P. Miller
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 11162
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11162
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

We thank Stijn Claessens, Simeon Djankov, Mara Faccio, and Larry Lang for access to their ownership data;
William Megginson, as well as seminar participants at the University of Oklahoma for helpful comments;
and, Ivalina Kalcheva for excellent research assistance. Karolyi is grateful to the Dice Center for Financial
Economics for financial support. This research is supported by the NSF under Grant No. NSF-0215754. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, Karl V. Lins, Darius P. Miller, and René M. Stulz. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Private Benefits of Control, Ownership, and the Cross-Listing Decision
Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, Karl V. Lins, Darius P. Miller, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 11162
March 2005
JEL No. G15, G34, K00, P51
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates how a foreign firm’s decision to cross-list its shares in the U.S. is related to
the concentration of the ownership of its cash flow rights and of its control rights. Theory has
proposed that when private benefits are high, controlling shareholders are less likely to choose to list
their firm’s shares in the U.S. because the higher standards for transparency and disclosure, as well
as the increased monitoring associated with such listings, limit their ability to extract private
benefits. We offer evidence that confirms this hypothesis using data on more than 4,000 firms from
31 countries. Using logistic regression analysis, we show that the control rights held by controlling
shareholders, as well as the difference between their control rights and their cash flow rights are
significantly and negatively related to the existence of a U.S. listing. In addition, we employ duration
analysis using a Cox proportional-hazard model to show that the probability of listing in a given year
from 1995 to 2001, conditional on not yet having listed, is significantly lower for firms whose
managers have high levels of control and for firms whose controlling shareholder owns more control
rights than cash flow rights.
Craig Doidge
University of Toronto
craig.doidge@rotman.utoronto.ca
G. Andrew Karolyi
The Ohio State University
karolyi@cob.osu.edu
Karl V. Lins
University of Utah
finkvl@business.utah.edu
Darius P. Miller
Indiana University
damiller@indiana.edu

René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction.
Academics and practitioners have developed extensive lists of reasons why foreign firms
choose to list in the U.S. Benefits of access to U.S. markets that have been discussed include the
increased ability to raise equity, growth of the firm’s shareholder base, increased liquidity, lower
cost of capital, and greater visibility and prestige.1 Recently, however, much attention has been paid
to the corporate governance implications of U.S. cross-listings.
Controlling shareholders of foreign firms listed in the U.S. face more constraints and have more
obligations than controlling shareholders of firms not listed in the U.S.2 For instance, a U.S. crosslisting typically improves transparency by imposing disclosure requirements on firms that are
stronger than the disclosure requirements they face in their home country. Additionally, by
choosing to list in the U.S., controlling shareholders accept the consequence of being subject to an
additional layer of monitoring by a variety of U.S. market intermediaries. For example, the crosslisting subjects them to enforcement actions initiated by the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) and to scrutiny from U.S. analysts and journalists. Further, if they raise funds in
the U.S., these firms are subjected to monitoring by underwriters. This commitment to improve
governance through greater transparency and monitoring is consistent with the existing evidence
that firms experience positive abnormal returns when they announce their intention to list in the
U.S. (Foerster and Karolyi, 1999; Miller, 1999), that they subsequently raise more capital after
listing (Reese and Weisbach, 2002; Lins, Strickland, and Zenner, 2005), that their cost of capital is
lower (Hail and Leuz, 2004), that estimates of private benefits of control are lower (Doidge, 2004a),

1

Surveys by Karolyi (1998, 2004), Claessens, Klingebiel, and Schmukler (2002), and Benos and Weisbach
(2004) evaluate over 150 different published studies that examine the decision to cross-list shares on foreign
markets. Some new studies focus on the importance of geographic proximity (Sarkissian and Schill, 2004)
and product market linkages (Pagano, Roell, and Zechner, 2002) as factors in firms’ decisions about where
and when to cross-list shares.
2
Non-U.S. firms are typically controlled by large shareholders (see La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer,
1999). We therefore use the term controlling shareholders to denote the group which controls the firm (which
can include managers and/or large blockholders).

1

and that foreign firms listed in the U.S. are valued more highly than firms that do not list in the U.S.
(Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004).
To the extent that control of a firm is valuable because it enables those who have it to extract
private benefits from the firm, we would expect firms in which controlling shareholders have
greater ownership of voting rights, and, therefore, tighter control of the firm, to be less likely to
choose to list in the U.S. (see Coffee, 2002, for related arguments). We investigate this proposition
using comprehensive ownership and control data on more than 4,000 firms from 31 countries in
Asia, Europe, Latin America, and elsewhere. The data include the control rights for controlling
shareholders, such as top managers and their family members, governments, other corporations, and
financial institutions. Using logistic regression analysis, we find strong evidence that when
controlling shareholders have high levels of control, their firms are less likely to be listed in the
U.S. Similarly, we find that firms controlled by their top managers and their families are less likely
to be listed in the U.S. We also employ duration analysis using a Cox proportional-hazard model to
show that the probability of listing in a given year over the 1995 to 2001 period, conditional on not
yet having listed, is significantly lower when controlling shareholders have high levels of control
and when firms are controlled by their top managers.
The corporate governance literature makes an important distinction between ownership of
voting rights and ownership of cash flow rights. If controlling shareholders have a majority of
voting rights but own negligible cash flow rights, they have little incentive to take steps to increase
the value of the firm’s equity. However, as controlling shareholders’ ownership of cash flow rights
increases, any action they take to benefit themselves at the expense of other equity holders has a
cost in that it decreases the value of the shares controlling shareholders own. If controlling
shareholders own almost all of the cash flow rights, it makes little sense for them to expend
resources to extract private benefits at the expense of minority shareholders. This reasoning
suggests that, for a given level of cash flow rights, controlling shareholders are less likely to seek a

2

listing for their firm as their holdings of control rights exceed their holdings of cash flow rights. In
both our logistic regression and Cox proportional hazard analysis, we find that this is the case.
The relation between the listing decision and cash flow rights ownership is complex. If
controlling shareholders own shares to control the firm and want to keep control, they have little to
gain through a cross-listing. In such a situation, the cross-listing makes control less valuable and
controlling shareholders cannot realize the share-price benefit from the reduced value of control by
selling shares since by doing so they would lose control. At the same time, if controlling
shareholders own shares for the purpose of aligning incentives with shareholders, incentives are
well-aligned when controlling shareholders own a large stake so the benefit of cross-listing is
smaller as long as controlling shareholders keep their current stake. If, however, the large stake
controlling shareholders hold is costly to them – for instance, by forcing them to bear firm risk –
and they want to reduce it, they can do so on better terms by cross-listing since controlling
shareholders of a cross-listed firm are more constrained in their consumption of private benefits.
With this view, it is possible that high cash flow ownership when the firm does not yet have a
cross-listing makes a future cross listing more likely. We investigate this hypothesis explicitly with
our Cox proportional-hazard model, but find no evidence that greater holdings of cash flow rights
make it more likely for controlling shareholders to choose a cross-listing. Thus, the large equity
stakes of controlling shareholders we observe in our sample firms are consistent with the view that
control is an important motivation for holding these shares.
To the extent that listing enables firms to raise funds at lower cost, we would expect, everything
else equal, to see firms with better investment opportunities pursue listings and firms that have not
yet listed to become more likely to do so following an improvement in their expected investment
opportunities. We find strong support for these predictions. Also, controlling shareholders receive
fewer private benefits in countries with better protection of investor rights (Nenova, 2003; Dyck

3

and Zingales, 2004). This suggests that, everything else equal, firms in countries with better
investor protection would be more willing to cross-list. We find that this is the case.
Our evidence contributes to both the literature on corporate ownership and the literature on
cross-listings. The fact that controlling shareholders with more control rights are more reluctant to
list provides further support for the view that a cross-listing reduces their discretion to take actions
that reduce the wealth of minority shareholders. It does not, however, resolve the on-going debate
about the exact nature of the constraints imposed on controlling shareholders. The predictions
investigated in this model hold whenever such constraints exist and do not depend on whether the
discretion of controlling shareholders is limited by the disclosure requirements and enforcement of
U.S. securities laws (see Coffee, 1999 and 2002, and Stulz 1999, for arguments in favor of this
hypothesis and Siegel, 2004, for arguments against), by monitoring of “gatekeepers” (see, in
addition, Lang, Lins, and Miller, 2003; King and Segal, 2004), or in other ways.
The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we present our data. In Section 3, we investigate
whether the controlling shareholders’ control (i.e., voting) rights as well as the difference between
their control rights and cash flow rights help further our understanding of which firms are crosslisted among the population of firms. In Section 4, we estimate a Cox proportional-hazard model
that allows us to relate the listing decision to changing firm attributes and to ownership.
Conclusions follow in Section 5.

2. Data.
2.1. Sample description
To examine whether firms’ decisions to cross-list on a U.S. exchange are related to firm-level
corporate governance, we construct two separate datasets, each of which contains a different
measure of the depth of ownership and control structure for a broad sample of firms from a large
number of countries around the world. Our datasets are compiled from the raw ownership and

4

control data available for Western European firms from Faccio and Lang (2002); for emerging
market firms from Lins (2003); and for East Asian firms from Claessens, Djankov, and Lang
(2000).3 Ownership and control data for East Asian and emerging market firms are from the 1995
and 1996 period and those from Western Europe range from 1996 to 1999, with the majority of
sample observations occurring in 1996. We confine our analysis to non-financial firms to maintain
consistency across the three ownership and control-structure datasets. Because we need a variety of
firm-level financial data, we use only firms covered by the Worldscope database. Also, to make
firms across countries more comparable, we limit our sample to firms with total assets of at least
$10 million.
Claessens et al. (2000), Faccio and Lang (2002), and Lins (2003) report ownership and control
statistics that could proxy for a firm’s internal corporate governance environment. For instance,
they compute the percentage of total ultimate control rights held by the following types of
blockholders: Family/Management, Government, Widely-Held Corporations, Widely-Held
Financials, and Miscellaneous (which includes ownership by Trusts, Cooperatives, Foundations,
Employees, etc.). From these data it is possible to identify the largest blockholder of a firm’s
control rights. Unfortunately, the cash flow ownership data presented in Faccio and Lang (2002),
Lins (2003), and Claessens et al. (2000) are categorized using different algorithms. Faccio and Lang
and Claessens et al. report the separation of ownership and control only for the largest blockholder
of their sample firms (which may not be the family/management group), while Lins reports this

3

Claessens, Djankov, Fan, and Lang (2002) examine the impact of ownership structure on firm value in East
Asia. Fan and Wong (2002) examine the effect of ownership structure on earnings informativeness. Both
studies exclude Japan from their tests based on the argument that Japan has a unique keiretsu governance
system that features very little individual ownership or control and instead is dominated by widely held
financial institutions who control a web of group-linked companies. Our empirical tests comprise a broader
range of countries. While some countries arguably have unique characteristics, it is difficult for us to apply a
consistent screening principle indicating uniqueness in country-level governance. Thus, we are reluctant to
exclude any one country. However, later in the paper, we discuss results where we exclude Japan to follow
Claessens et al. (2002). None of our inferences are weakened by removing Japan and some are strengthened.
Two countries in our sample have many more firms than the other countries: the U.K. and Japan. Our
inferences about the role of control rights and cash flow rights are robust to omitting these two countries.

5

measure for all holdings of the family/management group (which may not be the largest
blockholder). Given these difficulties, we conduct our tests on two firm-level governance datasets.
The first dataset is called the “Controlling Blockholder” dataset and it uses data for the ultimate
control rights and cash flow rights held by the largest blockholder as detailed in Claessens et al.
(2000) and Faccio and Lang (2002). Our classification of the largest blockholder as the controlling
shareholder follows much of the literature on international corporate governance (see, e.g., La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999 and Claessens et al., 2002). To make it clear that the
largest blockholder is assumed to be the controlling shareholder in this dataset, we will call the
controlling shareholder the controlling blockholder when this dataset is used. The primary benefit
of this dataset is that we can conduct tests using the control rights held by the controlling
blockholder as well as the difference between this entity’s control and cash flow rights. This allows
us to focus on both the controlling blockholder’s capability to pursue its own agenda as well as the
incentives to refrain from consumption of private benefits. One drawback of this dataset is that we
have relatively few firms from emerging market countries. In particular, this dataset has no
countries from Latin America. At the end of 1997, this dataset contains 4,062 firms across 22
countries with complete firm-level data.
Our second dataset is called the “Family/Management Control” dataset. In this dataset, we
compile the ultimate control rights held by a firm’s officers, directors, top-level managers, and their
family members. Since it is the management group that actually administers a firm, the private
benefits of control may be especially pronounced when we observe high levels of control held by
top managers and their families. Ultimate family/management control rights can consistently be
identified across the datasets of Faccio and Lang (2002), Lins (2003), and Claessens et al. (2000).
An advantage of this dataset is that we can include more firms from emerging market countries; the
disadvantage is that we cannot consistently identify family/management cash flow rights. At the
end of 1997, there are 4,272 firms from 31 countries in the Family/Management Control dataset.

6

In compiling the Family/Management Control dataset, we seek to construct measures that
indicate that a firm’s managers are, in effect, in full control of a firm because, all else equal, the
capability to expropriate minority shareholders will be highest when managers’ control of a firm
cannot be challenged internally. Because effective managerial control depends on the control rights
held by management, as well as the control rights held by outside blockholders, we use both a
nominal and a relative measure of effective managerial control in our analysis. The nominal
measure is the percentage of control rights held by the management group and its family. We
expect that higher levels of managerial control rights correspond to more effective control of a firm.
Our relative measure is an indicator variable set equal to one if the control rights held by a firm’s
family/management group exceed those held by any other blockholding entity. The relative
measure corresponds to the idea that high raw levels of control may not always be necessary to
establish effective managerial control; rather, managers need only to obtain sufficient control rights
so that they can avoid being influenced by other blockholders.4
We acknowledge that the Family/Management Control dataset allows us to focus only on the
capability for expropriation and not on the incentives to avoid expropriation. To measure such
incentives, we would need data for the ultimate cash flow ownership stakes held by the
management group and its family for all of our firms, which we do not have.5 However, it is
possible that this limitation will not materially affect our inferences. To the extent that effective
managerial control can be established at some level below 100 percent, control and cash flow rights
will inherently be separated. Generally, managerial control of 51 percent of the shares will confer
unequivocal control rights. In such a case, controlling managers that divert one dollar from the firm

4

Results using the nominal and relative measures are similar. We focus our presentation of results on the
nominal family/management control rights measure because it corresponds more closely to the control rights
variable used in the Controlling Blockholder dataset.
5
While we do not have data to separate the effect of managerial cash flow rights from control rights, the
analysis in Faccio and Lang (2002) and Lins (2003) suggests that, for our sample, ultimate managerial control
rights often exceed cash flow rights because of pyramid ownership structures and superior voting shares.

7

for personal gain will bear at most 51 cents of the cost. Any further separation of control from cash
flow rights via pyramids and superior voting shares may be a second-order effect.

2.2. Variable definitions
In each dataset, we compile a complete list of firms with Level 2 or Level 3 ADRs at the end of
each year from 1995 to 2001. Firms with Level 2 or 3 ADRs are firms listed either on the Nasdaq,
American Stock Exchange (Amex), or New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). Level 3 ADR firms
have also raised equity in the U.S. To determine whether a firm is listed on a U.S. exchange, we use
information obtained from the Bank of New York, Citibank, the NYSE, and Nasdaq. Listing dates
are verified using Lexis-Nexis searches and by examining firm’s annual reports as well as 20-Fs
filed with the SEC. Firms that issue private placements via Rule 144a or firms that list via Level 1
ADR programs are not included, as the SEC imposes few requirements on these firms and previous
research shows that both the costs and the benefits are largest for exchange listings (see, e.g.,
Miller, 1999, Reese and Weisbach, 2002, Doidge et al., 2004, Hail and Leuz, 2004, and Lins,
Strickland, and Zenner, 2005).
In our analysis, we include a number of firm- and country-level control variables. At the firm
level, we include an indicator variable that denotes the presence of an additional blockholder with
at least 10 percent of the voting rights (“2nd blockholder”). An additional large blockholder may
serve to mitigate the actions of the controlling blockholder that are not in the interests of minority
shareholders. However, it is also possible that the second blockholder’s non-trivial control stake
could allow it to share some private benefits of control with the controlling blockholder. We control
for growth opportunities using two proxies: sales growth over the last two years (“Sales growth”)
and the median q of the global industry that a firm belongs to (“Global industry q”). We expect that
controlling shareholders will be more likely to forgo private benefits of control if the need for
external financing to fund growth opportunities is greater. Our sales growth proxy is a two-year

8

geometric average of annual inflation-adjusted growth in sales. Because Worldscope data for many
countries is relatively sparse prior to 1994, this reduces our sample size by about 250 firms
compared to using a one-year sales growth measure. For robustness, we re-estimate all of our
models using a one-year sales growth measure and find results that are virtually identical in
magnitude and significance.
In addition to proxies for growth opportunities, we include “Leverage”, which is total debt
divided by the total assets of the firm. Firms that have higher leverage (prior to listing) might be
more likely to pursue a U.S. listing to raise new equity capital. Firm size, as proxied by the natural
logarithm of total assets in U.S. dollars (“Log assets”), is included to control for the economies of
scale in cross-listing. These economies of scale reflect the lower proportional fixed costs and
potential benefits that increase with firm size. Firm profitability, as proxied by the return on assets
(“ROA”), is included to control for the possibility that higher quality firms may be more likely to
cross-list in order to signal their quality. We would expect firms with international activities to be
more subject to the discipline resulting from cross-listing their shares in the U.S. For instance, it
would be easier for minority shareholders to recover damages from a firm with U.S. assets than
from one that has only domestic assets.6 Further, firms with a larger presence in foreign product
markets may be expected to pursue cross-listings as a complement to an overall strategy of
internationalization (Pagano et al., 2002). As an indicator for the degree of international orientation,
we include the ratio of foreign sales to total sales (“Foreign sales”).7 Finally, we include an
indicator variable that equals one if the state is a firm’s largest shareholder (“Government owned”)
under the premise that governments might take into account different tradeoffs than private
controlling shareholders. For instance, the government might be privatizing to raise funds, in which
6

See Siegel (2004).
Similar to Pagano et al. (2002), we find that foreign sales data is missing for a significant fraction of the
sample firms. Therefore, we follow the procedure they outline to impute missing values via regressions that
generate predicted values of foreign sales – see footnote 22 on page 2678 in Pagano et al. for further details.
For robustness, we repeat all of our regressions using the actual foreign sales data on a necessarily smaller
sample. None of the results reported in the paper are affected.
7

9

case it might choose to cross-list in more liquid markets in order to increase the proceeds from the
sale of shares.8
We also employ a number of country-level control variables. As noted earlier, controlling
shareholders receive fewer private benefits in countries with better protection of investor rights.
Therefore, we include proxies for investor protection in a firm’s home country. From La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) (hereafter, LLSV), we use legal origin, the index of
anti-director rights, and the index of judicial efficiency. LLSV (1998) assign each country to one of
two legal traditions, Civil law or Common law. The anti-director rights index includes six different
shareholder rights. The index is constructed by giving one point for each right so that it takes a
value from 0 to 6, where a higher score indicates better shareholder protection. We also include the
index of judicial efficiency which produces a rating of the “efficiency and integrity of the legal
environment as it affects business, particular foreign firms.” It takes a value from 0 to 10 and
judicial efficiency is increasing in the score. We also create a variable “Anti-director * Judicial
Efficiency” which is intended to capture both protection and enforcement. A similar variable has
been used earlier in the literature, for instance by Johnson, Boone, Breach, and Friedman (2000).
Finally, we also control for financial development and overall economic development. As a
proxy for the level of financial development, we use the ratio of the total capitalization of domestic
listed firms to GDP (“Stock market cap / GDP”). To control for the level of economic development,
we use the log of GNP per capita. We use the historical three-year stock market correlation (weekly
dollar-denominated returns) with the U.S. market index as a proxy for familiarity.

8

We do not consider separately privatized firms. Our dataset has 28 privatized firms. Eight firms privatize
and list from 1995 to 2001. The Government owned dummy variable is equal to one for these firms.

10

2.3. Summary statistics
We summarize basic firm-level governance statistics for each dataset in Table 1 and break these
out based on whether or not the firm has an exchange listing in the U.S. as of year-end 1997.9 Panel
A shows that in the Controlling Blockholder dataset, 130 firms are listed on a U.S. exchange, while
3,932 firms are not. Overall, we find that firms listed in the U.S. are significantly larger, as
measured by total assets (in $ billions), than firms that are not listed (p-value of the t-test of
equality of means across the two subsamples is less than 0.01). Panel A also shows that mean
control rights held by the controlling blockholder are higher for firms that are not listed on a U.S.
exchange (p-value equals 0.04), consistent with the idea that higher private benefits of control are
associated with a lower likelihood to list on an exchange that requires more disclosure and subjects
firms to greater potential monitoring. At the same time, mean cash flow rights held by the
controlling blockholder are not significantly higher for the firms that are not listed (p-value equals
0.11). Tests on differences between the medians of these variables for listed and non-listed
subsamples show virtually identical significance levels.
Another primary variable of interest in the Controlling Blockholder dataset is the separation of
control and cash flow rights held by the largest blockholder. Theoretically, Bebchuk, Kraakman,
and Triantis (2000) show that agency costs of controlling shareholders are higher when there is a
separation of control rights and cash flow rights. Empirically, Claessens et al. (2002) find that
separation of control rights and cash flow rights is associated with higher expected minority
shareholder expropriation. To measure the “wedge” between control rights and cash flow rights, we
use the percentage point difference in the control rights and cash flow rights held by the largest
9

In terms of coverage, the ownership datasets that we use are very comprehensive when compared to datasets
used in other studies. However, we recognize that we do not have complete coverage for all firms that have
financial data available in Worldscope, which leads to two potential concerns. First, in terms of firm
characteristics, the firms for which we have ownership data may be different from firms for which we do not
have ownership data. Lins (2003) addresses this issue and finds no significant differences between the two
groups of firms. Second, requiring ownership data may have an impact on the fraction of firms that have a
U.S. exchange listing in our study. To address this concern, we compare the dataset that is constrained to
include ownership data to one that is not constrained. The mean (median) fraction of firms listed in the U.S. is
similar in both samples and the differences across countries are not significant.

11

blockholder, which is also used by Claessens et al. (2002). Such a measure directly assesses the
percentage of control rights held for which there are no corresponding cash flow consequences of
exercising the control.
In Panel A, we report the frequency with which the controlling blockholder’s control rights
exceed its cash flow rights (for the sake of brevity, we do not report mean and median percentage
point values for this separation, conditional upon such a separation being present). We find that a
separation between control and cash flow rights occurs with greater frequency in firms that are not
listed in the U.S. (p-value equals 0.05). To the extent that this separation proxies for an enhanced
potential to consume private benefits of control, it is consistent with the idea that a significant
number of controlling shareholders do not want to reduce their ability to extract private benefits of
control by listing. Finally, the last column for each type of firm listed in Panel A also reports the
percentage of firms with a secondary blockholder that holds at least 10 percent of a firm’s total
control rights. There is no statistically significant difference in the frequency of the presence of a
secondary blockholder between cross-listed and non-cross-listed firms (p-value equals 0.46).
In Panel B of Table 1, we report summary statistics for the Family/Management Control
dataset. Similar to the Controlling Blockholder dataset, relatively few firms have a U.S. exchange
listing (154 firms have a listing compared to 4,118 firms that do not), and those that are listed are
much larger in size than those that are not (p-value less than 0.01). The panel also shows that mean
and median levels of family/management control rights are significantly higher for firms that are
not listed in the U.S. (30 percent versus 12 percent, p-value of difference is 0.00). Similarly, the
frequency with which the family/management group holds the most control rights is significantly
higher for firms that are not listed in the U.S. (p-value less than 0.01).
Taken together, the summary statistics reported in Table 1 are consistent with our hypotheses
that when controlling shareholders have more control rights and when there is a separation between
control rights and cash flow rights, they are reluctant to subject themselves to the higher levels of

12

disclosure and monitoring associated with a U.S. listing. In the next section, we examine these
hypotheses in more detail.

3. The effect of ownership and control on the cross-listing decision.
In this section, we examine whether ownership of cash flow rights and control rights are related
to firms’ decisions to list in the U.S., after controlling for other firm-level variables as well as
country-level variables. We first analyze the role of control rights held by the controlling
blockholder or the top managers and their families in Tables 2 and 3. In Table 4, we examine
whether firms in which the controlling blockholder has more control rights than cash flow rights are
less likely to be listed on a U.S. exchange.
To determine the relation between the control rights of blockholders and the probability of
having a U.S. listing, we estimate a series of cross-sectional logistic regressions where the
dependent variable, “Exchange”, is an indicator variable that equals one if a firm is cross-listed on
the Amex, Nasdaq, or the NYSE. The firm and country characteristics are measured as of the end of
1997. As a robustness check, we repeat all of the regressions using data for 1996, and find similar
results. In all models, we report marginal effects evaluated at the means of the independent
variables (marginal effects for the intercept are not computed or reported). Marginal effects for
dummy variables are calculated as the discrete change in the expected value of the dependent
variable as the dummy variable changes from a value of zero to one. The standard errors are
computed assuming that observations are independent across countries, but not within countries.
Our prediction is that the probability that a firm is listed in the U.S. is negatively related to the
control rights held by the controlling blockholder. Since we estimate a cross-sectional regression,
we do not consider the listing decision directly. The control rights held by the controlling
blockholder we observe for listed firms are measured when the firm is already listed. Consequently,
it is possible that holdings of control rights of controlling blockholders decreased after the listing.

13

The benefit of estimating cross-sectional regressions is that we can use all listed firms to estimate
the relation between control rights of controlling blockholders and the listing status of a firm. In
contrast, in regressions that examine the listing decision directly, we can use only firms that list
after we observe ownership of control rights, which restricts the number of listed firms that we can
include.
In Table 2, we use the Controlling Blockholder dataset. In model (1), we regress the dummy
variable, Exchange, on the percentage of voting rights held by the controlling blockholder (“Control
rights”). The marginal effect for control rights is -0.0621 with a t-statistic of -2.03. Therefore, a one
percentage point increase in the control rights held by the controlling blockholder decreases the
probability of listing in the U.S. by 6.21 percent. Model (1) does not, however, control for other
known determinants of a firm’s listing status.
In model (2), we add a dummy variable for whether the firm has a second blockholder who
holds at least 10 percent of control rights and control for firm characteristics. The marginal effect
for the control rights of the largest blockholder continues to be negative and statistically significant
(-0.0104, t-statistic = -2.99). The marginal effect on the dummy variable for the second blockholder
is positive, but not significant. In addition, we find that many of the firm-level characteristics are
important in explaining whether a firm has a listing in the U.S. For example, both Sales growth and
Global industry q are positive and Global industry q is statistically significant. Sales growth is
significant in all other models when we control for various country characteristics, though its
economic importance is smaller than that of the control rights variable: a one percent increase in
sales growth is associated with a 0.47 percent increase in the likelihood of listing.10 The marginal
effect on firm size (Log assets) is also positive and statistically significant, which is consistent with
the hypothesis that larger firms are more likely to find the costs lower and the benefits larger for
10

It is difficult to compare the economic significance directly from the marginal effects without some sense
of the unconditional distributional properties of the control variable. The median sales growth for the firms in
our sample is 4.09 percent with an interquartile range of -1.7 percent to 12.5 percent. A one-percent change in
sales growth is an economically large change spanning a difference of over 250 firms of our sample of 4,062.

14

cross-listing. Finally, firms with a more international orientation, as proxied by Foreign sales, are
more likely to have a cross-listing; the economic importance of this relationship is strong with a one
percent increase in foreign sales associated with approximately a one percent increase in listing
likelihood.11 Leverage, ROA, and the dummy variable for Government ownership are not
significant. With all of these additional variables, the pseudo-R-squared of the logistic regressions
increases sharply to 39 percent.
In models (3) through (6) of Table 2, we add country-level variables as additional control
variables. Model (7) replaces the country-level variables with individual country dummy variables.
In every specification, the marginal effect on control rights remains negative and significant. Firmlevel characteristics that were significant in model (2) remain statistically significant in models (3)
through (7). Further, the marginal effect for sales growth is always positive and significant, though
it is modest in magnitude. In some specifications, the dummy variable for the existence of a second
large blockholder is positive and significant. Although the results show that country-level
characteristics do not subsume the effect of control rights in explaining the cross-listing status of a
firm, there is some attenuation in the magnitude of the effect on control rights. Moreover, a number
of the country-level control variables are significant. Consistent with our predictions, firms from
Civil law countries and firms from countries that have lower shareholder protections (a lower Antidirector rights index) are less likely to list in the U.S. (Doidge et al., 2004). Further, while the
efficiency of the judicial system alone is not significantly related to the incidence of cross-listing,
the interaction of anti-director and efficiency of the judicial system is positive and statistically
significant. Therefore, cross-listings are more prevalent in countries where there exist both laws on
the books and an efficient judicial system, which is consistent with the hypothesis that controlling

11

The median level of foreign sales is 10.7 percent with an interquartile range of 0 percent to 40.8 percent, so
a one-percent change in foreign sales is a smaller economic event that is much more likely to occur than a
similar change in sales growth.

15

blockholders are more likely to choose a U.S. listing if the value of private benefits is lower in their
home country, keeping other firm characteristics the same.
While Stock market capitalization to GDP is not significant, we find that the Log of GNP has a
significantly negative effect. This suggests that firms from countries with lower economic
development are more likely to have a cross-listing. We also include the correlation of the country’s
market with the U.S. market as an explanatory variable. Stocks from countries that have a low
correlation with the U.S. would offer greater diversification benefits to U.S. investors, so that a firm
might benefit more from listing such a stock. We find that the coefficient on Correlation is positive
and significant, which is inconsistent with this view. This is not surprising in light of the findings of
Sarkissian and Schill (2004). They find that proximity is an important determinant of listing, but
diversification benefits, as measured by market return correlations, are not. Highly correlated
markets are often closer to each other geographically.
Finally, model (7) indicates that the coefficient on Control rights remains negative and
significant when the country characteristics are controlled for using country dummy variables.
Overall, the evidence in Table 2 is consistent with our hypothesis that firms in which controlling
blockholders have more control rights are less likely to list in the U.S.
As mentioned previously, one drawback of the Controlling Blockholder dataset is that the
largest blockholder is not always directly associated with the firm’s top management group or its
controlling family. In Table 3, we use the Family/Management Control dataset to examine the
effect of the management group and its family on the incidence of cross-listing. This dataset also
allows us to examine a broader set of firms from both emerging and developed markets. The tests
reported in Table 3 follow closely those reported in Table 2, but the variable of interest is the
percentage of voting rights held by the management group or controlling family (“Family/Mgmt
Control Rights”).

16

Overall, the results in Table 3 show that the higher the control rights held by the management
group and its family, the less likely it is that the firm is listed. For example, model (1) shows that
the marginal effect for Family/Mgmt Control rights is negative and significant (-0.066, t-statistic = 2.41), which implies that a one percentage point increase in the control rights held by the
family/management group decreases the probability of listing in the U.S. by 6.60 percent. When
firm-level characteristics such as growth opportunities, firm size, international orientation, and
profitability are added in model (2), we continue to find that the percent of control rights held by
the management group and its family is negatively related to the incidence of cross-listing in the
U.S. When country-level characteristics are added in models (3) through (7), we again see that the
coefficient on Family/Mgmt Control rights is negative, and, in four of the five specifications,
statistically significant. Again, we find that firms from countries with weak investor protection are
less likely to list. Finally, when we replace country-level characteristics with individual country
indicator variables, the marginal effect for Family/Mgmt Control rights is negative and significant
(-0.0035, t-statistic = -1.68).
The results contained in Tables 2 and 3 are supportive of our hypothesis that when the control
rights held by blockholders are higher, firms are less likely to list in the U.S. We next turn to tests
that use the Controlling Blockholder dataset to capture both the capability for expropriation as well
as the incentives to avoid expropriation.
Table 4 reports tests in which we examine the incidence of cross-listing as a function of the
cash flow rights and of the difference between the control rights and cash flow rights (“Control –
Cash”) of the controlling blockholder. Model (1) reports that the marginal effects for both Cash
flow rights and Control – Cash are negative and significant. In terms of economic significance, a
one percentage point increase in Control – Cash decreases the probability of listing in the U.S. by
14.82 percent. Therefore, when the controlling blockholder bears less of the cash flow
consequences of his actions, the firm is even less likely to be listed. Note that when there is no

17

separation between control rights and cash flow rights, the controlling blockholder must own
substantial cash flow rights to exercise control. It is therefore possible that the negative coefficient
on Cash flow rights is explained by the fact that, in many firms, there is no difference between cash
flow rights and control rights, so that Cash flow rights proxies for the control exerted by the
controlling blockholder. Hence, as the controlling blockholder has more control rights, he is more
reluctant to give up some control by listing abroad. In the other models in Table 4, we follow our
previous analysis in Table 2 and perform a battery of tests that control for both firm-specific and
country-level characteristics. In every specification, the marginal effect for Control – Cash is
negative and significant. The impact of firm and country-level variables in models (2) – (7) is
similar to the results reported in Table 2 and we do not discuss it further here.
To summarize the results from Tables 2 through 4, we find that when the control rights held by
controlling shareholders are higher, firms are less likely to have a cross-listing in the U.S. This
finding is robust to alternative definitions of the controlling shareholders and to firm and countrylevel controls. In addition to the results with control rights, we find that when there is a larger
separation of control rights and cash flow rights, firms are less likely to be listed. Further, we
consistently find that firms with better growth opportunities, larger firms, firms with more
international activity, and firms from countries with better investor protection are more likely to be
listed in the U.S. Overall, the results are consistent with the hypothesis that firms in which
controlling shareholders have the capability and the incentives to expropriate minority shareholders
are less likely to subject themselves to the increased transparency and monitoring of a U.S. listing.
We should also note that the economic magnitudes of the marginal effects are sizeable. In the next
section, we estimate Cox models to investigate which characteristics help to predict firms’ listing
decisions.

18

4. Predicting firms’ listing decisions using Cox proportional hazard models.
In this section, we employ duration analysis using Cox (1972) proportional-hazard models to
investigate the factors that affect firms’ listing decisions. Specifically, we model the probability of
listing in year t, given that the firm has not yet listed, as a function of firm-level and country-level
variables. The logistic regressions in Section 3 are estimated for 1997. These previous models allow
us to study differences in the characteristics of firms that are listed in the U.S. and those that are not
listed in the U.S., at a particular point in time. The Cox models that we employ in this section allow
us to predict firms’ listing decisions in a panel setting, while allowing the independent variables to
change over time. Similar approaches are used in Pagano et al. (2002) and Claessens, Klingebiel,
and Schmukler (2003). As discussed earlier, the cost of this approach is a reduction in power since
the number of firms that list over the relevant period in our sample is 58 in the Controlling
Blockholder dataset and 67 in the Family/Management Control dataset.
The Cox proportional-hazard model estimates the probability that a firm that has not yet listed
in the U.S. will list in a given year. The hazard rate in the model is the instantaneous rate of listing
for firms that have not yet listed. The model assumes that the hazard rate for firm j, h(t|xj ), is a
function of the independent variables, xj and is written as,

(

)

h t x j = h0 ( t ) exp (x j β x ) ,
where βx, is a vector of coefficients to be estimated. The hazard function is composed of two
separate parts. The first part, h0(t), is called the baseline hazard. It is obtained by setting x equal to
zero so that the baseline hazard for firm j corresponds to the hazard rate with xj set to zero. The Cox
model is a semi-parametric model in that βx is estimated without specifying the baseline hazard;
that is, the model makes no assumptions about the nature or shape of the hazard function.12 The

12

The baseline hazard cancels out of the partial likelihood function. Note also that the intercept is subsumed
into the baseline hazard. Because the baseline hazard drops out, the Cox model has no intercept. If one
knows, or is willing to make assumptions about, the form of the baseline hazard, parametric hazard models
can be estimated. As a robustness check, we re-estimate all hazard models assuming an exponential
distribution, i.e., the baseline hazard is constant. None of the results we report are affected.

19

second part, exp(xj βx) is called the relative hazard, and is a function of explanatory variables. The
model is proportional in that the hazard is obtained by shifting the baseline hazard as the
explanatory variables change. For example, firm j’s hazard is a multiplicative transformation of
firm i’s hazard. Therefore, the model assumes that, whatever the shape of the baseline hazard, it is
the same for all firms.
In this “event time” experiment, we consider firms over the period from 1995 to 2001. In the
Controlling Blockholder dataset, there are 4,589 firms with complete data. Of these firms, 58 listed
on a U.S. exchange during this period. In the Family/Management Control dataset, there are 4,731
firms, of which 67 list during this period. Once a firm lists in the U.S., it is no longer used in the
model estimation. For example, if a firm lists in 1998, then it is included in the sample from 1995
through 1998 and is excluded in subsequent years. Although our ownership data is observed at only
one point in time, usually in 1995 or 1996, all other firm level variables are allowed to change each
year. As such, we are assuming that firms’ ownership structures are constant, at least until they list
in the U.S. The assumption that ownership structures are constant prior to listing is not overly
restrictive given the general discussion in Shleifer and Vishny (1997) that, in many countries,
firms’ controlling shareholders change little over time and the specific quote in La Porta et al.
(1999) that “ownership patterns tend to be relatively stable” (p. 475). Doidge (2004b) does show,
however, that some controlling shareholders significantly decrease their ownership stakes and/or
sell their control stakes after listing in the U.S. Because we exclude firms in the years after they
have listed in the U.S., our analysis is not affected by possible changes in ownership after firms list
in the U.S.
We use the same set of firm-level and country-level variables that we used in Section 3. The
difference in this section is that all firm-level variables are lagged by one year since we are trying to
explain why a firm with specific characteristics at the end of one year chooses to list in the next
year. For example, in 1996 we use 1995 values for sales growth, global industry q, total assets,

20

foreign sales, leverage, and ROA. The Cox model is estimated by maximizing the ‘partial’
likelihood function. We report the coefficients in exponentiated form. The advantage of
exponentiated coefficients is that they can be interpreted as the effect of a unit change in the
explanatory variable on the hazard. For example, an exponentiated coefficient of 1.2 (0.8) implies
that a one unit increase (decrease) in the explanatory variable increases (decreases) the hazard by 20
percent. The standard errors are adjusted for clustering across firms, so that we assume errors are
independent across firms, but not across time.
We begin by investigating the role of control rights on the listing decision. In Table 5, we
report results using the control rights of the controlling blockholder as an explanatory variable in
our model of the probability that a firm will list in the U.S. in a given year (the Controlling
Blockholder dataset). We report results using the control rights of the family/management group as
an explanatory variable in Table 6 (the Family/Management Control dataset).
In model (1) of Table 5, the only explanatory variable in the estimated Cox model of the listing
decision is the controlling blockholder’s control rights. The hazard ratio is 0.20 and is statistically
significant different from one (t-statistic = -2.19).13 A one unit increase in Control rights decreases
the relative hazard by 80 percent. When we add firm-level variables in model (2), the hazard ratio
increases to 0.28 and this coefficient is significant at the 10 percent level. The hazard ratio for the
second large blockholder dummy variable is greater than one and is significant. This is consistent
with the idea that the value of control is lower when there is a second large shareholder to monitor
the actions of the controlling blockholder. When control is less valuable, the cost to the controlling
shareholders of listing is lower and firms are more likely to list.
Our first proxy for growth opportunities, Sales growth, has a hazard ratio greater than one
(1.64), but is not significant. This weak finding may stem from its close correlation with other
growth proxies. If we exclude Global industry q and ROA – both of which are significant in all
13

The null hypothesis can be written as H0: exp(βx) = 1 since hazard ratios equal one when the coefficients
equal zero.

21

models – then Sales growth becomes statistically significant, and this is true for all models in this
table. The hazard ratio for our second proxy for growth opportunities, Global industry q, is greater
than one (3.65) and is significant. Therefore, the evidence is consistent with the argument that
higher growth opportunities increase the probability of listing. Large firms, those with more
international activity in terms of foreign sales, and more profitable firms are also more likely to list:
the hazard ratios for total assets (2.23), foreign sales (12.18), and ROA (1.02) are all greater than
one and are statistically significant. Contrary to what we might expect, but consistent with our logit
regression analysis in Tables 2 through 4, firms with higher leverage are not more likely to list.
Finally, whether or not a firm is controlled by the state does not have a material impact on the
listing decision.
In models (3) – (6) we add country-level variables to model (2).14 When we add country-level
variables, the hazard ratio on Control rights is still less than one, but becomes statistically
insignificant. At the same time, the hazard ratio on the dummy for a second blockholder remains
both greater than one and significant. The only country-level variable that is significant is the
correlation with the U.S. market. The investor protection variables, stock market capitalization to
GDP, and log of GNP per capita are not significant. This is a surprising contrast from our results in
the logistic regressions of Tables 3 and 4 in which correlation with the U.S. market was a weaker
factor compared to the investor protection variables and log of GNP per capita.
Why do country controls reduce the significance on control rights? Further investigation reveals
that it is the investor protection proxies (the civil law dummy and the anti-director rights variable)
that reduce the significance of Control rights. Given the findings of La Porta et al. (1999) that
14

We cannot control for country effects using country dummies in these models. Suppose that from 1995 to
1997, there are no cross-listed firms from a given country. The dummy variable for that country then
perfectly predicts the exchange listed dummy variable for those years. In 1998, if one firm lists, then the
dummy variable no longer perfectly predicts the exchange listed dummy and we could use the country
dummy. However, it does not make sense to estimate the model with no country dummy from 1995 to 1997
and then add one for 1998 to 2001. The other possibility is to estimate the model excluding the country
dummy for the entire sample period. The problem with such an approach is that we do not control for country
effects for that country.

22

investor protection and ownership concentration are related, this is not surprising. Finally, we note
that if we exclude Japan (see footnote 3 in Section 2), Control rights is always significant. Further,
the hazard ratio for the Civil law dummy is less than one and is significant, while the hazard ratio
for Anti-director is greater than one and is significant – firms from countries with weaker investor
protection are less likely to list in the U.S. Because Japan accounts for a large fraction of the sample
and very few firms from Japan are listed in the U.S., including or excluding Japan has an impact on
some of our conclusions.15
We next turn to the results using the control rights of the family/management group in Table 6.
As noted earlier, a potential advantage of this analysis is that the effect of control rights on crosslisting may be sharpest in firms for which we can be certain the controlling shareholder is part of
the management group or its family. Model (1) begins by including just the family/management
group’s control rights. The hazard ratio is 0.17 and is significant (t-statistic = -3.13). As we would
expect, an increase in control rights decreases the probability of listing. In model (2) we add firmlevel control variables. The hazard ratio for the Family/Management Control rights remains
significant and only increases slightly in magnitude to around 0.20. In addition, the hazard ratios for
sales growth, global industry q, assets, foreign sales, and ROA are all greater than one, as expected,
and are statistically significant. The only firm-level variable that is not significant is leverage, as
before in Table 5.
When we add country-level variables in models (3)-(6), none of the results in model (2) are
affected. The Civil law dummy and Anti-director variables have the expected signs, but are not
significant. As in Table 5, if we exclude Japan, the investor protection variables become significant
so that firms from countries with weaker investor protection are less likely to list. Stock market
capitalization to GDP is not significant. However, the hazard ratio for the log of GNP per capita is
less than one and is significant while that for the correlation with the U.S. market is greater than
15

When Japan is included, there are a total 4,589 firms of which 58 list over the sample period. When we
exclude Japan, there are a total of 3,713 firms, of which 54 list over the sample period.

23

one and is significant. Firms from less developed countries and firms from countries that are more
correlated with the U.S. markets are more likely to list in the U.S.
If the controlling blockholder has control of the firm, but owns very little of the cash flow
rights, it has few incentives to take any action to reduce expropriation from minority shareholders
and to increase the value of the firm’s equity. If the controlling blockholder holds a large cash-flow
stake in the firm, it bears a large fraction of the cost of expropriating minority shareholders.
Therefore, for a given cash flow stake, we expect that controlling blockholders who hold more
control rights relative to their cash flow rights are less likely to list in the U.S. We investigate this
hypothesis in Table 7 using the Controlling Blockholder dataset.
Model (1) includes the controlling blockholder’s cash flow rights and the difference between
the controlling blockholder’s control rights and its cash flow rights (“Control – Cash”). The hazard
ratio for Cash flow rights is less than one and is significant. The hazard ratio for Control – Cash is
less than one but is not significant. However, this specification does not control for other firm
characteristics. When we control for firm characteristics in model (2), we see that while the hazard
ratio for Cash flow rights is still less than one, it is no longer significant; however, the hazard ratio
for Control – Cash is 0.01 and becomes statistically significant (t-statistic = -2.43). A one unit
increase in Control – Cash decreases the hazard by 99 percent. In addition, the hazard for second
blockholder is greater than one and is statistically significant. This evidence is consistent with the
argument that controlling blockholders are less likely to list in the U.S. when their private benefits
are higher. The hazard ratio for Sales growth is greater than one, but is not significant (it is
significant if Global industry q and ROA are excluded). Our other proxy for growth opportunities,
Global industry q, is significant so that, once again, we see that firms with better growth
opportunities are more likely to list. In addition, larger firms, firms with more international activity,
and more profitable firms are more likely to list. The other firm-level variables, Leverage, and the
government ownership dummy do not have a significant impact on the listing decision.

24

In models (3) – (6) we again add country-level controls. The first thing to note is that none
of the firm-level variables are affected. Control – Cash and the second blockholder dummy remain
statistically significant in all specifications. As in Table 5, the investor protection proxies have the
correct sign, but are not statistically significant. However, if we exclude Japan (which, as
mentioned, accounts for a large fraction of the sample, but has very few listing firms) the investor
protection variables become significant. Stock market capitalization to GDP and log of GNP per
capita are not significant. As before, the correlation with the U.S. has a positive impact on the
probability of listing.
Finally, we investigate, but do not report, the possibility of a nonlinear impact on the
difference between control rights and cash flow rights on the listing decision. For example, small
differences may not have a major impact on incentives to cross-list in the U.S., but a larger
difference might. One simple nonlinear specification that we considered is the squared difference
between control rights and cash flow rights. However, for many firms the difference is zero, so that
the squared term is highly correlated with the linear term. Therefore, we estimate a model that is
piecewise linear in the difference between control rights and cash flow rights, allowing for one
change in the slope. Because choosing a point at which the slopes change is fairly arbitrary, we try
a number of different cutoff points. For example, when we use a cutoff at 5 percent with the full set
of control variables, the hazard ratio for Cash flow rights is 0.44, but is not significant.16 The hazard
ratio for Control – Cash from 0 to 5 percent is 0.42 and is not significant. The hazard ratio for
Control – Cash greater than 5 percent declines to 0.007 and is significant at the 10 percent level.
When we use a 10 percent cutoff, the hazard ratio for Control – Cash from zero to 10 percent is
0.31 and is not significant. The hazard ratio for Control – Cash greater than 10 percent is 0.001 and
is significant at the 10 percent level. Overall, the evidence suggests that the difference between

16

Recall from Table 1 that the Control – Cash difference is zero for the majority of the firms and that a 5
percent cutoff is almost associated with the 75th quantile of our sample of firms and it rises to a maximum
value of 34 percent.

25

control rights and cash flow rights has a nonlinear impact on firm’s listing decisions, but the exact
form of this nonlinear relationship is somewhat unclear.

5. Conclusions.
Recent research has shown that the private benefits of control are especially valuable in
countries with weak investor protection. A related stream of research finds that the decision to
cross-list in the U.S. is value enhancing and concludes that the cross-listing premium arises from
firms’ commitments to improved disclosure and corporate governance, as well as additional
scrutiny by various reputational intermediaries. However, despite the benefits of cross-listing, it is
well-known that many non-U.S. firms do not cross-list their shares in the U.S. One explanation is
that the controlling shareholders of firms that choose not to list have valuable private benefits that
they do not want to give up. We investigate and find evidence in support of this hypothesis in this
paper.
Using two separate databases of ownership structure for over 4,000 firms from 31 countries
around the world, we construct proxy measures of private benefits of control and find that, when
controlling shareholders have high levels of control and when their control rights exceed their cash
flow rights, their firms are less likely to list their shares in the U.S. Similarly, we find that firms
controlled by their top managers and their families are less likely to have a U.S listing. We also find
an important role for other firm-level variables, such as growth opportunities and size, as well
country-level variables, such as home country investor protections, in modeling the costs and
benefits of listing. We employ duration analysis using a Cox proportional-hazard model to show
that the probability of listing in a given year over the 1995 to 2001 period, conditional on not yet
having listed, is significantly lower when controlling shareholders have higher levels of control,
when their control rights exceed their cash flow rights, and when firms are controlled by their top
managers. Taken together, our results indicate that a desire to either consume private benefits of

26

control, or to retain the option to consume such benefits, deters the controlling shareholders of
many non-U.S. firms from listing in the U.S.

27

References
Bebchuk, L., R. Kraakman, and G. Triantis, 2000, Stock pyramids, cross-ownership, and dual class
equity, in R. Morck, ed., Concentrated Corporate Ownership (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, Ill.).
Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and R. Levine, 2001, A new database on the structure and
development of the financial sector, World Bank Economic Review.
Benos, E., and M. Weisbach, 2004, Private benefits and cross-listings in the United States,
Emerging Markets Review, forthcoming.
Claessens, S., S. Djankov, and L. Lang, 2000, The separation of ownership and control in East
Asian corporations, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 81-112.
Claessens, S., S. Djankov, J. Fan, and L. Lang, 2002, Disentangling the incentive and entrenchment
effects of large shareholdings, Journal of Finance 57, 2741-2771.
Claessens, S., D. Klingebiel and S. Schmukler, 2002, The future of stock exchanges in emerging
economies: Evolution and prospects, in eds: R. Litan and R. Herring, Brookings-Wharton
Papers on Financial Services.
Classens, S., D. Klingebiel and S. Schmukler, 2003, Accessing international equity markets: what
firms from which countries go abroad?, working paper, World Bank.
Coffee, Jr., J., 1999, The future as history: the prospects for global convergence in corporate
governance and its implications, Northwestern Law Review 93, 641-707.
Coffee, Jr., J., 2002, Racing towards the top?: the impact of cross-listings and stock market
competition on international corporate governance, Columbia Law Review 102, 17571831.
Cox, D.,1972, Regression models and life-tables (with discussion), Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society 34B, 187-220.
Doidge, C., 2004a, U.S. cross-listings and the private benefits of control: evidence from dual-class
firms, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 519-553.
Doidge, C., 2004b, Do changes in laws matter for ownership and control? Evidence from emerging
markets firms that list in the U.S., working paper, University of Toronto.
Doidge, C., G. A. Karolyi, and R. Stulz, 2004, Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S. worth
more?, Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.
Dyck, A., and L. Zingales, 2004, Private benefits of control: an international comparison, Journal of
Finance 59, 537-600.
Faccio, M., and L. Lang, 2002, The ultimate ownership of western European corporations, Journal
of Financial Economics 65, 365-395.

28

Foerster S., and G. A. Karolyi, 1999, The effects of market segmentation and investor recognition
on asset prices: evidence from foreign stocks listing in the U.S., Journal of Finance 54, 9811014.
Fan, J., and T. Wong, 2002, Corporate ownership structure and the informativeness of accounting
earnings in East Asia, Journal of Accounting and Economics 33, 401-425.
Hail, L., and C. Leuz, 2004, Cost of capital and cash flow effects of U.S. cross-listings, working
paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Johnson, S., P. Boone, A. Breach, and E. Friedman, 2000, Corporate governance in the Asian
financial crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 141-186.
Karolyi, G. A., 1998, Why do companies list abroad? A survey of the evidence and its managerial
implications, Financial Markets, Institutions, and Instruments Vol. 7, Blackwell Publishers,
Boston.
Karolyi, G. A., 2004, The world of cross-listings and cross-listings of the world: challenging
conventional wisdom, working paper, Ohio State University.
King, M., and D. Segal, 2004, International cross-listing, institutional investors, and the bonding
hypothesis, working paper, University of Toronto.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around the world,
Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, Law and finance, Journal of
Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
Lang, M., Lins, K., and Miller, D., 2003, ADRs, analysts, and accuracy: does cross-listing in the
U.S. improve a firm’s information environment and increase market value? Journal of
Accounting Research 41, 317-345.
Lins, K., 2003, Equity ownership and firm value in emerging markets, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 38, 159-184.
Lins, K., Strickland, D., and M. Zenner, 2005, Do non-U.S. firms issue equity on U.S. exchanges to
relax capital constraints?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
Miller, D., 1999, The market reaction to international cross-listing: evidence from depositary
receipts, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 103-123.
Nenova, T., 2003, The value of corporate voting rights and control: a cross-country analysis,
Journal of Financial Economics 68, 325-351.
Pagano, M., A. Roell, and J. Zechner, 2002, The geography of equity listing: why do companies list
abroad?, Journal of Finance, 2651-2694.

29

Reese, W., and M. Weisbach, Protection of minority shareholder interests, cross-listings in
the United States, and subsequent equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
2002, 65-104.
Sarkissian, S., and M. Schill, 2004, The overseas listing decision: new evidence of proximity
preference, Review of Financial Studies 17, 769-809.
Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of Finance 52, 737783
Siegel, J., 2004, Can foreign firms bond themselves effectively by renting U.S. securities laws?,
Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming
Stulz, R., 1999, Globalization of equity markets and the cost of capital, Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance 12, 8-25.

30

Austria
Belgium
Finland
France
Germany
Hong Kong
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Malaysia
Norway
Philippines
Portugal
Singapore
South Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
UK
Total
Mean
Median

Country

Panel A.

43
62
55
334
398
98
89
28
90
848
107
65
41
39
119
183
82
97
103
86
76
889
3932

N

Control
rights
0.56
0.38
0.31
0.50
0.55
0.35
0.37
0.21
0.48
0.10
0.34
0.31
0.29
0.41
0.31
0.20
0.35
0.26
0.42
0.23
0.39
0.20
0.34
0.35

Total
assets
0.45
1.78
0.71
1.07
1.10
0.56
0.44
0.22
2.39
1.92
0.45
0.34
0.19
0.38
0.34
0.91
1.16
0.77
0.83
0.53
0.37
0.32

0.78
0.55

Mean

0.29
0.29

CF
rights
0.48
0.35
0.26
0.49
0.49
0.30
0.30
0.17
0.38
0.07
0.27
0.25
0.26
0.40
0.24
0.17
0.32
0.20
0.30
0.18
0.37
0.18
0.34
0.33

Control
rights
0.64
0.38
0.28
0.50
0.53
0.33
0.34
0.15
0.49
0.10
0.32
0.28
0.27
0.47
0.31
0.22
0.33
0.23
0.45
0.23
0.42
0.16
0.27
0.25

CF
rights
0.50
0.35
0.22
0.50
0.50
0.28
0.28
0.14
0.40
0.03
0.25
0.21
0.24
0.41
0.22
0.16
0.25
0.15
0.23
0.17
0.36
0.14

Median

Not cross-listed

0.37
0.35

0.47
0.24
0.47
0.10
0.33
0.24
0.53
0.43
0.62
0.42
0.44
0.35
0.34
0.13
0.66
0.25
0.23
0.32
0.54
0.56
0.13
0.28

CR>CF

31

0.42
0.41

0.21
0.29
0.49
0.34
0.36
0.26
0.49
0.32
0.42
0.08
0.61
0.51
0.66
0.41
0.62
0.20
0.40
0.48
0.33
0.50
0.88
0.36

2nd BH

Frequency of

0
1
2
15
6
1
2
4
5
13
0
5
1
2
1
3
3
8
3
0
0
55
130

N

12.56
8.54

Total
assets
.
10.87
4.08
16.03
40.70
6.15
2.53
2.90
27.72
33.70
.
4.69
4.86
9.11
0.63
13.65
28.38
8.13
2.95
.
.
8.94

Controlling Blockholder Dataset

0.25
0.24

Control
rights
.
0.31
0.00
0.24
0.24
0.18
0.56
0.10
0.43
0.08
.
0.25
0.33
0.41
0.41
0.32
0.14
0.12
0.20
.
.
0.16

0.22
0.21

CF
rights
.
0.15
0.00
0.21
0.22
0.18
0.56
0.09
0.33
0.06
.
0.23
0.33
0.41
0.41
0.32
0.14
0.05
0.20
.
.
0.15

Mean

0.23
0.22

Control
rights
.
0.31
0.00
0.15
0.24
0.18
0.56
0.10
0.31
0.00
.
0.20
0.33
0.41
0.41
0.33
0.00
0.12
0.28
.
.
0.13

0.20
0.18

CF
rights
.
0.15
0.00
0.10
0.17
0.18
0.56
0.07
0.18
0.00
.
0.20
0.33
0.41
0.41
0.33
0.00
0.03
0.28
.
.
0.11

Median

Cross-listed

0.22
0.20

.
1.00
0.00
0.33
0.17
0.00
0.00
0.25
0.60
0.23
.
0.40
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.38
0.33
.
.
0.24

CR>CF

0.35
0.27

.
1.00
0.00
0.27
0.50
0.00
0.00
0.25
0.40
0.08
.
0.40
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.33
0.00
0.13
0.67
.
.
0.27

2nd BH

Frequency of

Table 1. Summary statistics for 1997.
Summary statistics are computed as of December 31, 1997 for firms that are not cross-listed on a U.S. exchange and for firms that are cross-listed on a U.S.
exchange. Data sources for information on U.S. listings and ownership is described in Section 2. Firms that list via Rule 144a and Level 1 ADRs are excluded
and firms with assets < $10 million are excluded. N denotes the number of firms. Total assets ($ billions) is the average for firm assets from Worldscope. Panel A
presents results using the Controlling Blockholder dataset. Control rights (CF rights) is equal to the voting rights (cash flow rights) held by the controlling
blockholder. 2nd BH equals one if there is another blockholder with at least 10% of the voting rights. Panel B presents results for the Family/Management Control
dataset. Family/Mgmt control rights are the voting rights held by the management group or controlling family.

Argentina
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Chile
Czech
Finland
France
Germany
Hong Kong
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Malaysia
Norway
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Singapore
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
UK
Total
Mean
Median

Country

Panel B.

Table 1, continued.

2
43
62
17
9
7
55
335
402
114
46
28
4
90
848
199
68
2
22
40
111
55
141
82
5
97
103
101
125
16
889
4118

N
0.00
0.44
0.37
0.14
0.50
0.28
0.33
0.50
0.54
0.41
0.38
0.12
0.26
0.46
0.03
0.30
0.25
0.25
0.48
0.39
0.34
0.45
0.17
0.32
0.18
0.25
0.40
0.18
0.21
0.20
0.16
0.30
0.30

0.76
0.53

Mean

1.21
0.45
1.78
1.43
1.17
0.14
0.71
1.07
1.10
0.53
0.28
0.22
1.65
2.39
1.92
0.39
0.33
0.32
0.17
0.38
0.31
0.59
1.01
1.16
0.07
0.77
0.83
0.42
0.25
0.23
0.32

Total assets

0.29
0.25

0.00
0.60
0.39
0.00
0.56
0.20
0.30
0.52
0.59
0.47
0.46
0.00
0.25
0.52
0.00
0.31
0.23
0.25
0.52
0.48
0.35
0.54
0.16
0.19
0.14
0.23
0.45
0.14
0.18
0.00
0.11

Median

Family/Mgmt control rights

Not cross-listed

32

0.62
0.67

Family/Mgmt
largest BH
0.00
0.65
0.74
0.29
0.89
0.71
0.65
0.82
0.82
0.81
0.65
0.25
0.50
0.80
0.15
0.70
0.59
0.50
0.82
0.80
0.67
0.73
0.76
0.57
0.80
0.59
0.70
0.83
0.54
0.31
0.47
4
.
1
1
5
.
2
15
6
2
2
4
6
5
13
.
5
2
1
2
1
4
3
2
.
8
3
2
.
.
55
154

N

9.79
6.17

6.69
.
10.87
7.82
6.17
.
4.08
16.03
40.70
3.21
2.53
2.90
1.05
27.72
33.70
.
4.69
1.82
4.86
9.11
0.63
1.65
13.65
22.47
.
8.13
2.95
2.26
.
.
8.94

Total assets

Family/Management Control Dataset

0.12
0.05

0.00
.
0.00
0.00
0.20
.
0.00
0.18
0.03
0.20
0.00
0.05
0.35
0.28
0.02
.
0.22
0.00
0.23
0.00
0.58
0.00
0.06
0.00
.
0.03
0.36
0.08
.
.
0.14

Mean

0.11
0.00

0.00
.
0.00
0.00
0.20
.
0.00
0.10
0.00
0.20
0.00
0.00
0.47
0.28
0.00
.
0.20
0.00
0.23
0.00
0.58
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
0.00
0.51
0.08
.
.
0.00

Median

Family/Mgmt control rights

Cross-listed

0.28
0.17

Family/Mgmt
largest BH
0.00
.
0.00
0.00
0.60
.
0.00
0.53
0.17
0.50
0.00
0.25
0.67
0.60
0.15
.
0.60
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.33
0.00
.
0.13
0.67
0.50
.
.
0.35

Table 2. Cross-sectional logits: controlling blockholder’s control rights.
The logit regressions estimate the probability that a firm has a level 2 or level 3 ADR on December 31, 1997.
The table reports marginal effects evaluated at the means of the independent variables and t-statistics are in
parentheses. Marginal effects for dummy variables are calculated as the discrete change in the expected value of
the dependent variable as the dummy variable changes from zero to one. Data sources for information on U.S.
listings and ownership are described in Section 2. Firms that list via Rule 144a and Level 1 ADRs are excluded
and firms with assets < $10 million are excluded. Control rights is equal to the voting rights held by the
controlling shareholder. Second blockholder equals one if there is another blockholder with at least 10% of the
voting rights. Government owned equals one if the state is the controlling shareholder. All accounting data is
from Worldscope. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth. Global industry q is the firm’s
median global industry q. Total assets are in $ thousands. Foreign sales is the percentage of foreign sales to total
sales. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets. Civil law, anti-director, and efficiency of judicial are from
LLSV (1998). Log of GNP per capita ($) is from the World Bank WDI Database. Stock market capitalization to
GDP is from Beck et al. (2001). Correlation with U.S. market is calculated using weekly data over the previous
three years: it is the correlation of the Datastream local stock market index returns (in $) with the U.S. stock
market index returns. Pseudo-R2 is a goodness-of-fit measure for binary choice models based on the difference
between unrestricted and restricted likelihood functions. The standard errors are computed assuming
observations are independent across countries, but not within countries. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.
Control rights

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.0621
-(2.03)**

-0.0104
-(2.99)***
0.0022
(1.32)
0.0047
(1.19)
0.0117
(3.65)***
0.0053
(5.60)***
0.0127
(4.12)***
-0.0050
-(1.30)
0.0002
(1.18)
0.0018
(0.88)

-0.0070
-(2.46)**
0.0010
(0.76)
0.0035
(2.34)**
0.0092
(3.89)***
0.0043
(5.84)***
0.0089
(4.72)***
-0.0025
-(0.51)
0.0000
(0.21)
0.0018
(0.85)
-0.0110
-(2.35)**

-0.0059
-(2.34)**
0.0018
(1.95)*
0.0039
(2.99)***
0.0078
(2.74)***
0.0040
(4.09)***
0.0092
(4.20)***
-0.0036
-(0.83)
0.0000
(0.14)
0.0021
(1.09)

-0.0090
-(3.26)***
0.0011
(0.72)
0.0038
(2.07)**
0.0104
(3.07)***
0.0047
(4.30)***
0.0097
(4.02)***
-0.0029
-(0.53)
0.0000
(0.16)
0.0014
(0.58)

-0.0053
-(2.05)**
0.0018
(1.88)*
0.0038
(2.81)***
0.0077
(2.67)***
0.0040
(3.98)***
0.0091
(3.99)***
-0.0038
-(0.89)
0.0000
(0.14)
0.0021
(1.07)

-0.0040
-(2.21)**
0.0013
(2.33)**
0.0021
(1.92)*
0.0063
(3.97)***
0.0032
(6.93)***
0.0054
(4.09)***
-0.0025
-(0.58)
0.0000
(0.14)
0.0020
(1.22)

yes
4062
0.48

2nd blockholder
Sales growth
Global industry q
Log assets
Foreign sales
Leverage
ROA
Government owned
Civil law
Anti-director

0.0021
(2.58)***

Efficiency of judicial

0.0008
(0.61)

Anti-director*Eff. of judicial
Stock market cap / GDP

no

no

-0.0023
-(1.24)
-0.002
-(2.01)**
0.0122
(1.66)*
no

4062
0.02

4062
0.39

4062
0.45

Log of GNP per capita
Correlation with U.S. market
Country dummies
Number of observations
Pseudo R2

33

-0.0013
(0.74)
-0.0033
-(5.07)***
0.0153
(1.95)*
no

0.0011
(0.53)
-0.0048
-(1.99)**
0.0194
(1.53)
no

0.0002
(2.80)***
-0.0021
-(1.05)
-0.0041
-(5.70)***
0.0152
(2.08)**
no

4062
0.45

4062
0.43

4062
0.45

Table 3. Cross-sectional logits: family/management control rights.
The logit regressions estimate the probability that a firm has a level 2 or level 3 ADR on December 31, 1997.
The table reports marginal effects evaluated at the means of the independent variables and t-statistics are in
parentheses. Data sources for information on U.S. listings and ownership are described in Section 2. Firms that
list via Rule 144a and Level 1 ADRs are excluded and firms with assets < $10 million are excluded.
Family/Mgmt control rights is the fraction of voting rights held by the management group or controlling family.
All accounting data is from Worldscope. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth. Global
industry q is the firm’s median global industry q. Total assets are in $ thousands. Foreign sales is the percentage
of foreign sales to total sales. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets. Civil law, anti-director, and
efficiency of judicial are from LLSV (1998). Log of GNP per capita ($) is from the World Bank WDI Database.
Stock market capitalization to GDP is from Beck et al. (2001). Correlation with the U.S. market is calculated
using weekly data over the previous three years: it is the correlation of the Datastream local stock market index
returns (in $) with the U.S. stock market index returns. Pseudo-R2 is a goodness-of-fit measure for binary choice
models based on the difference between unrestricted and restricted likelihood functions. The standard errors are
computed assuming observations are independent across countries, but not within countries. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.
Family/Mgmt control rights

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.0660
-(2.41)**

-0.0099
-(2.73)***
0.0057
(1.11)
0.0168
(4.14)***
0.0073
(6.79)***
0.0159
(4.30)***
-0.0076
-(1.50)
0.0003
(1.63)

-0.0071
-(2.01)**
0.0043
(1.66)*
0.0134
(4.07)***
0.0058
(4.86)***
0.0120
(3.80)***
-0.0044
-(0.74)
0.0001
(0.54)
-0.0124
-(1.82)*

-0.0061
-(1.83)*
0.0051
(2.39)**
0.0115
(2.91)***
0.0053
(3.78)***
0.0132
(3.22)***
-0.0048
-(0.88)
0.0000
(0.27)

-0.0083
-(2.47)**
0.0042
(1.48)
0.0146
(3.44)***
0.0060
(4.28)***
0.0126
(3.45)***
-0.0041
-(0.64)
0.0001
(0.37)

-0.0050
-(1.49)
0.0048
(2.30)**
0.0113
(2.84)***
0.0052
(3.75)***
0.0126
(3.20)***
-0.0057
-(1.07)
0.0000
(0.30)

-0.0035
-(1.68)*
0.0030
(2.39)**
0.0069
(3.92)***
0.0035
(7.38)***
0.0065
(3.86)***
-0.0033
-(0.73)
0.0000
(0.07)

yes
4272
0.48

Sales growth
Global industry q
Log assets
Foreign sales
Leverage
ROA
Civil law
Anti-director

0.0029
(2.51)**

Efficiency of judicial

0.0021
(1.19)

Anti-director*Eff. of judicial
Stock market cap / GDP

no

no

-0.0039
-(1.20)
-0.0045
-(3.40)***
0.0180
(1.89)*
no

4272
0.03

4272
0.35

4272
0.42

Log of GNP per capita
Correlation with U.S. market
Country dummies
Number of observations
Pseudo R2

34

-0.0030
-(1.17)
-0.0056
-(3.85)***
0.0207
(2.15)**
no

-0.0011
-(0.38)
-0.0095
-(2.33)**
0.0269
(1.81)*
no

0.0003
(2.61)***
-0.0044
-(1.43)
-0.0072
-(3.98)***
0.0204
(2.41)**
no

4272
0.42

4272
0.40

4272
0.42

Table 4. Cross-sectional logits: difference between controlling blockholder’s control and cash flow rights.
The logit regressions estimate the probability that a firm has a level 2 or level 3 ADR on December 31, 1997.
The table reports marginal effects evaluated at the means of the independent variables and t-statistics are in
parentheses. Marginal effects for dummy variables are calculated as the discrete change in the expected value of
the dependent variable as the dummy variable changes from zero to one. Data sources for information on U.S.
listings and ownership are described in Section 2. Firms that list via Rule 144a and Level 1 ADRs are excluded
and firms with assets < $10 million are excluded. Cash flow (control) rights is equal to the fraction of cash flow
(voting) rights held by the controlling shareholder. Control – Cash is control rights minus cash flow rights.
Second blockholder equals one if there is another blockholder with at least 10% of the voting rights.
Government owned equals one if the state is the controlling shareholder. All accounting data is from
Worldscope. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth. Global industry q is the firm’s median
global industry q. Total assets are in $ thousands. Foreign sales is the percentage of foreign sales to total sales.
Leverage is total debt divided by total assets. Civil law, anti-director, and efficiency of judicial are from LLSV
(1998). Log of GNP per capita ($) is from the World Bank WDI Database. Stock market capitalization to GDP
is from Beck et al. (2001). Correlation with the U.S. market is calculated using weekly data over the previous
three years: it is the correlation of the Datastream local stock market index returns (in $) with the U.S. stock
market index returns. Pseudo-R2 is a goodness-of-fit measure for binary choice models based on the difference
between unrestricted and restricted likelihood functions. The standard errors are computed assuming
observations are independent across countries, but not within countries. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.
Cash flow rights
Control – Cash
2nd blockholder

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.0554
-(1.83)*
-0.1482
-(2.64)***

-0.0082
-(2.58)**
-0.0327
-(2.96)***
0.0022
(1.63)
0.0045
(1.19)
0.0109
(3.43)***
0.0051
(5.45)***
0.0125
(4.11)***
-0.0051
-(1.38)
0.0002
(1.24)
0.0011
(0.72)

-0.0060
-(1.98)**
-0.0198
-(2.49)**
0.0011
(0.94)
0.0035
(2.48)**
0.0087
(3.48)***
0.0042
(5.55)***
0.0089
(4.73)***
-0.0028
-(0.59)
0.0000
(0.26)
0.0012
(0.76)
-0.0065
-(3.36)***

-0.0055
-(2.01)**
-0.0145
-(1.71)*
0.0017
(2.09)**
0.0039
(3.14)***
0.0076
(2.73)***
0.0040
(4.11)***
0.0093
(4.26)***
-0.0036
-(0.84)
0.0000
(0.16)
0.0015
(1.09)

-0.0071
-(2.28)**
-0.0262
-(2.89)***
0.0012
(0.91)
0.0038
(2.31)**
0.0096
(2.94)***
0.0046
(4.28)***
0.0096
(4.21)***
-0.0032
-(0.63)
0.0000
(0.18)
0.0008
(0.41)

-0.0048
-(1.78)*
-0.0147
-(1.67)*
0.0017
(2.06)**
0.0038
(3.00)***
0.0076
(2.66)***
0.0040
(4.02)***
0.0092
(4.08)***
-0.0039
-(0.91)
0.0000
(0.17)
0.0014
(1.04)

-0.0034
-(1.71)*
-0.0132
-(2.39)**
0.0012
(2.68)***
0.0020
(1.76)*
0.0061
(3.80)***
0.0032
(6.74)***
0.0054
(4.04)***
-0.0025
-(0.59)
0.0000
(0.12)
0.0012
(1.15)

yes
4062
0.48

Sales growth
Global industry q
Log assets
Foreign sales
Leverage
ROA
Government owned
Civil law
Anti-director
Efficiency of judicial

0.0019
(2.33)**

Anti-director*Eff. of judicial
Stock market cap / GDP

no

no

-0.0021
-(1.15)
-0.0021
-(2.21)**
0.0108
(1.41)
no

4062
0.03

4062
0.40

4062
0.45

Log of GNP per capita
Correlation with U.S. market
Country dummies
Number of observations
Pseudo R2

35

0.0008
(0.66)

-0.0011
-(0.60)
-0.0033
-(5.10)***
0.0145
(1.81)*
no

0.0009
(0.49)
-0.0048
-(2.12)**
0.0170
(1.47)
no

0.0002
(2.48)**
-0.0018
-(0.90)
-0.004
-(5.57)***
0.0143
(1.88)*
no

4062
0.45

4062
0.43

4062
0.45

Table 5. Cox models: controlling blockholder’s control rights.
The Cox models estimate the probability of listing in year t, given that the firm has not listed yet. The sample
includes observations on the dependent variable from 1995 to 2001. Data sources for information on U.S.
listings and ownership are described in Section 2. Firms that list via Rule 144a and Level 1 ADRs are excluded
and firms with assets < $10 million are excluded. The table presents results using the Controlling Blockholder
dataset. Control rights is equal to the fraction of voting rights held by the controlling shareholder. Second
blockholder equals one if there is another blockholder with at least 10% of the voting rights. Government
owned equals one if the state is the controlling shareholder. All accounting data is from Worldscope. Sales
growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth. Global industry q is the firm’s median global industry q.
Total assets are in $ millions. Foreign sales is the percentage of sales that are foreign. Leverage is total debt
divided by total assets. Civil law, anti-director, and efficiency of judicial are from LLSV (1998). Log of GNP
per capita ($) is from the World Bank WDI Database. Stock market capitalization to GDP is from Beck et al.
(2001). Correlation with the U.S. market is calculated using weekly data over the previous three years: it is the
correlation of the Datastream local stock market index returns (in $) with the U.S. stock market index returns.
The table reports hazard ratios (i.e., exp(βx), not βx). The model does not estimate a constant. The standard
errors are adjusted for clustering on firms – they are computed assuming observations are independent across
firms, but not across time. The t-statistics reported in parentheses are for the null hypothesis that the coefficient
is equal to one. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.
# of subjects: 4,589
# of failures: 58
Time at risk: 22,276
Control rights
2nd blockholder

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.20
-(2.19)**

0.28
-(1.68)*
1.82
(1.91)*
1.64
(0.77)
3.65
(2.96)***
2.23
(10.60)***
12.18
(5.21)***
0.30
-(1.16)
1.02
(3.51)***
1.03
(0.07)

0.32
-(1.45)
1.81
(1.85)*
1.49
(0.59)
4.37
(3.22)***
2.38
(10.43)***
9.11
(4.49)***
0.52
-(0.56)
1.02
(2.99)***
1.02
(0.04)
0.60
-(1.08)

0.32
-(1.44)
1.85
(1.95)*
1.49
(0.58)
4.32
(3.17)***
2.37
(10.67)***
9.02
(4.24)***
0.49
-(0.59)
1.02
(2.96)***
0.97
-(0.07)

0.28
-(1.55)
1.76
(1.78)*
1.46
(0.53)
4.54
(3.35)***
2.33
(10.51)***
8.19
(4.22)***
0.55
-(0.50)
1.02
(2.85)***
0.97
-(0.08)

0.31
-(1.42)
1.82
(1.89)*
1.48
(0.57)
4.37
(3.19)***
2.36
(10.56)***
8.83
(4.22)***
0.50
-(0.58)
1.02
(2.93)***
0.97
-(0.07)

Sales growth
Global industry q
Log assets
Foreign sales
Leverage
ROA
Government owned
Civil law
Anti-director

1.09
(0.67)

Efficiency of judicial

1.03
(0.15)

Anti-director*Eff. of judicial
Stock market cap / GDP
Log of GNP per capita
Correlation with U.S. market
Log likelihood
χ2
Prob > χ2

-473.17
4.80
0.03

-383.87
221.53
0.00

36

1.12
(0.46)
0.87
-(0.56)
13.62
(2.16)**
-378.20
209.06
0.00

1.25
(1.00)
0.75
-(1.35)
22.13
(2.45)**
-378.53
220.28
0.00

1.35
(1.48)
0.72
-(1.11)
24.08
(2.43)**
-378.78
225.51
0.00

1.01
(0.52)
1.26
(0.99)
0.73
-(1.45)
22.55
(2.48)**
-378.62
218.18
0.00

Table 6. Cox models: family/management control rights.
The Cox models estimate the probability of listing in year t, given that the firm has not listed yet. The sample
includes observations on the dependent variable from 1995 to 2001. Data sources for information on U.S. listings
and ownership are described in Section 2. Firms that list via Rule 144a and Level 1 ADRs are excluded and firms
with assets < $10 million are excluded. The table presents results for the Family/Managment Control dataset.
Family/Mgmt control rights is the voting rights held by the management group or controlling family. All
accounting data is from Worldscope. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth. Global industry q is
the firm’s median global industry q. Total assets are in $ thousands. Foreign sales is the percentage of foreign
sales to total sales. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets. Civil law, anti-director, and efficiency of judicial
are from LLSV (1998). Log of GNP per capita ($) is from the World Bank WDI Database. Stock market
capitalization to GDP is from Beck et al. (2001). Correlation with the U.S. market is calculated using weekly data
over the previous three years: it is the correlation of the Datastream local stock market index returns (in $) with
the U.S. stock market index returns. The table reports hazard ratios (i.e., exp(βx), not βx). The model does not
estimate a constant. The standard errors are adjusted for clustering on firms – they are computed assuming
observations are independent across firms, but not across time. The t-statistics reported in parentheses are for the
null hypothesis that the coefficient is equal to one. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels.
# of subjects: 4,731
# of failures: 67
Time at risk: 23,164
Family/Mgmt control rights

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.17
-(3.13)***

0.24
-(2.41)**
2.90
(2.56)**
2.66
(2.51)**
2.11
(11.15)***
8.60
(4.91)***
0.25
-(1.49)
1.02
(3.41)***

0.20
-(2.45)**
2.18
(1.80)*
3.80
(3.32)***
2.27
(11.40)***
7.32
(4.64)***
0.49
-(0.70)
1.02
(2.96)***
0.86
-(0.32)

0.20
-(2.41)**
2.19
(1.81)*
3.74
(3.25)***
2.27
(11.70)***
7.45
(4.64)***
0.48
-(0.72)
1.02
(2.88)***

0.21
-(2.42)**
2.23
(1.83)*
3.83
(3.38)***
2.28
(11.69)***
7.27
(4.66)***
0.51
-(0.65)
1.02
(2.86)***

0.20
-(2.37)**
2.19
(1.80)*
3.77
(3.26)***
2.27
(11.60)***
7.37
(4.57)***
0.48
-(0.72)
1.02
(2.89)***

Sales growth
Global industry q
Log assets
Foreign sales
Leverage
ROA
Civil law
Anti-director

1.05
(0.46)

Efficiency of judicial

1.10
(0.57)

Anti-director*Eff. of judicial
Stock market cap / GDP
Log of GNP per capita
Correlation with U.S. market
Log likelihood
χ2
Prob > χ2

-546.87
9.79
0.01

-459.09
205.52
0.00

37

1.14
(0.49)
0.47
-(3.93)***
19.77
(2.74)***
-447.31
229.44
0.00

1.14
(0.58)
0.46
-(4.89)***
22.00
(2.83)***
-447.26
231.04
0.00

1.10
(0.38)
0.40
-(3.09)***
24.18
(2.73)***
-447.17
227.63
0.00

1.00
(0.26)
1.17
(0.59)
0.45
-(4.64)***
22.19
(2.84)***
-447.33
229.1
0.00

Table 7. Cox models: difference between controlling blockholder’s control and cash flow rights.
The Cox models estimate the probability of listing in year t, given that the firm has not listed yet. The sample
includes observations on the dependent variable from 1995 to 2001. Data sources for information on U.S.
listings and ownership are described in Section 2. Firms that list via Rule 144a and Level 1 ADRs are excluded
and firms with assets < $10 million are excluded. The table presents results using the Controlling Blockholder
dataset. Cash flow (control) rights is equal to the cash flow (voting rights) held by the controlling shareholder.
Control – Cash is control rights minus cash flow rights. Second blockholder equals one if there is another
blockholder with at least 10% of the voting rights. Government owned equals one if the state is the controlling
shareholder. All accounting data is from Worldscope. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth.
Global industry q is the firm’s median global industry q. Total assets are in $ thousands. Foreign sales is the
percentage of sales that are foreign. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets. Civil law, anti-director, and
efficiency of judicial are from LLSV (1998). Log of GNP per capita ($) is from the World Bank WDI Database.
Stock market capitalization to GDP is from Beck et al. (2001). Correlation with the U.S. market is calculated
using weekly data over the previous three years: it is the correlation of the Datastream local stock market index
returns (in $) with the U.S. stock market index returns. The table reports hazard ratios (i.e., exp(βx), not βx). The
model does not estimate a constant. The standard errors are adjusted for clustering on firms – they are computed
assuming observations are independent across firms, but not across time. The t-statistics reported in parentheses
are for the null hypothesis that the coefficient is equal to one. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.
# of subjects: 4,589
# of failures: 58
Time at risk: 22,276
Cash flow rights
Control – Cash
2nd blockholder

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.21
-(2.04)**
0.11
-(1.12)

0.39
-(1.23)
0.01
-(2.43)**
2.01
(2.27)**
1.90
(0.99)
3.46
(2.77)***
2.27
(11.10)***
12.72
(5.40)***
0.30
-(1.19)
1.02
(3.27)***
0.97
-(0.07)

0.42
-(1.09)
0.02
-(2.19)**
1.96
(2.14)**
1.70
(0.78)
4.13
(3.04)***
2.42
(10.58)***
9.72
(4.70)***
0.48
-(0.63)
1.02
(2.96)***
0.97
-(0.07)
0.60
-(1.07)

0.39
-(1.21)
0.02
-(2.17)**
1.96
(2.15)**
1.66
(0.74)
4.17
(3.04)***
2.39
(10.85)***
9.25
(4.34)***
0.49
-(0.61)
1.02
(2.94)***
0.94
-(0.16)

0.37
-(1.21)
0.02
-(2.25)**
1.91
(2.07)**
1.66
(0.71)
4.29
(3.17)***
2.37
(10.69)***
8.74
(4.44)***
0.52
-(0.56)
1.02
(2.84)***
0.93
-(0.18)

0.39
-(1.17)
0.02
-(2.19)**
1.95
(2.13)**
1.66
(0.73)
4.19
(3.04)***
2.38
(10.72)***
9.16
(4.34)***
0.49
-(0.61)
1.02
(2.92)***
0.94
-(0.17)

Sales growth
Global industry q
Log assets
Foreign sales
Leverage
ROA
Government owned
Civil law
Anti-director
Efficiency of judicial

1.06
(0.45)

Anti-director*Eff. of judicial
Stock market cap / GDP
Log of GNP per capita
Correlation with U.S. market
Log likelihood
χ2
Prob > χ2

-473.13
5.33
0.07

-382.22
260.20
0.00

38

1.12
(0.43)
0.87
-(0.58)
11.15
(2.01)**
-377.05
241.16
0.00

1.29
(1.16)
0.75
-(1.36)
18.85
(2.36)**
-377.53
248.65
0.00

1.03
(0.14)
1.34
(1.45)
0.72
-(1.09)
19.73
(2.33)**
-377.62
261.25
0.00

1.00
(0.35)
1.30
(1.12)
0.74
-(1.41)
18.97
(2.38)**
-377.56
248.89
0.00

