                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ARE ASSET PRICE GUARANTEES USEFUL
                         FOR PREVENTING SUDDEN STOPS?
                      A QUANTITATIVE INVESTIGATION OF THE
                 GLOBALIZATION HAZARD-MORAL HAZARD TRADEOFF

                                         Ceyhun Bora Durdu
                                         Enrique G. Mendoza

                                         Working Paper 11178
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11178


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




Work on this project began while Mendoza was a visiting scholar at the Research Department of the Inter-
American Development Bank. Comments and suggestions by Guillermo Calvo, Reuven Glick, Olivier
Jeanne, Urban Jermann, Alejandro Izquierdo, Katherine Smith, Linda Tesar and Diego Valderrama are
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Ceyhun Bora Durdu and Enrique G. Mendoza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Are Asset Price Guarantees Useful for Preventing Sudden Stops?: A Quantitative Investigation of
the Globalization Hazard-Moral Hazard Tradeoff
Ceyhun Bora Durdu and Enrique G. Mendoza
NBER Working Paper No. 11178
March 2005
JEL No. F41, F32, E44, D52

                                           ABSTRACT

The globalization hazard hypothesis maintains that the current account reversals and asset price

collapses observed during 'Sudden Stops' are caused by global capital market frictions. A policy

implication of this view is that Sudden Stops can be prevented by offering global investors price

guarantees on emerging markets assets. These guarantees, however, introduce a moral hazard

incentive for global investors, thus creating a tradeoff by which price guarantees weaken

globalization hazard but strengthen international moral hazard. This paper studies the quantitative

implications of this tradeoff using a dynamic stochastic equilibrium asset-pricing model. Without

guarantees, distortions induced by margin calls and trading costs cause Sudden Stops driven by

Fisher's debt-deflation mechanism. Price guarantees prevent this deflation by introducing a distortion

that props up foreign demand for assets. Non-state-contingent guarantees contain Sudden Stops but

they are executed often and induce persistent asset overvaluation. Guarantees offered only in high-

debt states are executed rarely and prevent Sudden Stops without persistent asset overvaluation. If

the elasticity of foreign asset demand is low, price guarantees can still contain Sudden Stops but

domestic agents obtain smaller welfare gains at Sudden Stop states and suffer welfare losses on

average in the stochastic steady state.

Ceyhun Bora Durdu                                     Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of Maryland                                University of Maryland
College Park, MA 20742                                College Park, MD 20742
durdu@econ.bsos.umd.edu                               and NBER
                                                      mendozae@econ.umd.edu
                                                                                                      1

1. Introduction
       The Sudden Stop phenomenon of emerging markets crises is characterized by three
stylized facts: a sudden reversal of private capital inflows and current account deficits, a collapse
in production and private absorption, and large relative price corrections in domestic goods
prices and asset prices. A large fraction of the literature on this subject is based on a hypothesis
that Calvo (2002) labeled “globalization hazard.” According to this hypothesis, world capital
markets are inherently imperfect, and hence prone to display contagion and overreaction in the
determination of asset positions and prices relative to levels consistent with “fundamentals” (see
Arellano and Mendoza (2003) for a short survey of this literature). This argument suggests that
an international financial organization (IFO) could help prevent Sudden Stops by offering global
investors ex-ante price guarantees on the emerging-markets asset class. Calvo put forward a
formal proposal for setting up this facility and compared it with other arrangements that
propose ex-post price guarantees for global investors (including the IMF’s Contingent Credit
Line and the proposal put forward by Lerrick and Meltzer (2003)).
       Ex-ante price guarantees aim to create an environment in which asset prices can be
credibly expected to remain above the crash levels that trigger Sudden Stops driven by
globalization hazard. Calvo views this facility as kin to an open-markets operation facility: it
would exchange a liquid, riskless asset (e.g., U.S. T-bills) for an index of emerging markets
assets whenever the value of the index falls by a certain amount, and would re-purchase the
riskless asset when the index recovers. The optimal response of market participants would
incorporate their expectations that these guarantees would be executed if a systemic fire sale
were to make asset prices crash, and hence the price guarantees could rule out rational
expectations equilibria in which Sudden Stops occur. If globalization hazard is the only cause of
Sudden Stops, and if the support of the probability distribution of the shocks that can cause
them is known (i.e., if there are no truly “unexpected” shocks), the facility would rarely trade.
       A potentially important drawback of ex-ante price guarantees is that they introduce
moral hazard incentives for global investors. Everything else the same, the introduction of the
guarantees increases the foreign investors’ demand for emerging markets assets, since the
downside risk of holding these assets is transferred to the IFO providing the guarantees. This
can be a serious drawback because a similar international moral hazard argument has been
forcefully put forward as a competing explanation of Sudden Stops, and has been used to
propose major reforms to the international financial system (see the Meltzer Commission report
and the article by Lerrick and Meltzer (2003)).1
       Proponents of the international moral hazard view argue that Sudden Stops are induced
by excessive indebtedness of emerging economies driven by the expectation of global investors
that IFOs will bail out countries in financial difficulties. Based on this premise, Lerrick and


1
  Part of the literature on Sudden Stops focuses on domestic moral hazard problems caused by
government guarantees offered to domestic agents (see, for example, Krugman (2000)). This paper focuses
instead on Sudden Stops triggered by globalization hazard, and on the tradeoff between this hazard and
the international moral hazard created by offering price guarantees to global investors.
                                                                                                           2

Meltzer (2003) proposed the use of ex-post price guarantees to be offered by an IFO to anchor
the orderly resolution of a default once it has been announced and agreed to with the IFO. The
IFO would determine the crash price of the defaulted asset and would require the country to
commit to re-purchase the asset at its crash price (making the commitment credible by having
the IFO commit itself to buy the asset at a negligible discount below the crash price if the
country were unable to buy it). If the only cause of Sudden Stops is international moral hazard,
the announcement of this arrangement should remove the moral hazard distortion and reduce
debt levels, and in practice the arrangement itself would rarely be activated.
        The tensions between the globalization hazard and moral hazard hypotheses, and their
alternative proposals for using price guarantees, reflect an important tradeoff that ex-ante price
guarantees create. On one hand, ex-ante price guarantees could endow IFOs with an effective
tool to prevent and manage Sudden Stops driven by frictions affecting international capital
markets. On the other hand, ex-ante guarantees could end up making matters worse by
strengthening international moral hazard incentives (even if it were true that globalization
hazard was the only cause of Sudden Stops in the past).
        The globalization hazard-moral hazard tradeoff implies that making the case for ex-ante
price guarantees requires their advocates to show that it is possible to design a system of price
guarantees such that its benefits, in terms of undoing the distortions induced by financial
frictions, outweighs its costs, in terms of inducing moral hazard. The goal of this paper is to
study this issue from the perspective of the quantitative predictions of a dynamic, stochastic
general equilibrium model of asset pricing and current account dynamics. The model is based on
the globalization hazard setup of Mendoza and Smith (2004). This paper adds to their
framework an IFO that offers ex-ante guarantees to foreign investors on the asset prices of an
emerging economy. We are interested in particular in studying how the guarantees affect asset
positions, asset price volatility, business cycle dynamics, and the magnitude of Sudden Stops.
        Asset price guarantees have not received much attention in quantitative equilibrium
asset pricing theory, with the notable exception of the work by Ljungqvist (2000), and these
guarantees have yet to be introduced into the research program dealing with quantitative
models of Sudden Stops. The theoretical literature and several policy documents on Sudden
Stops have examined various aspects of the globalization hazard and international moral hazard
hypotheses separately. From this perspective, one contribution of this paper is that it studies
the interaction between these two hypotheses in a unified dynamic equilibrium framework from
which we derive quantitative predictions.
       The two financial frictions that we borrowed from Mendoza and Smith (2004) to
construct a model in which globalization hazard causes Sudden Stops are: (a) a margin
constraint on foreign borrowing faced by the agents of an emerging economy, and (b) asset
trading costs incurred by foreign securities firms specialized in trading the equity of the
emerging economy.2 These frictions are intended to represent the collateral constraints and


2
    Aiyagari and Gertler (1999) first proposed a closed economy asset-pricing model with these features.
                                                                                                     3

informational frictions that have been widely studied in the Sudden Stops literature (see, for
example, Calvo (1998), Izquierdo (2000), Calvo and Mendoza (2000a, 2000b), Caballero and
Krishnamurty (2001), Mendoza (2004), Paasche (2001) and Schneider and Tornell (1999)).
        The model introduces asset price guarantees in the form of ex-ante guarantees offered to
foreign investors on the liquidation price (or equivalently, on the return) of the emerging
economy’s assets. Thus, these guarantees are kin to a “put option” with minimum return. An
IFO offers these guarantees and finances them with a lump-sum tax on foreign investors’ profits.
Both domestic agents and foreign investors are aware of the IFO’s guarantees policy when
formulating their optimal plans. Hence, forward-looking equity prices reflect the effects of
margin constraints, trading costs and ex-ante price guarantees. The setup of the price
guarantees is similar to the one proposed in Ljungqvist’s (2000) closed-economy, representative-
agent analysis, but framed in the context of what is effectively a two-agent equilibrium asset-
pricing model with margin constraints and trading costs.
        Price guarantees have different implications depending on the level at which they are set.
If they are set so low that they are never executed, globalization hazard dominates and the
model yields the same Sudden Stop outcomes of the Mendoza-Smith model. If they are set so
high that they are always executed, the model yields equilibria highly distorted by international
moral hazard. Hence, the interesting range for studying the globalization hazard-moral hazard
tradeoff lies between these two extremes. The quantitative analysis shows that guarantees set
slightly above the model’s “fundamentals” price (by ½ to 1 percent) contain the Sudden Stop
effects of globalization hazard and virtually eliminate the probability of margin calls in the
stochastic steady state. If the guarantee is non-state-contingent, the guarantee is executed often
(with a long-run probability of about 1/3) and the model predicts persistent overvaluation of
asset prices above the prices obtained in a frictionless environment. A guaranteed price set at
the same level but offered only at high levels of external debt is executed much less often (with
a long run probability below 1/100) and it is equally effective at containing Sudden Stops
without inducing persistent asset overvaluation.
        Analysis of the normative implications of the model shows that, when the elasticity of
foreign demand for domestic assets is high, the guarantees improve domestic welfare measured
from initial conditions at a Sudden Stop state, with negligible changes in long-run welfare levels.
At the same time, the value of foreign traders’ firms measured in a Sudden Stop state falls
slightly, while their long-run average rises sharply. In this case the balance tilts in favor of using
price guarantees to contain globalization hazard. On the other hand, when the elasticity of
foreign demand for domestic assets is low, higher price guarantees are needed to prevent Sudden
Stops, and as a result large moral hazard distortions reduce domestic welfare gains at Sudden
Stop states and enlarge average welfare losses in the stochastic steady state. In this case, price
guarantees can be a misleading policy instrument that yields a short-term improvement in
macroeconomic indicators and welfare at the expense of a long-term welfare loss.
      The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model and characterizes the
competitive equilibrium in the presence of margin constraints, trading costs and ex-ante price
                                                                                                     4

guarantees. Section 3 studies key properties of this equilibrium that illustrate the nature of the
globalization hazard-moral hazard tradeoff. Section 4 represents the competitive equilibrium as a
recursive, rational expectations equilibrium and proposes a solution algorithm. Section 5
conducts the quantitative analysis and Section 6 concludes.
2.     A Model of Globalization Hazard and Price Guarantees
       Consider a small open economy (SOE) inhabited by a representative household that
rents out labor and a time-invariant stock of capital to a representative firm. Households can
trade the equity of this firm with a representative foreign securities firm specialized in trading
the economy’s equity, and can also access a global credit market of one-period bonds. In
addition, an IFO operates a facility that guarantees a minimum sale price to foreign traders on
their sales of the emerging economy’s equity. Dividend payments on the emerging economy’s
equity are stochastic and vary in response to exogenous productivity shocks. Markets of
contingent claims are incomplete because trading equity and bonds does not allow domestic
households to fully hedge domestic income uncertainty, and the credit market is imperfect
because of margin constraints and trading costs.
2.1    The Emerging Economy
       The representative firm inside the SOE produces a tradable commodity by combining
labor (n) and a time-invariant stock of physical capital (k) using a Cobb-Douglas technology:
exp(εt)F(k,n), where ε is a Markov productivity shock. This firm participates in competitive
factor and goods markets taking the real wage (w) as given. Thus, the choice of labor input
consistent with profit maximization yields standard marginal productivity conditions for labor
demand and the rate of dividend payments (d ):
                                             wt = exp(εt )Fn (k , nt )                           (1)
                                              dt = exp(εt )Fk (k, nt )                           (2)
       The representative household chooses intertemporal sequences of consumption (c), labor
supply (n), equity holdings (α), and foreign bond holdings (b) so as to maximize Epstein’s
(1983) stationary cardinal utility (SCU) function:
                                        ∞      t −1                                     
                       U (c, n ) = E 0  ∑ exp  − ∑ v ( cτ − h(n τ ) ) u ( ct − h(nt ) )    (3)
                                        t =0                                               
                                                τ = 0                 
                                                                                            
This utility function is a time-recursive, Von Neumann-Morgenstern intertemporal utility index
with an endogenous rate of time preference. The period utility function u(⋅) is a standard,
concave, twice-continuously differentiable utility function. The function v(⋅) is the time
preference function, which is also concave and twice-continuously differentiable. The argument
of both functions is a composite good defined by consumption minus the disutility of labor c-
h(n), where h(⋅) is an increasing, convex, continuously-differentiable function. Greenwood,
Hercowitz and Huffman (1988) introduced this composite good as a way to eliminate the wealth
effect on labor supply. As in Mendoza and Smith (2004), this property of preferences, together
with conditions (1) and (2), separates the determination of equilibrium wages, dividends, labor
and output from the equilibrium allocations of consumption, saving and portfolio choice.
                                                                                                            5

        The endogenous rate of time preference of the SCU function introduces an “impatience
effect” on the marginal utility of date-t consumption by which changes in ct alter the subjective
discount rate applied to future utility flows. Epstein showed that the conditions required for
SCU to be consistent with consumption smoothing limit this impatience effect. Utility functions
with endogenous impatience are commonly used in models of small open economies to obtain
well-defined long-run equilibria for holdings of foreign assets in which the exogenous world
interest rate equals the rate of time preference (see for example Obstfeld (1981) or Mendoza
(1991)).3 As Section 3 shows, in models with financial frictions these preferences are also critical
for supporting long-run equilibria in which credit constraints bind.
        The household maximizes lifetime utility subject to the following budget constraint:
                             ct = αt kdt + wt nt + qt (αt − αt +1 )k − bt +1 + bt R                        (4)
where αt and αt+1 are beginning- and end-of-period shares of capital owned by households, qt is
the price of equity, and R is the world real interest rate (which is kept constant for simplicity).
        International loan contracts incorporate a collateral constraint in the form of a margin
clause by which the stock of foreign debt of the small open economy cannot exceed the fraction
κ of the market value of the SOE’s equity holdings:
                                    bt +1 ≥ −κqt αt +1k ,       0≤κ≤1                                      (5)
        Margin clauses of this form are widely used in international capital markets. In some
instances they are imposed by regulators with the aim of limiting the exposure of financial
intermediaries to idiosyncratic risk in lending portfolios, but they are also widely used by
investment banks and other lenders as a mechanism to manage default risk (they can take the
form of explicit margin clauses linked to the value of specific securities offered as collateral, or
implicit margin requirements linked to the volatility of returns of an asset class or subclass as
those implied by value-at-risk collateralization). Margin clauses are a particularly effective
collateral constraint (compared to constraints like the well-known Kiyotaki-Moore constraint
that limits debt to the discounted liquidation value of assets one period ahead) because: (a)
custody of the securities that constitute the collateral is surrendered at the time the credit
contract is entered and (b) margin calls to make up for shortfalls in the market value of the
collateral are automatic once the value of the securities falls below the contracted value.
        Households in the small open economy also face a short-selling constraint in the equity
market: αt+1 ≥χ with -∞<χ<1 for all t. This constraint is necessary in order to make the
margin constraint non-trivial. Otherwise, any borrowing limit in the bond market implied by a
binding margin constraint could always be undone by taking a sufficiently short equity position.
2.2     The Foreign Securities Firm, the IFO & the Price Guarantees
        The representative foreign securities firm obtains funds from international investors and
specializes in investing them in the SOE’s equity. The securities firm maximizes its net present
value discounted at the stochastic discount factor relevant for its international clients (i.e., the


3
 Arellano and Mendoza (2003) provide further details and a short survey of the literature on this issue.
                                                                                                                              6

world interest rate). Thus, the foreign traders’ problem is to choose a sequence of equity
holdings αt+1*, for t = 1, ..., ∞ , so as to maximize:
                  ∞        
       D = E 0  ∑ R−t πt  ,
                 t = 0   
                                πt ≡ k  αt*dt − (qt αt*+1 − max(qt , qt )αt* ) − qt
                                                                                     ( )( α
                                                                                       a
                                                                                       2
                                                                                            *
                                                                                            t +1   − αt* + θ ) − Tt*  .
                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                             (6)

         The total net return of the foreign securities firm (πt) is the sum of: (a) dividend
earnings on current equity holdings (kαt*dt ), minus (b) the value of equity trades, which is the
difference between equity purchases qt k α t+1* minus equity sales max(qt, qt )kα t* executed at
either the market price qt or the guaranteed price qt , whichever is greater, minus (c) trading
costs, which include a term that depends on the size of trades (αt+1* - αt*) and a recurrent
trading cost (θ ), minus (d) lump sum taxes paid to the IFO (kTt*). Trading costs are specified
in quadratic form, as in some of the literature on equilibrium asset pricing models with trading
costs, so a is a standard adjustment-cost coefficient.
         The IFO buys equity from the foreign traders at the guaranteed price and sells it at the
equilibrium price. Thus, the IFO’s budget constraint is:
                                              Tt* = max ( 0, ( qt − qt ) αt* )                                              (7)
If the guarantee is not executed, the tax is zero. If the guarantee is executed, the IFO sets the
lump-sum tax to match the value of the executed guarantee (i.e., the extra income that foreign
traders earn by selling equity to the IFO instead of selling it in the equity market). Since the
return on equity is Rtq ≡ [dt+qt ]/ qt-1, the IFO’s offer to guarantee the date-t price implies a
guaranteed return on the emerging economy’s equity Rtq = [ qt + dt ] / qt −1 .
2.3    Equilibrium
       A competitive equilibrium is given by stochastic sequences of prices [ wt , dt , qt ]t∞= 0 and
                                                      ∞
allocations  ct , nt , bt +1 , αt +1 , αt*+1 ,Tt* t = 0 such that: (a) households maximize the utility function (3)
subject to the constraints (4) and (5) and the short-selling constraint, taking prices, wages and
dividends as given, (b) domestic firms maximize profits so that equations (1) and (2) hold,
taking wages and dividends as given, (c) foreign traders maximize (6) taking the price of equity,
the price guarantees and lump-sum taxes as given, (d) the budget constraint of the IFO in
equation (7), holds and (e) the equity market clears (i.e., α t+α t*=1 for all t).
3.       Characterizing the Globalization Hazard-Moral Hazard Tradeoff
         The tradeoff between the globalization hazard introduced by the distortions that margin
constraints and trading costs create and the moral hazard introduced by distortions due to price
guarantees can be illustrated with the optimality conditions of the competitive equilibrium.
Consider the first-order conditions of the domestic household’s maximization problem:
                                                     UC t (c, n ) = λt                                                       (8)
                                                       h ′(nt ) = wt                                                         (9)
                                    qt ( λt − ηt κ ) = Et [ λt +1 (dt +1 + qt +1 ) ] + υt                                   (10)
                                                 λt − ηt = Et [ λt +1R ]                                                    (11)
U ct (c, n ) is the derivative of the SCU function with respect to ct (which includes the impatience
effect), and λt, ηt and υt are the Lagrange multipliers on the budget constraint, the margin
constraint, and the short-selling constraint respectively.
                                                                                                         7

         Condition (8) has the standard interpretation: at equilibrium, the marginal utility of
wealth equals the lifetime marginal utility of consumption. Condition (9) equates the marginal
disutility of labor with the real wage. This is the case because the Greenwood-Hercowitz-
Huffman composite good implies that the marginal rate of substitution between ct and nt is
equal to the marginal disutility of labor h′(nt ), and thus is independent of ct. It follows from this
result that condition (9) together with (1) and (2) determine the equilibrium values of nt, wt and
dt as well as the equilibrium level of output. These “supply-side” solutions are independent of
the dynamics of consumption, saving, portfolio choices and equity prices, and are therefore also
independent of the distortions induced by financial frictions and price guarantees.
        The neutrality of the “supply side” of the domestic economy with respect to the financial
frictions follows from admittedly strong assumptions but it simplifies significantly the solution of
the model by separating the equilibrium path of dividends from the saving and portfolio
decisions. Mendoza (2004) studies the business cycle implications of margin constraints in a
small-open-economy model with endogenous investment in which financial frictions affect
dividends, investment and the Tobin Q, but abstracting from international equity trading.
       Conditions (10) and (11) are Euler equations for the accumulation of equity and bonds
respectively. As in Mendoza and Smith (2004), these conditions can be combined to derive
expressions for the forward solution of equity prices and the excess return on equity from the
perspective of the emerging economy. The forward solution for equity prices is:
                                       ∞  i             η      −1               
                              qt = Et  ∑  ∏  1 − t + j κ  M t +1+idt +1+i             (12)
                                         i =0  j =0  λt + j  
                                                                                    
where Mt+1+i ≡ λt+1+i /λt , for i=0,...,∞, is the marginal rate of substitution between ct+1+i and ct.
The excess return on domestic equity is:
                                                                 υt
                                                 ηt (1 − κ) −       − COVt (λt +1, Rtq+1 )
                                                                 qt
                           Et Rtq+1
                              [       ]− R =                                                       (13)
                                                                  Et [λt +1 ]
Given these results, the forward solution for equity prices can also be expressed as:
                                           ∞  i                        −1         
                                           
                                  qt = Et  ∑  ∏ ( Et  Rtq+1+ j  )  dt +1+i            (14)
                                            i =0  j = 0
                                                                                 
       Expressions (12)-(14) show the direct and indirect effects of margin calls on the demand
for equity of domestic agents, and thus on their valuation of equity and excess returns. The
direct effect of a date-t margin call is represented by the term ηt (1-κ) in (13), or the term ηtκ in
(12): When a margin call occurs, domestic agents “fire sale” equity in order to meet the call and
satisfy the borrowing constraint. Everything else the same, this effect lowers the date-t equity
price and increases the expected excess return for t+1. The indirect effect of the margin call is
reflected in the fact that a binding borrowing limit makes “more negative” the co-variance
between the marginal utility of consumption and the rate of return on equity (since a binding
borrowing limit hampers the households’ ability to smooth consumption). These direct and
indirect effects increase the rate at which future dividends are discounted in the domestic
agents’ valuation of asset prices, and thus reduce their demand for equity. Interestingly, the
                                                                                                                    8

date-t equity price along the domestic agents’ demand curve is reduced by a margin constraint
that is binding at date t or by any expected binding margin constraint in the future. As a result,
equity prices and the domestic demand for equity can be distorted by the margin requirements
even in periods in which the constraint does not bind.
        In a world with frictionless asset markets, domestic agents facing margin calls could sell
assets in a perfectly-competitive market in which the world demand for the emerging economy’s
assets is infinitely elastic at the level of the fundamentals price. Margin calls would trigger
portfolio reallocation effects without any price movements. However, in the presence of frictions
that make the world demand for the emerging economy’s assets less than infinitely elastic, the
equilibrium asset price falls. Since households were already facing margin calls at the initial
price, this price decline tightens further the margin constraint triggering a new round of margin
calls. This downward spiral in equity prices is a variant of Fisher’s debt-deflation mechanism,
which magnifies the direct and indirect effects of the margin constraint.
        The world demand for assets of the emerging economy is less than infinitely elastic
because of the trading costs that foreign traders incur. Define the conditional expected value of
the stream of dividends discounted at the world interest rate as the “fundamentals” price
            ∞                     
qt f ≡ Et  ∑ R−(t +1+i )dt +1+ i  . The first-order condition for the optimization problem of foreign
            i = 0                
traders implies then that the traders’ asset demand function is:
                                                     ∞                                             
                                                Et  ∑ R −(t +i ) ( max(qt +i , qt +i ) − qt +i )  
                                     1     q f                                                      
                  ( αt*+1   − αt* ) =  t − 1 +     i =1                                               − θ   (15)
                                     a  qt                             qt                                
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                      
The foreign traders’ demand for the emerging economy’s assets is an increasing function of: (a)
the percent deviation of qt f relative to qt (with an elasticity equal to 1/a) and (b) the expected
present discounted value of the “excess prices” induced by the price guarantees in percent of
today’s equity price. The first effect reflects the influence of the per-trade trading costs. If a =0
and there are no price guarantees, the foreign traders’ demand function is infinitely elastic at q f.
The second effect is the international moral hazard effect of the guarantees, which acts as a
demand shifter on the foreign traders’ demand function. Foreign traders that expect price
guarantees to be executed at any time in the future have a higher demand for domestic assets at
date t than they would in a market without guarantees. The recurrent trading costs are also a
demand shifter (the foreign traders’ demand function is lower the higher is θ ).
       Putting together the previous results, the tradeoff between globalization hazard and
international moral hazard can be summarized as follows. Suppose the date-t asset price in a
market without margin constraints and without price guarantees is determined at the
intersection of the domestic agents’ and foreign traders’ demand curves (HH and FF
respectively) at point A in Figure 1.
        The demand function of foreign traders is simply equation (15), shown in Figure 1 as a
linear function for simplicity and as an upward-slopping curve because the horizontal axis
                                                                                                   9

measures α, which is the complement of α*. This FF curve is relatively flat to approximate a
situation with low per-trade costs. There is no closed-form solution for HH, so the curve
depicted is intended only to facilitate intuition. HH is shown as an downward-slopping curve
but, since domestic agents respond to wealth, intertemporal-substitution and portfolio-
composition effects in choosing their equity holdings, HH can be downward or upward slopping
depending on which effect dominates.




                                                Figure 1.

       Suppose that a margin call hits domestic agents because an adverse shock hits the
economy when their debt is sufficiently high relative to the value of their assets. As a result, HH
shifts to HH ′. In Figure 1, HH ′ represents the “final” demand function, including the
magnification effect of the Fisherian debt-deflation mechanism. Without price guarantees, the
date-t equilibrium price would fall to point B. This is the “Sudden Stop scenario,” in which
margin calls result in lower asset prices and reversals in consumption and the current account.
Enter now an IFO that sets a price guarantee higher than the market price at B. The
international moral hazard effect shifts the foreign traders’ demand curve to FF′ and the new
date-t market price is determined at point C, which yields the fundamentals price. The scenario
depicted here is an ideal one in which the IFO is assumed to know exactly at what level to set
the guaranteed price so as to stabilize the market price at the fundamentals level. If the
guarantee is “too low” (i.e., below the price at B) it would have no effect on the Sudden Stop
equilibrium price, and thus price guarantees would be irrelevant. If the guarantee is “too high”
it could lead to a price higher than the fundamentals price with the “overpricing” even larger
than the “underpricing” that occurs at B. Hence, ex-ante price guarantees do not necessarily
reduce the volatility of asset prices (as the numerical analysis of Ljungqvist (2000) showed).
                                                                                                          10

        In Figure 1, the equilibrium with margin constraints, trading costs and price guarantees
at C is one in which foreign traders own more equity than in the absence of price guarantees at
B. This can still allow domestic agents to support higher debt in the bond market, as long as
the value of their equity increases (i.e., as long as the increase in qt offsets the reduction in αt+1).
       If the HH and HH ′ curves were upward sloping, the moral hazard effect would still prop
up the foreign traders’ asset demand function, but in the equilibrium with price guarantees,
domestic agents would end up owning more equity relative to the equilibrium without price
guarantees. In this case, this higher level of domestic equity holdings also means that the
domestic economy’s debt would be higher than in the absence of the guarantees when the
margin constraint binds. Thus, the model can predict that price guarantees offered to foreign
traders lead to excessive holdings of equity and excessive borrowing by domestic agents.
        From the perspective of the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model, Figure 1 is a
partial equilibrium snapshot of the date-t asset market. The forward-looking behavior of
domestic households and foreign traders implies that changes that affect the date-t asset market
spillover into the market outcomes at other dates and vice versa. For example, the price
guarantee may not be in force at t but the expectation of executing future price guarantees will
shift upward the FF curve at t. Similarly, the margin constraint may not bind at t, but the
expectation of future margin calls is enough to shift the date-t HH curve. Given the lack of
closed-form solutions for equilibrium allocations and prices, the only way to study the effects of
price guarantees on the dynamics of consumption, the current account, asset holdings, and asset
prices is by exploring the model’s quantitative implications via numerical simulation.
4.       Recursive Equilibrium and Solution Method
         In the recursive representation of the equilibrium, the state variables are the current
holdings of assets and bonds in the emerging economy, α and b, and the realizations of
productivity shocks ε. The state space of asset positions spans the discrete grid of NA nodes
Α={α1<α2<…<αNA} with α1=χ, and the state space of bonds spans the discrete grid of NB
nodes Β={b1<b2<…<bNB}. The endogenous state space is defined by the discrete set Z = Α × Β
of NA×NB elements. Productivity shocks follow a stationary, two-point Markov chain with
realizations E={ε L < ε H}. Equilibrium wages, dividends, labor and output are determined by
solving the supply-side system given by equations (1), (2), (9) and the production function. The
solutions are given by functions that depend only on ε : w(ε), d(ε), n(ε) and F(ε).
         Assume that foreign traders and domestic agents take as given a continuous,
nonnegative asset pricing function qˆ(α, b, ε) : E × Z → R+ . For a given pair of conjectured decision
rules for assets and bonds, αˆ ′(α, b, ε), bˆ′(α, b, ε) : E × Z → R , the conjectured pricing function must
satisfy q min (α, b, ε) ≤ qˆ(α, b, ε) ≤ q max (α, b, ε) , where:
                                 q min (α, b, ε) =  q f (ε) + G (α, b, ε)  [ 1 + a ( α − χ + θ ) ]   (16)
                               q max (α, b, ε) =  q f (ε) + G (α, b, ε)  [ 1 + a ( α − αNA + θ ) ]   (17)
and G(α,b,ε) represents the expected present discounted value of “excess prices” induced by the
price guarantees and the conjectured pricing function and decision rules. The prices in (16) and
                                                                                                                 11

(17) are maximum and minimum prices along the foreign traders’ demand curve. These bounds
of the pricing function follow from the fact that when domestic agents hit either χ or αNA, the
foreign traders are at the “short side” of the market.
        The recursive equilibrium can be characterized in one of the two ways described in
Mendoza and Smith (2004), modified to include the effect of the price guarantees. One approach
iterates on the asset pricing function “outside” the optimization problem of the SOE. This
approach uses the conjectured pricing function, the foreign trader’s demand function and the
market-clearing condition in the asset market to create a conjectured law of motion for equity
holdings, and solves a dynamic programming problem for the SOE in which bond holdings are
the only endogenous state given this law of motion and the conjectured pricing function. This
dynamic programming problem yields optimal consumption plans and these plans are then used
to compute an “actual” pricing function. The “actual” and conjectured pricing functions are
used to create a new conjectured pricing function with a Gauss-Siedel rule, and the process is
repeated until the conjectured and actual pricing functions satisfy a convergence criterion.
       The drawback of this method is that convergence of pricing function iterations is not
achieved via a contraction mapping property like that of the Bellman equation. Instead, pricing
function iterations seek “stable convergence” of excess supply or demand to market-clearing
prices in all points of the state space starting from an arbitrary initial pricing function. This
creates two problems. First, convergence is slow because Gauss-Siedel updates of price
conjectures need to use adaptive successive overrelaxation to prevent price iterations from
producing the classic problem of unstable “hog” cycles (by which price iterations diverge away
from market-clearing prices instead of converging to them). As a result, solutions based on this
method can take several hours to compute. Second, the final pricing function generally retains
higher margins of error than those produced by value function iterations.
       The second method represents the equilibrium of the model in recursive form using a
“quasi-planning problem” in which the contraction-mapping property of the Bellman equation is
exploited to compute equilibrium prices faster and without error. The quasi-planning-problem
approach starts with a conjecture for the expected present value of “excess prices” Gˆ(α, b, ε) .
Given this conjecture, the optimal plans of domestic agents are represented as the solution to
the following dynamic programming problem:
              V (α, b, ε) = max { u (c − h ( n(ε) ) ) + exp ( −v (c − h ( n(ε) ) ) ) E [V ( α ′, b ′, ε′ ) ]}   (18)
                            α′,b ′∈Α×Β

subject to:
                                                    q f (ε) + Gˆ(α, b, ε)
                     c = αkd (ε) + w(ε)n(ε) +                             k ( α − α ′ ) − b ′ + bR              (19)
                                                   1 + a θ + a(α − α ′)
                                                    q f (ε) + Gˆ(α, b, ε)
                                          b ′ ≥ −κ                        α ′k                                  (20)
                                                   1 + a θ + a(α − α ′)
In this formulation, domestic agents choose equity and bond positions and equity prices are
displaced with the prices along the demand curve of foreign traders by imposing market clearing
in the equity market and solving for the equity prices implied by equation (15).
                                                                                                       12

       Once the above dynamic programming problem is solved, the resulting optimal plans for
equity holdings are plugged into equation (15) to derive the “actual” asset pricing function for
the given conjecture Gˆ(α, b, ε) . The decision rules for bonds and equity, the guaranteed prices,
and this “actual” pricing function are then used to solve for the “actual” G (α, b, ε) function (i.e.,
the function that returns the expected present discounted value of excess prices conditional on
any initial triple (α,b,ε)). The conjectured and actual G functions are then combined to create a
new conjecture using a standard Gauss-Siedel rule and the procedure starts again with the
Bellman equation (18). The process is repeated until the actual and conjectured G functions
converge, so that the function Gˆ(α, b, ε) that is taken as given in the dynamic programming
problem is consistent with the function G (α, b, ε) implied by the asset pricing function and
decision rules that are endogenous outcomes of that problem.
        The drawback of this quasi-planning-problem method is that in principle it treats the
emerging economy as a Stackelberg leader that internalizes the demand function of foreign
traders. Mendoza and Smith (2004) show, however, that the only deviation from the competitive
equilibrium conditions introduced by this Stackelberg-leader feature reduces to a distortion that
appears as a multiple of the return on equity in the marginal benefit of equity purchases by
domestic agents. Thus, the equilibrium of this quasi-planning problem is equivalent to a
competitive equilibrium for a variant of the model with a proportional tax or subsidy on asset
returns, with tax revenues rebated as a lump-sum transfer. Mendoza and Smith show that
whether the distortion is a tax or a subsidy depends on how much date-t and date-t+1 equity
prices vary with the optimal choice of αt+1 along the foreign traders’ demand curve, which in
turn depends on the size of a (i.e., on the price elasticity of this demand function).
       We face therefore a choice between a method that solves the competitive equilibrium
with error in the asset pricing function and a method that computes prices without error but
does so by introducing a tax-like distortion on equity returns earned by domestic agents. In the
simulations of the next Section we use a baseline value of a =0.2 and consider also a =2 as part
of a sensitivity analysis. The maximum absolute values of the distortion produced by the quasi-
planning problem method are equivalent to negligible taxes on asset returns that range between
0.08 (0.4) and 0.2 (0.8) percent when a =0.2 (2). The average distortion in absolute value is
about 0.03 (0.3) percent in all the simulations with a =0.2 (2). Since this method is also
considerably faster, we chose to use it instead of the pricing iteration method.
       The optimal decision rules obtained after the solution method converges constitute a
recursive, rational expectations equilibrium. At this equilibrium, the decision rules determining
asset holdings, bond holdings, consumption, labor, wages, dividends, the foreign traders’ asset
holdings and asset prices are such that: (a) given wages, dividends and asset prices, the policy
functions for c, b′, α′ and n maximize household utility and firm profits in the SOE subject to
the relevant constraints,4 (b) given asset prices and dividends, the choice for α′ * solves the



4
 With the caveat that the Benveniste-Sheinkman equations of the Bellman equation (18) yield an Euler
equation for equity that includes the tax-like distortion on equity returns.
                                                                                                    13

maximization problem of foreign traders, (c) the IFO’s budget constraint holds and (e) the
market-clearing conditions for assets, goods and labor markets hold.
5.     Quantitative Analysis
       The functional forms that represent preferences and technology are the following:
                                      F ( k , nt ) = k 1− γ nt γ ,          0≤ γ ≤1                (21)
                                                                     1− σ
                                                 [ ct − h ( nt ) ]   −1
                           u (ct − h ( nt ) ) =                             ,    σ >1              (22)
                                                          1−σ
                      v ( ct − h ( nt ) ) = β [ Ln ( 1 + ct − h ( nt ) ) ],           0<β≤σ        (23)
                                                           ntδ
                                              h ( nt ) =         ,      δ >1                       (24)
                                                            δ
γ is the labor income share, σ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, β is the elasticity of the
rate of time preference with respect to 1+ct - h(nt ), and δ determines the wage elasticity of labor
supply (which is equal to 1/(δ-1)). The condition 0<β≤σ comes from Epstein (1983).
5.1   Deterministic Steady State and Calibration to Mexican Data
      The calibration strategy differs markedly from the one in Mendoza and Smith (2004).
They normalize the capital stock to k=1 and let the steady-state equity price adjust to the value
implied by the asset pricing condition given a set of parameter values directly inferred from the
data or set to enable the model to match ratios of national accounts statistics. Here, we
normalize instead the steady-state equity price so that the capital stock matches the
deterministic, steady-state capital stock of a typical RBC-SOE model calibrated to Mexican
data (see Mendoza (2004)). The steady state of this RBC-SOE model is a frictionless,
neoclassical stationary equilibrium. Calibrating to this frictionless equilibrium helps focus the
analysis on the use of price guarantees to prevent Sudden Stops triggered by margin calls that
hit the economy only when it is highly leveraged (and hence off the long-run equilibrium).
       The risk aversion parameter does not appear in the model’s deterministic steady-state
conditions. This parameter is set at σ =2 in line with values often used in RBC-SOE studies.
The parameter values that enter into the supply-side system are determined as follows. The
labor share is set at γ =0.65, in line with international evidence on labor income shares. The
Mexican average share of labor income in value added in an annual sample for 1988-2001 is 0.34,
but values around 0.65 are the norm in several countries and there is concern that the Mexican
data may measure inaccurately proprietors income and other forms of labor income (see
Mendoza (2004) for details). The real interest rate is set at 6.5 percent, which is also a value
widely used in the RBC literature. Since the model is set to a quarterly frequency, this implies
R=1.0651/4. The labor disutility coefficient is set to the same value as in Mendoza and Smith
(2004), δ =2, which implies a unitary wage elasticity of labor supply.
      As in a typical RBC calibration exercise, the calibration is designed to yield a set of
parameter values such that the model’s deterministic steady state matches actual averages of
the GDP shares of consumption (sc), investment (si), government purchases (sg) and net
exports (snx). In the Mexican data, these shares are sc=0.684, si=0.19, sg=0.092, and
snx=0.034. Since the model does not have investment or government purchases, their combined
share (0.282) is treated as exogenous absorption of output equivalent to 28.2 percent of steady-
                                                                                                     14

state GDP. In the stochastic simulations we keep the corresponding level of these expenditures
constant at 28.2 percent of the value obtained for steady-state output in the calibration.
       The typical RBC-SOE model features a standard steady-state optimality condition that
equates the marginal product of capital net of depreciation with the world interest rate, and a
standard law of motion of the capital stock that relates the steady-state investment rate to the
steady-state capital-output ratio. Given the values of si, γ, δ and R, these two steady-state
conditions can be combined to yield values of the depreciation rate (dep) and the capital-output
ratio (sk). On an annual basis, the resulting depreciation rate is 7.75 percent and sk is about 2.5
(or 10.08 on a quarterly basis).
        In a deterministic steady state of the model of Section 2 in which the credit constraint
does not bind and there are no price guarantees, the equity price is q = q f = d/(R-1). Given the
RBC-SOE calibration criterion that the steady-state marginal product of capital net of
depreciation equals the net world interest rate, q f can be re-written as Fk (k,n)/(Fk (k,n)-dep).
With the Cobb-Douglas production function this reduces to q f = (1-γ)/(1-γ -si). Thus, the
requirement that the model’s dividend rate must match a typical RBC-SOE calibration implies
that the steady-state equity price is determined by si and γ. With the parameter values set
above we obtain q f=2.19.
        Given the values of γ, δ, R, and q f the steady-state solutions for n, w, k, and F(k,n)
follow from solving the supply-side system conformed by (1), (2), (9) and (21). The resulting
steady-state capital stock is k =79. By construction, this capital stock is also consistent with
the estimated capital-output ratio of 2.5 and the observed Mexican investment rate of 0.19.
       The parameters that remain to be calibrated are the time-preference elasticity coefficient
β and the financial frictions parameters a, θ and κ. The time-preference elasticity coefficient is
derived from the consumption Euler equation as follows. In the deterministic stationary state of
the model there are no credit constraints and hence the endogenous rate of time preference
equals the real interest rate:
                                                            δ   β
                                      1 + scF (k , n ) − n       =R                            (25)
                                                          δ    
Given the values of R, δ, n, F(k,n) and sc, this condition can be solved for the required value of
β. The solution yields β =0.0118. The total stock of domestic savings at steady state follows
then from the resource constraint as s = [c-F(k,n)(si+sg)-wn] / (R-1)= αq fk + b.
        Up to this point the calibration followed the typical RBC-SOE deterministic calibration
exercise. A problem emerges, however, when we try to determine the composition of the savings
portfolio because the allocation of savings across bonds and equity is undetermined. Any
portfolio (α,b)∈Α×Β is consistent with the RBC-SOE deterministic steady state as long as it
supports the unique steady-state level of savings (i.e., αq fk + b = s) and the margin and short-
selling constraints do not bind (b> -καq fk and α > χ). Moreover, given the values of s, q f and
k implied by the calibration, it follows from the definition of savings that there is only a small
subset of portfolios in which the economy borrows in the bond market (i.e., portfolios with b<0)
                                                                                                        15

in the set of multiple steady-state portfolios. Debt portfolios require α > 0.9. If domestic agents
own less than 90 percent of k, their steady-state bond position is positive and grows larger the
smaller is α. This also implies that it will take low values of κ to make the margin constraint
bind. In particular, setting the upper bound of α at 100 percent, it takes κ ≤ 0.10 for the margin
constraint to bind for at least some of the multiple steady-state pairs of (α,b). These low values
of κ can be justified by considering that the margin constraint represents the fraction of
domestic capital that is useful collateral for external debt. Several studies in the Sudden Stops
literature provide arguments to suggest that this fraction is small (see, for example, Caballero
and Krishnamurty (2001), Paasche (2001), Mendoza (2002), and Scheneider and Tornell (2000)).
        The stochastic RBC-SOE without credit constraints has the additional unappealing
feature that it can lead to degenerate long-run distributions of equity and bonds in which
domestic agents hold the smallest equity position (χ) and use bonds to engage in consumption
smoothing and precautionary saving. The reason is that, without credit constraints and zero
recurrent trading costs, risk-averse domestic agents demand a risk premium to hold equity (for
standard equity-premium reasons) while risk-neutral foreign traders do not.5 Hence, domestic
agents end up selling all the equity they can to foreign traders, although the process takes time
because per-trade costs slow the speed at which foreign traders adjust their equity holdings.
       To circumvent the problems of portfolio determination in the deterministic and
stochastic RBC-SOE steady states, we calibrate the values of the financial frictions parameters
(a, θ and κ) so that the allocations and prices obtained with the deterministic RBC-SOE steady
state can be closely approximated as the deterministic steady state of an economy with
negligible (but positive) recurrent trading costs and a margin constraint that is just slightly
binding. This calibration scenario is labeled the “nearly frictionless economy”(NFE).
        The deterministic steady state of the NFE has well-defined, unique solutions for bond
and equity positions. In particular, foreign traders hold a stationary equity position at the price
q = q f /(1+aθ). Since this price is less than q f, which is the price at which the return on
domestic equity equals R, it follows that at this lower price Rq > R. Thus, foreign traders now
require an equity premium to hold a stationary equity position. The ratio of the Lagrange
multipliers of the domestic agent’s margin constraint and budget constraint can then be found
to be η /λ = (Rq-R)/(Rq -Rκ). In addition, since the margin constraint binds, bond holdings
must satisfy b = -κα q k, and hence a unique stationary domestic equity position can be
obtained from the steady-state consumption Euler equation. This is the value of α that solves
the following expression:
                                                              nδ   β      R
                             1 + αkd + wn − κq αk (R − 1) −        =                              (26)
                                                               δ      1 − (η /λ )



5
  With θ =0 and no price guarantees, equation (15) implies that foreign traders attain a stationary equity
position when the equity price equals the fundamentals price, and the latter implies a stationary asset
return equal to R. Thus, at this steady state foreign traders hold equity at zero equity premium.
                                                                                                     16

       Equation (26) illustrates the key role of the endogenous rate of time preference in
supporting deterministic stationary equilibria with binding credit limits: it allows the rate of
time preference to adjust so as to make the higher long-run consumption level, implied by the
fact that the credit constraint prevents domestic agents from borrowing as they desire in the
transition to steady state, to be consistent with the higher effective long-run real interest rate
also implied by the credit constraint. The recurrent trading cost is also critical. With θ=0, a
stationary equity position for foreign traders requires a price equal to q f and a return on equity
equal to R, but the latter implies that η/λ=0, so the borrowing constraint could not bind.
       In the NFE steady state, the values of a, θ and κ are set to support a deterministic
steady state with a binding borrowing constraint that satisfies the following conditions: (1) the
debt-GDP ratio is in line with Mexican data, (2) the allocations, factor payment rates and the
equity price are nearly identical to those obtained for the frictionless RBC-SOE deterministic
steady state, and (3) the elasticity of the foreign trader’s demand curve is relatively high. The
values of the financial frictions parameters are: a = 0.2, θ = 0.001 and κ = 0.03. With these
parameter values, and the values set earlier for γ, δ, β, and R, the NFE steady state yields
values of c, s, n, w, d, q, and Rq nearly identical to those of the RBC-SOE deterministic steady
state, but the NFE also has unique portfolio allocations of α = 0.931 and b = -4.825 (which
implies a debt-GDP ratio of about 0.62).
5.2     Stochastic Simulation Framework
        The stochastic simulations are solved over a discrete state space with 78 evenly-spaced
nodes in the equity grid and 120 evenly-spaced nodes in the bonds grid. The lower bound for
domestic equity is set at χ=0.84, so the equity grid spans the interval [0.84,1]. These equity
bounds, together with the maximum equity price defined in (17) and the margin constraint, set
the lower bound for bonds as -κ qmaxk = -5.2. This is the largest debt that the SOE could
leverage by holding the largest possible equity position at the highest possible price. The upper
bound of bonds is found by solving the model repeatedly starting with an upper bound that
supports steady state savings with the equity position at its lowest, and then increasing the
upper bound until the grid captures the support of the ergodic distribution of bonds. The
resulting grid spans the interval [-5.2,25.7]. The segment of debt positions inside this interval is
relatively small, reflecting the fact that, despite the frictions induced by asset trading costs,
domestic agents still have a preference for riskless bonds as a vehicle to smooth consumption
and build a buffer stock of savings.
        A lower bound on domestic equity holdings of 84 percent seems much higher than the
conventional short-selling limit set at 0 but it is consistent with the national aggregates targeted
in the calibration. In Mexico, the average ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP in the
period 1988-2000 was 27.6 percent. Since the calibration produced an estimate of the capital-
output ratio of about 2.5, the total value of the shares of Mexican publicly traded firms
constitutes just 11 percent of the capital stock. A large fraction of Mexico’s capital stock is
owned by non-publicly-traded firms and by owners of residential property, and thus does not
have a liquid market in which to trade shares with foreign residents. In general, at the aggregate
                                                                                                   17

level of most emerging economies it is hard to argue that a large fraction of the physical capital
stock has a liquid international market. Moreover, the result from the calibration exercise
showing that bond positions become positive and unrealistically large when the domestic
economy owns less than 90 percent of its capital also argues for a high value of χ.
       Productivity shocks are modeled as a two-point, symmetric Markov process that follows
the “simple persistence” rule. The two points of the Markov chain and the transition probability
matrix are set to produce moments of the limiting distribution of output that match the
standard deviation and first-order autocorrelation of the quarterly cyclical component of
Mexico’s GDP reported in Mendoza (2004) -- 2.64 percent and 0.683 respectively. The model
matches these moments using a Markov process of productivity shocks with a standard
deviation (σε) of 1.79 percent and a first-order autocorrelation coefficient (ρε) of 0.683. The
simple persistence rule implies therefore that the two points of the Markov chain are symmetric
and satisfy -εL = εH = 0.0179 and these two states have the same long-run probability of ½. The
transition probability of remaining in either state is given by ½(1-ρε )+ρε = 0.8415 and the
transition probability of shifting across states is ½(1-ρε ) = 0.1585.
5.3     Baseline Results: Globalization Hazard and Sudden Stops without Price Guarantees
       The baseline results include four sets of simulation exercises. The first set is for the NFE
case. The second set is for the economy with binding margin requirements (BMR), for which the
margin coefficient is set at κ =0.005. The third set introduces a simple price-guarantees policy
that sets a single, non-state-contingent guaranteed price (NSCG) for all dates and states. The
fourth set uses the same guaranteed price but as a state-contingent guarantee (SCG) that
applies only in a subset of the state space.
        The key result that emerges from the comparison between the NFE and BMR economies
is that the financial frictions representing globalization hazard in the model cause Sudden Stops
when the ratio of debt to the market value of equity is high and the equity market has enough
liquidity (i.e., domestic agents are not at their short-selling limit). Since the comparison is
similar to the one studied by Mendoza and Smith (2004), we keep the presentation short and
refer the reader to their article for details.
        Figures 2 shows the long run distributions of equity and bonds in the NFE and BMR
economies. The effect of the margin constraint is clear in the bonds distribution. The
distribution is biased to the left in the two economies but it shifts markedly to the right in the
BMR case. The opposite occurs with the distribution of equity. The bias to the left in the
distribution of equity reflects the incentive that risk-averse domestic agents have to sell equity
to risk-neutral foreign traders. Binding margin constraints shift the equity distribution further
to the left because of the equity fire sales triggered by margin calls.
        The shifts in the distributions of equity and bonds also reflect the outcome of the
precautionary saving effect. Domestic agents, aware of the imperfections of financial markets,
have an incentive to build up a buffer stock of savings so as to minimize the risk of large
declines in consumption, and in doing so they also lower the risk of facing states in which
margin constraints bind in the long run (Figure 2 shows that the long run distribution of bonds
                                                                                                    18

of the BMR economy rules out states with very large debt positions). Still, Table 1 shows that
the long-run probability of binding margin constraints is about 4 percent. Sudden Stops driven
are therefore rare but non-zero probability events in the stochastic steady state (although many
of the states in which margin constraints bind in the long run do not trigger Sudden Stops, as
explained below). Note also that, since the buffer stock of savings is made of a portfolio of
equity and bonds, margin constraints cause a portfolio reallocation of savings from equity into
bonds. Table 1 shows that the long-run average of the bonds-output ratio increases from 18
percent in the NFE to 50 percent in the BMR economy.
       Financial frictions have negligible effects on long-run business cycle moments (see Table
1). Hence, as in Mendoza and Smith (2004), we study Sudden Stops by examining the model’s
dynamics in the high-debt region of the state space in which the margin constraint binds (i.e.,
the “Sudden Stop region”). Figures 3-5 show the date-0 responses (or impact effects) of
consumption, the current account-GDP ratio (ca/y) and equity prices to a negative, one-
standard-deviation productivity shock for all possible date-0 (α,b) pairs in the Sudden Stop
region, measured in percent of the long-run mean of each variable. The Sudden Stop region
includes values of b that are low enough (i.e., high enough debt) for the margin constraint to
bind, and thus produce different impact effects in the BMR economy than in the NFE. This
region includes the first 25 nodes of the bonds grid and all 72 points of the equity grid.
        Figures 3-5 suggest that there are two key factors driving impact effects in the Sudden
Stop region: (1) The leverage ratio, defined as the ratio of debt to the market value of equity,
and (2) The liquidity of the equity market, defined as the difference between α and χ. Sudden
Stops with large reversals in c and ca/y occur when the leverage ratio is high (see Figures 3 and
4), but given high leverage the impact on asset prices is different depending on asset market
liquidity. If the asset market is illiquid, the Sudden Stop can feature negligible asset price
declines because domestic agents are close to χ and hence have little equity to sell (see Figure
5), but if there is some liquidity in the asset market, the Sudden Stop in c and ca/y is
accompanied by a fall in q. In contrast, when the leverage ratio is sufficiently low and the asset
market is sufficiently liquid, the drop in consumption and the current account reversal are small
(nearly as small as in the NFE case) but the drop in asset prices is larger. In this case, domestic
agents liquidate more equity and trigger larger asset price collapses, but they do so in order to
swap their limited borrowing ability via bonds for equity sales so as to minimize the drop in
consumption. This pattern of larger current account corrections coinciding with smaller asset
price collapses fits the observations of some emerging markets crises. The current account
reversal in the first quarter of 1995 in Mexico was 5.2 percent of GDP but the drop in real
equity prices was nearly 29 percent. In contrast, in Korea the current account reversal in the
first quarter of 1998 was twice as large but the asset price drop was just 10 percent.
        Figure 6 illustrates Sudden Stop dynamics using the conditional forecasting functions of
c, q and ca/y. The first two are shown as percentages of their long-run averages in the NFE and
the last is shown as the percentage points difference relative to the long-run average in the
NFE. These forecasting functions represent non-linear impulse response functions to a negative,
                                                                                                 19

one-standard-deviation productivity shock conditional on initial positions of equity and bonds
inside the Sudden Stop region. The Figures plot two sets of forecasting functions, one for a high
leverage initial state, at which α = 0.938 and b = -4.68 (which imply a debt ratio of 60 percent
of GDP and a leverage ratio of 3 percent of GDP), and one for a low leverage state with the
same α but b = -3.38 (which imply a debt ratio of 43 percent of GDP and a leverage ratio of 2
percent of GDP). Since these initial states are distant from the corresponding long-run averages,
the data in the Figures were adjusted to remove low-frequency transitional dynamics driven by
the convergence of bonds and equity to their long-run means. Given that c, q and ca/y have
nearly identical long-run averages in the four baseline experiments (except for the mean of q in
the NSCG economy, which is higher), the forecasting functions were detrended by taking
differences relative to the NFE forecasting functions.
        The impact effects in the initial date of the forecasting functions of the BMR economy
differ sharply across the high and low leverage states, and those of the high leverage state
deviate significantly from those of the NFE (or from zero in terms of Figure 6, since the data
are plotted as differences relative to the NFE). In the high leverage state of the BMR economy,
the negative shock triggers a Sudden Stop driven by the mechanisms described in Section 3:
Domestic agents sell equity to meet margin calls and trigger a Fisherian deflation that reduces
further their ability to borrow. The net result is that, on impact, a one-standard-deviation shock
to productivity causes c and q to drop by 1.5 and 0.4 percent more than in the NFE respectively
and ca/y to rise by about 1 percentage point of GDP. In the low leverage state, domestic agents
are better positioned to smooth consumption by substituting debt for equity to finance a current
account deficit. As a result, the responses of c and ca/y in the BMR economy are nearly
identical to those in the NFE, so their detrended forecasting functions hover around zero. This
occurs even though the sales of equity still make q fall by about the same amount as in the high
leverage scenario. Notice also that the drop in asset prices is small relative to observed Sudden
Stops, but very large relative to the standard deviation of asset prices in the NFE.
       One caveat about the plots in Figure 6: The initial bond and equity positions used to
generate them yield outcomes consistent with Sudden Stops, but the set of impact effects that
the model predicts for all initial conditions inside the Sudden Stop region (including transitional
dynamics components) are shown in Figures 3-5. As these Figures show, the Sudden Stop region
includes scenarios with much larger consumption and current-account reversals than those
shown in Figure 6, as well as scenarios in which there is little difference between the BMR and
NFE because the asset market is sufficiently liquid to maintain a similar current account deficit
by selling equity when the margin constraint binds. Precautionary saving implies, however, that
all of the scenarios with very large reversals in consumption and the current account have zero
probability in the long run. Notice also that, since the Sudden Stop region includes instances in
which the margin constraint binds but fire sales of assets prevent a sharp current account
reversal, the probability of binding margin constraints should not be interpreted as measuring
the probability of Sudden Stops.
                                                                                                               20

       Figure 6 suggests that Sudden Stops in the model are short-lived. The responses of the
BMR economy converge to those of the NFE in about 4 quarters. Mendoza and Smith (2004)
obtained Sudden Stops with more persistence using higher per-trade costs, which hamper the
foreign traders’ ability to adjust equity holdings. Mendoza (2004) also obtained more persistence
by introducing costly capital accumulation in an environment in which margin constraints link
the ability to borrow to the Tobin Q valuation of capital.
5.4     Baseline Results: State-Contingent and Non-State-Contingent Price Guarantees
       The price guarantees are set as a percent above the fundamentals price in the low
productivity state.6 This choice is based on a theoretical result that holds assuming stationary
decision rules (i.e., αt+1=αt, bt+1=bt) and equilibrium equity prices in the high productivity state
that exceed a time- and state-invariant guaranteed price. Under these assumptions, it is possible
                                                                                      q f (εL ) 
to show that the present value of excess prices reduces to G (α, b, εL ) = z  q −               , where z is a
                                                                                     1 + a θ 
positive fraction that depends on R, a, θ and the transition probabilities of the shocks. Hence,
                                       q f (εL )
under the stated assumptions, q >               is a necessary condition for price guarantees to be
                                       1 + aθ
executed at least in some states of nature. Given the low values of a and θ, this condition
suggests setting price guarantees above the fundamentals price in the low productivity state.
The result does not apply strictly to the numerical solutions, however, because the decision rules
are not generally stationary and equilibrium prices in the high productivity state can be lower
than guaranteed prices.
       The non-state-contingent price guarantee is set ½ of a percentage point above the
fundamentals price in the low productivity state (2.185). Hence, the guaranteed price is 2.196.
This guarantee is offered in all states (α,b,ε) in the NSCG economy. In contrast, the economy
with state-contingent price guarantees provides the same guaranteed price only for (α,b) pairs
inside the Sudden Stop region.
        Figure 7 shows the ergodic distributions of equity and bonds for the NSCG and SCG
economies. Relative to the BMR case, the non-state-contingent guarantee shifts the distribution
of equity (bonds) markedly to the left (right). The long-run average of the expected present
value of excess prices (i.e., the long-run average of the G(⋅) function) is 0.01, which is about ½
of a percent above the mean equity price in the stochastic stationary state.
        Comparing long-run moments across Panels I, II and III of Table 1, the main change
caused by price guarantees is the reduction in the probability of hitting states with binding
margin constraints. The price guarantee nearly rules out the possibility of hitting these states,
compared to the 4-percent probability obtained in the BMR economy. The long-run moments of
the model’s endogenous variables vary slightly with the non-state-contingent guarantee. Asset-


6
  Setting a guaranteed price above the fundamentals price is not awkward because the model’s
fundamentals price does not correspond to the price of a frictionless environment. In the NFE case, asset
markets are incomplete and risk-averse domestic agents trade equity with risk-neutral foreign traders.
Hence, equilibrium prices reflect the equity premium and the distortions induced by incomplete markets,
and thus differ from a fundamentals price that discounts dividends at the risk-free rate.
                                                                                                  21

price fluctuations display less variability, persistence and co-movement with output in the
NSCG economy relative to the NFE and BMR cases. The mean equity price increases by 0.053
percent, slightly more than the percent difference between the guaranteed price and the
fundamentals price of the low productivity state. The coefficient of variation of consumption
falls by about 1/5 of a percentage point and the variability of the current account and the trade
balance increase slightly. Consumption also becomes less correlated with GDP.
        The effects of the price guarantee on Sudden Stop dynamics are shown in Figure 6. Price
guarantees are an effective policy for containing Sudden Stops. Comparing the NSCG and BMR
economies in the high leverage state, the initial drop in consumption and current account
reversal are smaller in the NSCG economy, and the drop in equity prices turns into an increase
of about ¼ of a percentage point. In the low leverage state, the increase in equity prices in the
NSCG economy is slightly larger than in the high leverage state, and we now obtain an increase
in consumption and a widening of the current account deficit at date 0. The price guarantee
results in a price of equity at date 0 that is 2/3 of a percentage point higher in the NSCG than
in the BMR economy in both the high and low leverage states. Foreign traders execute the price
guarantee in both states of the NSCG economy.
       Figure 8 plots the levels of equity prices in the low productivity state of the NFE, BMR
and NSCG economies for all equity and bond positions. The plots show that the non-state-
contingent guarantee not only results in higher prices in the Sudden Stop region, but it actually
results in higher prices in all states. In fact, the guarantee produces significantly higher asset
prices in the NSCG economy than in either the NFE or BMR economies in states well outside
the Sudden Stop region. This is a potentially important drawback of non-state-contingent price
guarantees: they distort asset prices even when the economy is in states in which it is very far
from being vulnerable to Sudden Stops.
        One alternative to remedy the drawbacks of non-state-contingent price guarantees is to
consider state-contingent guarantees. Figure 7 shows that the SCG economy yields a long-run
distribution of equity (bonds) that is less skewed to the left (right) than in the NSCG economy.
Table 1 shows that the changes in the long-run business cycle moments of the SCG economy
relative to the NFE and BMR cases are qualitatively similar to those noted for the NSCG
economy but the magnitude of the changes is smaller. The SCG economy still features near-zero
percent probability of observing states of nature in which the margin constraint binds. Hence,
the state-contingent guarantee is as effective as the non-state-contingent guarantee at
eliminating the possibility of hitting states with binding margin requirements in the long run.
        Figure 6 shows that, in both the high and low leverage states, the SCG economy features
nearly-identical date-0 responses in consumption and the current account as the NSCG economy
and a slightly smaller recovery in asset prices. After date 0, the SCG economy converges faster
to the dynamic paths of the NFE economy. Finally, a comparison of the middle and bottom
plots of Figure 8 shows that the SCG economy yields higher asset prices mainly in the Sudden
Stop region of the state space. Thus, the policy of state contingent guarantees induces smaller
distortions on asset demand and asset prices than the non-state-contingent guarantees,
                                                                                                     22

particularly outside the Sudden Stop region, yet it has similar effects in terms of its ability to
prevent Sudden Stops.
5.5     Normative Implications of the Baseline Simulations
       We study next the normative implications of the baseline simulations by examining how
domestic welfare and the value of foreign securities firms varies across the NFE, BMR, NSCG
and SCG experiments. Welfare costs, W(α,b,ε), are measured by computing compensating
variations in date-0 consumption that equate expected lifetime utility in the BMR, NSCG and
SCG economies with that of the NFE for any triple (α,b,ε) in the state space. Welfare effects
are typically computed as compensating variations that apply to consumption at all dates, but
in principle both measures are useful for converting ordinal units of utility into the cardinal
units needed for quantitative welfare comparisons. The two measures yield identical welfare
rankings for the four experiments, but the measure based on date-0 consumption highlights
better the welfare costs of Sudden Stops and the potential benefits of price guarantees because
large deviations from the consumption dynamics of the NFE occur only in Sudden Stop states
(in which bond and equity positions are distant from their long-run averages).
       The model belongs to the class of models in which capital markets are used to smooth
consumption over the business cycle. Hence, since it is well-known that the welfare cost of
“typical” consumption fluctuations is small in these models, the mean welfare costs of deviating
from the NFE (E[W(α,b,ε)] computed with the ergodic distribution) should be small. As Table 2
shows, welfare comparisons based on date-0 consumption preserve this result. Agents in the
BMR, NSCG and SCG economies incur average welfare losses relative to the NFE equivalent to
cuts of less than 0.07 percent in c0. This is also in line with Mendoza’s (1991) results showing
trivial welfare costs for giving up access to world capital markets in an RBC-SOE model.
        The situation is very different when comparing welfare conditional on Sudden Stop
states. Since the Bellman equation implies that lifetime utility as of date 0 can be expressed as
V(0)= u(0) + exp(-v(0))E0[V(1)], Table 2 decomposes the total welfare cost into a short-run
cost (i.e., the percent change in c0 that equates u(0) in the distorted economies with that of the
NFE) and a long-run cost (i.e., the percent change in c0 that equates exp(-v(0))E0[V(1)] in the
distorted economies with that of the NFE). The Table also lists the date-1 rate of time
preference, exp(-v(0)), to show that changes in the endogenous subjective discount factor play a
negligible role in the welfare analysis.
        In the high leverage Sudden Stop state, which is the one that in the BMR economy
produces dynamics closer to those of observed Sudden Stops, the short-run welfare costs show
that domestic agents are worse off in the BMR economy or in the economies with price
guarantees than in the NFE. The welfare cost is 1.4 percent for the BMR economy and 0.9 and
1 percent for the NSCG and SCG economies respectively. This ranking reflects the fact that
declines in date-0 consumption, and hence u(0), are smallest in the NFE because it provides the
best environment for consumption smoothing, followed by the economies in which price
guarantees help contain the Sudden Stop that occurs in the BMR.
                                                                                                                             23

        The long-run costs are negative (i.e., domestic agents make welfare gains) because
consumption after date-0 increases at least temporarily in the BMR, NSCG and SCG economies.
In the high leverage case of the BMR economy, the binding credit constraint tilts the
consumption profile by reducing consumption at date 0 and increasing it later, resulting in a
long-run welfare gain of about 1 percent. Consumption tilting is also at work in the NSCG and
SCG economies, but in addition the higher (distorted) asset prices lead to higher consumption
relative to both the BMR and the NFE for three quarters beyond the initial date (see Figure 6).
This expansion of consumption in the economies with price guarantees is driven in turn by
larger current account deficits, which are financed by equity sales at higher prices. After the
Sudden Stop at date 0, domestic agents set to rebalance their portfolios from equity into bonds
gradually, but in economies with price guarantees the capital inflows from equity sales exceed
the outflows from bond purchases in the early periods of transition thus producing larger
external deficits. The result are long-run welfare gains in the high leverage NSCG and SCG
economies (1.9 and 1.3 percent respectively) that are large enough to offset the short-run costs,
so that domestic agents obtain total welfare gains of 1 percent in the NSCG and 0.3 percent in
the SCG. These results show that the asset price changes induced by price guarantees represent
non-trivial distortions relative to the NFE. Moreover, as we show below, the same distortions
that increase domestic welfare in the high leverage Sudden Stop states of the NSCG and SCG
economies reduce the value of the foreign traders’ firms in those states.
       At equilibrium, the foreign traders’ net returns can be written as:

                                                                                      ( )
         πˆ(α, b, ε) ≡ k  (1 − α)d (ε) − q(α, b, ε) ( α − αˆ ′(α, b, ε) ) − q(α, b, ε)
                                                                                         a
                                                                                         2
                                                                                           ( α − αˆ ′(α, b, ε) + θ )  .
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                            (27)
The terms inside the square brackets in the right-hand-side of this expression represent the
foreign traders’ dividend earnings, the net value of their trades at equilibrium, and the trading
costs they incur. Notice that, since the budget constraint of the IFO holds, the lump sum taxes
paid by foreign traders cancel with the value of the executed guarantees and hence the two do
not appear in the above expression. Thus, price guarantees distort the traders’ optimality
condition with the moral hazard effect identified in (15) but do not have direct income effects.
        As explained in Section 2, the payoff of foreign traders D is the value of their firms: the
expected present discounted value of the stream of net returns. In the recursive representation
of the equilibrium, the present value of returns is a function D(α,b,ε), and hence we can
compute long-run averages of net returns, E[D(α,b,ε)], and values of D(α,b,ε) conditional on
Sudden Sop states. Since the model has a well-defined stochastic steady state, the long-run
mean of net returns is given by E [ D ] = kE[ πˆ]R(R − 1)−1 .
       Table 2 shows that, relative to the NFE, E[D] and E [ π̂ ] are 14.5 percent higher in the
BMR economy and 52.6 and 42.5 percent higher in the NSCG and SCG economies respectively.
Thus, from the perspective of the long-run average of the value of their firms, foreign traders are
better off in the BMR economy and significantly better off in the economies with price
guarantees than in the NFE. Table 2 also shows that this is the case mainly because of the
increased average equity holdings of foreign traders in the BMR, NSCG and SCG economies,
and the corresponding increase in their average dividend earnings. The contribution of changes
                                                                                                             24

in the value of trades to changes in E[D] and E [ πˆ ] is zero by definition (since the unconditional
means of αt and αt+1 are identical) and the contribution of changes in trading costs is negligible.
Foreign traders build up a larger equity position in the BMR economy as a result of the
rebalancing of the portfolio of domestic agents from equity into bonds shown in Figure 2, and
also because in some states foreign traders buy assets at crash prices (i.e., when domestic agents
fire sale assets to meet margin calls). Foreign traders are much better off when price guarantees
are in place because the price guarantees are equivalent to a guaranteed minimum return, which
reduces sharply the downside risk of holding equity and results in even larger domestic portfolio
reallocations from equity into bonds.
        The result that the payoff of foreign traders is significantly higher on average in the long
run when price guarantees are in place hides the fact that, when evaluated conditional on a
Sudden Stop state, the payoff of foreign traders is lower in economies with price guarantees.
Table 2 shows that the ranking of foreign traders’ payoffs obtained by comparing D(α,b,ε)
across Sudden Stop states with low or high leverage is the opposite from the one obtained by
comparing E[D]. Relative to the NFE, the present value of profits is nearly unchanged in the
BMR economy and it falls in the high and low leverage states of the economies with price
guarantees (by about 0.7 and 0.3 percent in the NSCG and SCG economies respectively). The
latter occurs because in the NSCG and SCG economies the increase in the long-run average of
net returns ( E [ π̂ ] ) is not sufficient to offset the short-run decline in returns ( πˆ(α, b, ε) ) that
occurs at date 0 when a Sudden Stop hits (see Table 2). In turn, this decline in net returns at
date 0 is almost entirely driven by changes in the value of trades. The value of trades in the
high (low) leverage state rises from 0.36 in the NFE to 3.93 (3.22) in the BMR economy and to
about 3.95 (3.24) in the NSCG and SCG economies. In the BMR economy, the increase reflects
the domestic agents’ fire sales of equity to meet margin calls. The equity price falls, and when it
falls foreign traders demand more equity and the value of their trades increases. In the
economies with price guarantees, the moral hazard distortion exacerbates this effect by
increasing the foreign traders’ equity demand and producing equilibrium prices higher than in
the BMR economy. In line with the increase in trading values, trading costs rise sharply from
the NFE economy to the other economies, but their absolute amounts remain small. Dividend
earnings do not change because date-0 equity holdings are the same in all four economies and
the dividends of domestic firms are independent of financial frictions and price guarantees.
        In principle, the present value of foreign traders’ net returns conditional on a Sudden
Stop state could be higher or lower with price guarantees than without depending on whether
the short-run effect lowering date-0 net returns is weaker or stronger than the long-run effect
increasing average net returns. The strength of these effects depends in turn on how much and
how fast equilibrium equity positions and equity prices move, which depends on the parameters
driving the demand for equity of domestic agents and foreign traders. According to Table 2,
however, the substantial increases in the average payoff of foreign traders (E[D]) in the NSCG
and SCG economies exceed by large margins the small reductions in D(α,b,ε) to which foreign
traders are exposed with very low probability in the long run.
                                                                                                          25

       To analyze the distributional implications of price guarantees, consider the following
“resource constraint” implied by the households’ budget constraint and the definition of the
traders’ net returns:
                        c = εF (k , n ) −  k α*d − b(R − 1)  +  qk ( α ′* − α* ) − (b ′ − b )    (28)
The right-hand-side of this expression can be read as GNP (i.e., GDP plus net factor payments
abroad in the form of dividends on equity and interest on bonds) plus the current account (i.e.,
changes in net foreign assets resulting from bond and equity trades), or GDP minus net exports.
       As noted earlier, the long-run averages of consumption in the NFE, BMR, NSCG and
SCG economies are nearly identical (see Table 1). On the other hand, Table 2 shows that the
long-run average of the foreign traders’ dividend earnings is higher in the latter three than in
the NFE. Taking the long-run average of equation (28), it follows from these two observations
that domestic agents are able to sustain similar long-run average consumption levels because
their average savings remain nearly unchanged: The drop in dividend earnings on equity is
nearly offset by increased interest income from bonds. Thus, these baseline results suggest that
globalization hazard and price guarantees as modeled in this paper do not alter the long-run
average shares of global income and wealth across the small open economy and the rest of the
world. Foreign traders receive a larger share of domestic GDP but GNP is unaffected because
domestic agents increase bond holdings and thus collect more interest income from abroad. The
independence of GDP from financial frictions and price guarantees is a strong assumption that
plays a key role in this result. The SOE assumption also plays a role because it allows the
domestic portfolio swap of equity for bonds to occur without increasing the price of these bonds,
which would lower the world interest rate.
        Short-run distributional effects at a Sudden Stop state are different. GNP and GDP are
unchanged across the four simulations, but there is a redistribution of world income via the
current account. Relative to the NFE, foreign traders transfer income to domestic households in
the BMR, NSCG and SCG economies, as the value of trades in the third term of the right-hand-
side of (28) increases because domestic agents fire-sale equity to meet margin calls. But whether
the domestic economy receives more or less income from the rest of the world as a whole
depends on whether the fire sale of assets can prevent the current account reversal, which in
turn depends on the leverage ratio and the liquidity of the asset market. Table 2 shows that
πˆ(α, b, ε) falls at date 0 in the high and low leverage states, but Figure 6 shows that the reversal
in ca/y is larger in the former. Thus, the high leverage state features a redistribution of income
from foreign traders to domestic agents via the equity market, but the larger current account
reversal indicates that this redistribution is more than offset by the loss of access to the credit
market, so that the domestic economy reduces the share of world output that it absorbs. In
contrast, in the low leverage state the current account deficit remains close to the level of the
NFE and hence the domestic economy maintains its share of world output. These results hold
across the BMR, NSCG and SCG economies compared to the NFE but the effects are stronger
in the economies with price guarantees.
                                                                                                     26

         The above results show that, comparing long-run averages of the payoffs of domestic
agents and foreign traders at the stochastic steady state, foreign traders are significantly better
off in the economies with price guarantees than in the NFE or BMR economies while domestic
agents are nearly indifferent. This suggests that price guarantees could be close to a win-win
situation, but this result depends on controversial features of the model. In particular, domestic
agents are nearly indifferent between the long-run outcomes of the four economies because of the
trivial cost of consumption fluctuations in models of the class examined here, and foreign traders
make large gains in the BMR, NSCG and SCG economies because their dividend earnings are
unaffected by financial frictions. Moreover, from the perspective of Sudden Stop states, the
moral hazard distortion of economies with price guarantees yields persistently higher asset prices
which set in motion mechanisms that redistribute income from foreign traders to domestic
agents by more than is needed if the aim were just to recover the outcome of the NFE, hence
making domestic agents better off and foreign traders worse off. Still, foreign traders in the
model suffer little because the sharp increase in E[D] in the NSCG and SCG economies dwarfs
the small, near-zero-probability reduction in D(α,b,ε) for Sudden Stop states.
5.6    Sensitivity Analysis
        Table 3 reports the results of a sensitivity analysis that evaluates the robustness of the
baseline results to the following parameter changes: Columns (II) and (III), larger and more
persistent productivity shocks (σε =0.024 and ρε =0.8), Column (IV), higher price guarantees (1
percent above q f(εL)), Column (V), higher recurrent trading costs (θ =0.01), and Column (VI),
higher per-trade costs (a =2, which implies an elasticity of the foreign traders’ demand function
of 0.5). Column (I) reproduces results for the corresponding baseline simulations. The Table
shows panels with results for the BMR, NSCG and SCG economies for all six scenarios. In each
case, three sets of results are listed: (a) Sudden Stop effects as measured by the detrended, date-
0 forecasting functions conditional on the high leverage state, (b) key moments of the ergodic
distribution, and (c) changes in the payoffs of domestic agents and foreign traders, relative to
the corresponding NFE simulation, for the high leverage Sudden Stop state and the long-run
average of the stochastic steady state.
       Consider first the BMR panel. Columns (I)-(VI) show that the results derived from the
comparison of the baseline NFE and BMR economies are robust to the parameter changes
considered here. Column (IV) has no data for the BMR panel because the BMR economy does
not have price guarantees. The increases in σε and ρε resulted in small changes in Columns (II)
and (III) relative to Column (I). The exceptions are the probability of binding margin
constraints, which rises (falls) to 4.2 (2.3) percent when ρε (σε) increases, and the long-run
average of the value of the foreign traders’ firms, which falls to 12.2 and 4.4 percent in Columns
(II) and (III) respectively. The changes in the probability of margin calls result from portfolio
rebalancing effects. More persistent (variable) shocks increase (reduce) slightly the long-run
average of domestic equity holdings, and have the opposite effects on the long-run average of
bond holdings. As a result, the economy with more persistent (variable) shocks is more (less)
likely to hit low bond positions (i.e., high debt positions) in which the margin constraint binds.
                                                                                                   27

       In line with the findings of Mendoza and Smith (2004), Columns (V) and (VI) show that
BMR economies with higher θ or higher a display larger Sudden Stops, with the latter showing
stronger effects. The long-run probability of margin calls is also sharply higher in these
economies, reaching 16.7 percent with θ =0.01 and 19.4 percent with a =2. The BMR economy
with a =2 is the only scenario in Table 3 that can account for both large consumption and
current account reversals and large drops in asset prices, as observed in actual Sudden Stops.
This scenario also results in increased long-run variability in consumption and asset prices, and
sharply higher domestic welfare costs. The cost in the high leverage Sudden Stop state is 4.1
percent and the long-run average cost is 0.1 percent (which is small but nearly ten times bigger
than in the BMR baseline).
        Comparing now Columns (I)-(VI) across the BMR, NSCG and SCG panels, we find that
price guarantees always work to virtually eliminate the long-run probability of hitting states
with binding margin constraints. On the other hand, the long-run probability of executing the
guarantees is high in the NSCG economy, ranging between 29 and 34 percent in all scenarios
except the one with higher σε, in which it falls to 15 percent. In contrast, the probability of
executing the guarantees in the SCG economy is below 1 percent in all the scenarios except
those with θ =0.01 and a =2, in which it reaches 6 and 3.2 percent respectively. Thus, state-
contingent guarantees are as effective as non-state-contingent guarantees at reducing the long-
run probability of margin calls, with the advantage that in the SCG economy the IFO would be
trading much less frequently.
       A comparison of Columns (I) and (IV) shows that rising the guaranteed price to a level
1 percent above q f(εL), twice as large than in the baseline simulations, the NSCG and SCG
economies dampen the Sudden Stops of the BMR economy even more that in the baseline. With
the higher price guarantee in Column (IV), the fall in c is just 0.5 (0.6) percent in the NSCG
(SCG), compared to 0.8 (0.9) percent in the corresponding baseline simulations. Similarly, the
reversal in ca/y in the NSCG (SCG) is just 0.3 (0.4) percentage points of GDP in Column (IV),
compared to 0.6 (0.7) in Column (I). On the other hand, the economies with higher guarantees
prop up asset prices in the Sudden Stop state even more than in Column (I), with price
increases of 0.7 (0.6) percent in the NSCG (SCG) economy. In line with the smaller
consumption declines and larger price increases, the domestic welfare gain in the high leverage
Sudden Stop state increases to 2.4 (0.9) percent in Column (IV) of the NSCG (SCG) economy
compared to 1 (0.3) percent in the corresponding baseline simulations, while the long-run
welfare losses remain nearly unchanged across Columns (I) and (IV). At the same time as the
domestic welfare gains in the Sudden Stop state grow, the decline in the payoff of the foreign
traders in the same state grows from 0.7 (0.3) percent in the NSCG (SCG) baseline to 1.4 (0.9)
percent in the NSCG (SCG) with higher guarantees. In contrast, the long-run average of the
traders’ payoff increases with the higher guarantees. Thus, the results regarding the effects of
price guarantees obtained with the baseline simulations are qualitatively similar to those
obtained with higher guarantees, but quantitatively the higher guarantees induce larger moral
                                                                                                  28

hazard distortions which result in weaker Sudden Stops but larger redistribution effects across
foreign traders and domestic agents.
        Column (VI) shows that, if the baseline level of price guarantees is applied to an
economy with higher per-trade asset trading costs, the price guarantees still work to weaken the
real effects of Sudden Stops relative to those in the BMR economy. However, with a =2 the
guarantee set 0.5 percent above q f(εL) is insufficient to prevent marked reversals in c and ca/y
and a sharp drop in q. Consequently, domestic agents suffer a substantial welfare loss of 1.5
(2.6) percent in the high leverage Sudden Stop state of the NSCG (SCG) economy, instead of
the small gains obtained in the corresponding baseline simulations with a=0.2. Moreover, the
long-run average of welfare costs increases about 5 (2) times in the NSCG (SCG) economy with
a=2 relative to the same simulations with a=0.2. Interestingly, the payoff of the foreign traders
in the high leverage Sudden Stop state is larger in the NSCG and SCG economies with a=2
than in their baseline counterparts with a=0.2. In fact, in the SCG economy with a=2 the value
of the foreign traders’ firm in the high leverage state is even higher than that in the
corresponding NFE economy.
        The above results show that, for a given guaranteed price, there can be a sufficiently
high value of a such that the distortions of globalization hazard and international moral hazard
combine to yield outcomes in which domestic agents suffer large welfare losses at Sudden Stop
states, but still these losses are smaller than in the BMR economy without guarantees.
Moreover, for a given value of a, higher guarantees dampen Sudden Stops more and produce
welfare gains at Sudden Stop states. These findings would suggest that the IFO should set
higher price guarantees the higher are trading costs. The results also show, however, that
economies with higher a face higher long-run averages of welfare costs with price guarantees
than without them (the cost is 1/3 of a percent in the NSCG panel of Column (VI), compared
to 1/10 of a percent in the corresponding BMR). In addition, economies with higher guarantees
and the baseline value of a also yield larger long-run welfare losses with price guarantees (see
Column IV). Thus, if per-trade trading costs are high, increasing price guarantees makes
domestic agents better off at Sudden Stop states by weakening more the real effects of
globalization hazard, but the stronger adverse effects of international moral hazard make
domestic agents worse off on average in the long run.
        The findings of the sensitivity analysis suggest that the size of per-trade costs plays a
crucial role in determining the effectiveness of price guarantees and the direction of the tradeoff
between globalization hazard and moral hazard. Mendoza and Smith (2004) showed that this
parameter is also crucial for the model’s ability to account for asset price collapses of the
magnitude observed in Sudden Stops, and documented empirical evidence of trading costs in
actual asset markets roughly in line with the model’s predictions. Using the same values of a
and θ as in the baseline calibration of this paper, they found that trading costs in the BMR
economy peak inside the Sudden Stop region and reach a maximum of 6.4 percent of equity
returns. The empirical literature they surveyed estimates trading costs ranging from 4.8 to 8.8
percent across industrial countries and emerging markets. Nevertheless, the crucial feature is not
                                                                                                       29

the magnitude of a itself but the elasticity of world demand for the SOE’s equity, which can be
influenced by factors other than standard measures of trading costs. The findings of this paper
suggest that, if this elasticity is high, it is relatively easy to design a system of state-contingent
price guarantees that reduces the probability of margin calls, undoes the Sudden Stop effects of
globalization hazard, and makes domestic agents better off at Sudden Stop states with negligible
effects on foreign traders returns in those states, and with trivial implications on the long-run
welfare of domestic agents. On the other hand, as the elasticity falls, price guarantees still
weaken Sudden Stops but the tradeoff between globalization hazard and moral hazard can have
negative consequences for domestic welfare.
6.     Conclusions
       The equilibrium asset pricing theory presented in this paper suggests that, in the
presence of globalization hazard characterized by world capital market frictions, providing ex-
ante price guarantees on the emerging markets asset class can be an effective means to contain
Sudden Stops. The same theory predicts, however, that these guarantees introduce a distortion
that induces an international moral hazard effect propping up the foreign investors’ demand for
emerging markets assets. Hence, ex-ante price guarantees create a tradeoff between the benefits
of undoing globalization hazard and the costs of creating international moral hazard.
        The paper borrows from Mendoza and Smith (2004) the setup of a dynamic, stochastic
general equilibrium model of asset prices in which collateral constraints and asset trading costs
are the sources of globalization hazard causing Sudden Stops. Collateral constraints are modeled
as margin constraints that limit the ability of domestic agents to leverage foreign debt on equity
holdings. Asset trading costs are incurred by foreign traders and take the form of per-trade costs
and recurrent costs paid regardless of trading activity. In this environment, typical realizations
of the underlying shocks that drive business cycles trigger margin calls if they hit the economy
when its stock of foreign debt is sufficiently large relative to the market value of domestic
equity. Margin calls lead to a fire sale of equity by domestic agents and a Fisherian debt-
deflation of asset prices. If domestic asset markets are relatively illiquid, the result is a Sudden
Stop with a collapse in consumption, a current account reversal and a fall in asset prices.
        This paper introduced into the Mendoza-Smith model an IFO that offers foreign traders
ex-ante guarantees on the prices of an emerging economy’s assets by setting up a facility
credibly committed to buy these assets from them at pre-announced minimum prices. If the
guarantees are executed, their cost is financed with a lump sum tax on foreign traders’ returns.
The international moral hazard distortion that these guarantees create increases the foreign
traders’ demand for the emerging economy’s assets by an amount proportional to the traders’
conditional expected present value of the excess of guaranteed prices over market prices.
        The quantitative analysis based on a calibration to Mexican data showed that a
guaranteed price set ½ to 1 percent above the model’s “fundamentals” price in a low
productivity state reduces significantly the Sudden Stop effects of globalization hazard. This
guarantee also eliminates the long-run probability of margin calls in the stochastic steady state.
If the guarantee is non-state-contingent, however, the IFO trades often (with a long-run
                                                                                                    30

probability of executing the guarantee of about 1/3), and the model predicts persistent
overvaluation of asset prices above the prices obtained without globalization hazard. The IFO
trades much less often, with a long run probability below 1/100, if the same guaranteed price is
offered as a state-contingent guarantee that applies only at high levels of external debt. These
state-contingent guarantees are no less effective at containing Sudden Stops and they do not
result in persistent asset overvaluation.
        The effectiveness of price guarantees to prevent Sudden Stops and increase social welfare
hinges on the relative magnitude of globalization hazard and international moral hazard. In the
model of this paper, the size of per-trade costs that determine the price elasticity of world
demand for the emerging economy’s assets is a key determinant of both: The Fisherian debt-
deflation depends on how much prices have to fall for foreign traders’ to accommodate the fire
sales of domestic assets. The moral hazard distortion increases foreign demand for domestic
assets by an amount equal to the product of the expected present value of excess prices
multiplied by the price elasticity. With per-trade costs that yield an elasticity of 5, the
guaranteed price of ½ to 1 percent above the low-productivity fundamentals price reduces
Sudden Stop effects on consumption, asset prices and the current account. This results in
domestic welfare gains when the economy is at a Sudden Stop state, with negligible changes in
long-run welfare. At the same time, the value of foreign traders’ firms in a Sudden Stop state
falls slightly but the long-run average rises sharply. Hence, in this case the benefits of price
guarantees to contain globalization hazard outweigh the costs of international moral hazard.
        These results are reverted when per-trade costs yield an elasticity of world demand for
domestic equity of ½. In this case, globalization hazard causes larger Sudden Stops and higher
price guarantees are needed to contain them. However, even with the guarantees at ½ to 1
percent above the low-productivity fundamentals price, which cannot prevent reversals in
consumption and the current account, the moral hazard distortion is magnified significantly.
Welfare gains for the emerging economy at Sudden Stop states are smaller, and the economy
suffers non-trivial welfare losses in the stochastic steady state. In this case, price guarantees
yield a short-term improvement in macroeconomic indicators and welfare because they weaken
globalization hazard, but international moral hazard outweighs this benefit and causes a long-
run welfare loss. This outcome can be altered increasing guaranteed prices (so that Sudden Stop
effects are contained) and adjusting the state-contingent structure of the policy (so that the
moral hazard distortion is weakened) at the same time.
        The challenge to the IFO is to design ex-ante price guarantees that yield outcomes that
clearly dominate those obtained when there is no policy in place to contain Sudden Stops. The
findings of our quantitative analysis, particularly those highlighting the advantages of state-
contingent guarantees, illustrate the complexity of this task. But the task is also difficult
because designing an effective system of price guarantees requires a “useful” model of asset
prices (i.e., a model that explains the quantitative features of Sudden Stops and that can be
used to quantify the effects of the guarantees taking into account how they affect the optimal
plans of forward-looking agents). With trading costs in the neighborhood of those suggested by
                                                                                               31

the empirical literature, the Mendoza-Smith model produces large reversals in consumption and
the current account, and collapses in asset prices. On the other hand, the model is by
construction unable to account for the Sudden Stops’ large output and investment collapses.
Moreover, the challenge to develop a “useful” model applies to ex-ante as well as ex-post price
guarantees. The ex-post systems of the Lerrick-Meltzer and IMF proposals assume that “useful”
models are at hand to establish sustainable levels of external debt, as well as “normal” and
crash prices of emerging economies’ assets. This paper makes some progress towards developing
a “useful” model for designing a system of ex-ante price guarantees to prevent Sudden Stops,
but clearly there is a lot left for further research.
                                                                                              32

                                          References

Arellano, Cristina and Enrique G. Mendoza (2003), “Credit Frictions and ‘Sudden Stops’ in
Small Open Economies: An Equilibrium Business Cycle Framework for Emerging Markets
Crises,” in Dynamic Macroeconomic Analysis” S. Altug, J. Chadha and C. Nolan eds.,
Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2001), “International and Domestic Collateral
Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, v.48, 513-
548.

Calvo, Guillermo A. (2002), “Globalization Hazard and Delayed Reform in Emerging Markets,”
Economia, Spring, v. 2, no. 2.

          (1998), “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden
Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics, v.1, pp 35-54.

        and Enrique G. Mendoza (2000a), “Capital-Market Crises and Economics Collapse in
Emerging Markets: An Informational-Frictions Approach,” American Economic Review: Papers
& Proceedings, May.

          and Enrique G. Mendoza (2000b), “Rational Contagion and the Globalization of
Securities Markets,” Journal of International Economics, v.51.

Epstein Larry G. (1983), “Stationary Cardinal Utility and Optimal Growth under Uncertainty,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 31, 133-152.

Frankel, Jeffrey and Sebastian Edwards (2002), Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging
Markets. An NBER Conference Report. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Fisher, Irving (1933), “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica 1, 337-
57.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz and Gregory W. Huffman (1988), “Investment, Capacity
Utilization and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, June.

International Monetary Fund (1999), International Capital Markets, September, International
Monetary Fund, Washington:DC.

Izquierdo, Alejandro (2000) “Credit Constraints, and the Asymmetric Behavior of Asset Prices
and Output under External Shocks,” mimeo, The World Bank. June.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore (1997), “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
v.105, 211-248.

Krugman, Paul (2000) “Fire-Sale FDI,” in Capital Flows and the Emerging Economies,
Sebastian Edwards ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lerrick, Adam, and Allan H. Meltzer (2003), “Blueprint for an International Lender of Last
Resort,” Journal of Monetary Economics, v.50, 289-3003..
                                                                                                33

Ljungqvist, Lars (2000) “Government Guarantees on Assets and Volatility,” mimeo, Stockholm
School of Economics.

Mendoza, Enrique G. (1991), “Capital Controls and the Dynamic Gains from Trade in a
Business Cycle Model of a Small Open Economy,” IMF Staff Papers, September.

         (2002), “Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop.” In
Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Frankel, Jeffrey and Sebastian Edwards eds.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

        and Katherine A. Smith (2004), “Quantitative Implications of a Debt-Deflation Theory
of Sudden Stops and Asset Prices,” NBER Working Paper No. 10940, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

       (2004), “‘Sudden Stops’ in an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model with Credit
Constraints: A Fisherian Deflation of Tobin’s q,” mimeo, Dept. of Economics, Univ. of
Maryland.

Paasche, Bernhard (2001), “Credit Constraints and International Financial Crises,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, v.28, 623-650.

Schneider, Martin and Aron Tornell (1999), “Lending Booms, Asset Price Inflation and Soft
Landings,” mimeo, Department of Economics, University of California at Los Angeles.

Valderrama, Diego (2003), “The Impact of Financial Frictions on a Small Open Economy:
When Current Account Borrowing Hits a Limit,” mimeo, Research Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
                            Table 1. Long Run Business Cycle Moments

                                                        std. dev.                      first-order
                                           std. dev.                  correlation
Variable                         mean                  relative to                        auto-
                                            (in %)                     w/ GDP
                                                          GDP                          correlation
                                              I. NFE
GDP                               7.833      2.644        1.000          1.000           0.683
consumption                       5.366     2.185        0.826           0.853           0.770
current account-GDP ratio         0.000     1.347        0.509           0.979           0.660
trade balance-GDP ratio           0.315     0.948        0.358           0.564           0.811
equity price                      2.187      0.121        0.046           0.961          0.606
foreign debt-GDP ratio            0.177     56.694       21.442          -0.076          0.997
debt-equity ratio                 0.010      2.888        1.092           0.000          0.001

               II. BMR Economy (probability of binding margin constraints = 3.973%)
GDP                             7.833        2.644        1.000         1.000            0.683
consumption                     5.365        2.186       0.827          0.856            0.771
current account-GDP ratio       0.000        1.324       0.501          0.982            0.664
trade balance-GDP ratio         0.315        0.940       0.355          0.565            0.823
equity price                     2.187       0.121        0.046          0.962           0.609
foreign debt-GDP ratio           0.499      37.964       14.358         -0.118           0.994
debt-equity ratio                0.026       2.007        0.759          0.000           0.001

              III. NSCG Economy (probability of binding margin constraints = 0.001%)
GDP                              7.833       2.644        1.000         1.000            0.683
consumption                      5.362      2.052        0.776          0.790            0.724
current account-GDP ratio        0.000      1.487        0.562          0.968            0.660
trade balance-GDP ratio          0.315      1.111        0.420          0.631            0.750
equity price                     2.198       0.099        0.037         0.891            0.384
foreign debt-GDP ratio           1.336      41.053       15.526         0.001            0.992
debt-equity ratio                0.071       2.186        0.827         0.000            0.006

              IV. SCG Economy (probability of binding margin constraints = 0.001%)
GDP                            7.833        2.644       1.000          1.000             0.683
consumption                    5.364       2.121        0.802          0.834             0.765
current account-GDP ratio      0.000       1.380        0.522          0.974             0.660
trade balance-GDP ratio        0.315       1.000        0.378          0.599             0.788
equity price                   2.188        0.121       0.046           0.903            0.630
foreign debt-GDP ratio         1.114       34.141      12.912          -0.067            0.991
debt-equity ratio              0.059        1.810       0.685           0.000            0.004


Note: NFE is nearly frictionless economy, BMR is economy with binding margin requirements, NSCG
is economy with binding margin requirements and non-state-contingent guarantees, and SCG is
economy with binding margin requirements and state-contingent guarantees.
       Table 2. Payoffs of Domestic Agents and Foreign Traders in Baseline Simulations

                                              NFE             BMR            NSCG             SCG
                                         I. Long-run averages
Domestic Agents
Welfare cost 1/                                              0.017            0.062           0.057
Foreign Traders
 Present value of traders' returns           17.920         20.519          27.350           25.529
   percent change w.r.t. NFE                                14.499          52.621           42.460
 Returns                                     0.280           0.321           0.427            0.399
   (a) dividend earnings                     0.280           0.320           0.427            0.399
   (b) trading costs                        1.1E-05         2.3E-05         8.8E-05          1.6E-04


                                  II. High leverage Sudden Stop State
Domestic Agents
 Welfare cost 1/                                              0.367          -1.036          -0.317
  (a) short-run cost 2/                                       1.376           0.862           0.978
  (b) long-run cost 3/                                       -1.010          -1.899          -1.295
 Date-1 rate of time preference               1.58            1.56            1.57            1.57
Foreign Traders
 Present value of traders' returns           10.931         10.940          10.858           10.901
   percent change w.r.t. NFE                                  0.082          -0.670           -0.276
 Returns at date 0                           -0.192          -3.770          -3.796           -3.791
   (a) dividend earnings                     0.166           0.166           0.166             0.166
   (b) value of trades                       0.359           3.927           3.953             3.948
   (c) trading costs                        1.6E-04         9.8E-03         9.8E-03          9.8E-03


                                  III. Low leverage Sudden Stop State
Domestic Agents
 Welfare cost 1/                                             0.215           -1.194          -0.393
  (a) short-run cost 2/                                      0.055           -0.356          -0.293
  (b) long-run cost 3/                                       0.160           -0.838          -0.100
 Date-1 rate of time preference               1.59           1.59             1.59            1.59
Foreign Traders
 Present value of traders' returns           10.931          10.937          10.854          10.901
   percent change w.r.t. NFE                                  0.055          -0.707          -0.272
 Returns at date 0                           -0.192          -3.056          -3.077          -3.074
   (a) dividend earnings                     0.166           0.166           0.166            0.166
   (b) value of trades                       0.359           3.215           3.237            3.234
   (c) trading costs                          1.6E-04     6.7E-03           6.7E-03          6.7E-03
1/ Compensating variation in date-0 consumption that equates expected lifetime utility obtained in the
BMR, NSCG and SCG economies with that of the NFE.
2/ Compensating variation in date-0 consumption that equates date-0 period utility obtained in the
BMR, NSCG and SCG economies with that of the NFE.
3/ Difference of total welfare cost minus short-run cost.
                                              Table 3. Sensitivity Analysis
                                           Baseline   Productivity Shocks     Guarantees      Trading Costs
                                             (I)        (II)        (III)        (IV)          (V)     (VI)
                                                      ρ = 0.8 σε = 2.4%       1% above qf   θ = 0.01 a = 2
                                                I. BMR Economy
Initial responses in high leverage state
 consumption                                -1.335     -1.380    -1.404          n.a.       -1.453   -3.059
 current account-GDP ratio                   0.939      0.972     0.997          n.a.        1.023    2.157
 equity price                               -0.413     -0.413    -0.413          n.a.       -0.412   -4.324
 traders' returns                           -4.529     -4.526    -4.526          n.a.       -4.522   -4.866
Moments of the ergodic distribution
Prob. of binding mar. cons. (%)             3.973      4.200      2.331          n.a.       16.740   19.444
Averages                                                                         n.a.
 consumption                                5.365      5.369      5.366                      5.369    5.378
 equity price                               2.187      2.187      2.187          n.a.        2.183    2.183
 equity holdings                            0.883      0.885      0.861          n.a.        0.906    0.907
Standard deviations (%)                                                          n.a.
 consumption                                2.186      2.382      2.721          n.a.        2.169    2.454
 current account-GDP ratio                  1.324      1.325      2.020                      1.432    1.428
 equity price                               0.121      0.184      0.100          n.a.        0.114    0.463
Domestic welfare loss1/                                                          n.a.
 high leverage state                        0.367      0.361      0.389          n.a.        0.490    4.074
 long-run average                           0.017      0.013      0.012          n.a.        0.099    0.110

Change in PDV of traders' returns1/
 high leverage state                        0.083      0.082      0.095          n.a.       3.448    0.924
 long-run average                          14.502      12.163     4.354          n.a.       34.519   27.531

                                               II. NSCG Economy
Initial responses in high leverage state
 consumption                                -0.840     -0.875    -0.901         -0.503      -0.885   -2.205
 current account-GDP ratio                   0.591      0.616     0.640          0.354       0.623    1.554
 equity price                                0.259      0.274     0.214          0.718       0.362   -3.256
 traders' returns                           -4.562     -4.560    -4.561         -4.586      -4.561   -4.926
Moments of the ergodic distribution
Prob. of binding mar. cons. (%)             0.001      0.017      0.024         0.002        0.002    0.000
Prob. of executing guarantee (%)           34.290      32.892    15.434         29.650      34.068   28.925
Averages
 consumption                                5.362      5.365      5.360         5.361        5.362    5.362
 equity price                               2.198      2.199      2.198         2.208        2.198    2.206
 equity holdings                            0.844      0.844      0.844         0.842        0.844    0.842
 expected PDV of excess prices              0.012      0.013      0.011         0.022        0.015    0.023
Standard deviations (%)
 consumption                                2.052      2.269      2.615         2.014        2.047    2.191
 current account-GDP ratio                  1.487      1.473      2.035         1.567        1.490    1.584
 equity price                               0.099      0.149      0.104         0.091        0.100    0.429
 expected PDV of excess prices              2.083      3.913      4.235         1.375        1.368    1.466
                                 Table 3. Sensitivity Analysis (Continued)
                                           Baseline   Productivity Shocks   Guarantees      Trading Costs
                                             (I)        (II)        (III)      (IV)          (V)     (VI)
                                                      ρ = 0.8 σε = 2.4%     1% above qf   θ = 0.01 a = 2
Domestic welfare loss1/
 high leverage state                        -1.036    -1.137     -1.033       -2.359      -1.025    1.506
 long-run average                            0.062     0.063      0.132        0.086       0.286    0.332
Change in PDV of traders' returns1/
 high leverage state                       -0.670     -0.732    -0.660        -1.372       2.501   -0.459
 long-run average                          52.621     51.867    17.567        54.696      122.862 116.646

                                               III. SCG Economy
Initial responses in high leverage state
 consumption                                -0.952    -0.878     -0.988       -0.626      -0.920   -2.182
 current account-GDP ratio                   0.670     0.618      0.702        0.440       0.648    1.538
 equity price                                0.107     0.270      0.105        0.550       0.313   -3.227
 traders' returns                           -4.555    -4.560     -4.555       -4.586      -4.558   -4.928
Moments of the ergodic distribution
Prob. of binding mar. cons. (%)             0.001      0.014      0.042       0.009        0.013    0.000
Prob. of executing guarantee (%)            0.035      0.261      0.391       0.502        6.063    3.245
Averages
 consumption                                5.364      5.369      5.363       5.363        5.358    5.355
 equity price                               2.188      2.188      2.189       2.190        2.190    2.191
 equity holdings                            0.855      0.855      0.855       0.850        0.879    0.874
 expected PDV of excess prices              0.002      0.002      0.011       0.003        0.007    0.009
Standard deviations (%)
 consumption                                2.121     2.317       2.709       2.095       2.061    2.298
 current account-GDP ratio                  1.380     1.369       2.028       1.420       1.466    1.536
 equity price                               0.121     0.187       0.120       0.137       0.154    0.469
 expected PDV of excess prices             42.186     62.894      4.235       52.202      37.543   51.111
Domestic welfare loss1/
 high leverage state                        -0.317    -0.481     -0.297       -0.869      -0.385    2.596
 long-run average                            0.057     0.053      0.033        0.054       0.086    0.121
Change in PDV of traders' returns1/
 high leverage state                       -0.276     -0.359     -0.246       -0.567      2.985    0.167
 long-run average                          42.460     41.196      9.446       47.217      72.049   73.680


Note: The guaranteed price is 0.5 percent (1 percent for column (IV)) above the fundamentals price in the
low productivity state of the baseline simulation. Welfare costs are compensating variations in initial
consumption that equalize lifetime utility in each simulation with that of the corresponding NFE. Initial
responses are in percent of the corresponding NFE and detrended as described in the text (except the
response for traders' returns which is in percent of the capital stock and the response for the current
account-output ratio which is the difference in percentage points relative to the corresponding NFE).
1/Percentage change relative to NFE
  Figure 2. Ergodic Distributions of Domestic Equity and Bond Holdings in NFE and BMR Economies


                                                       Domestic Equity

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

   0
       0.84   0.85    0.86   0.88      0.89         0.90   0.91     0.93    0.94   0.95    0.96   0.98       0.99




                                                              Bonds
0.08


0.06


0.04


0.02


  0
       -5.2 -3.6 -2.1 -0.5 1.0   2.6   4.2    5.7    7.3   8.8 10.4 12.0 13.5 15.1 16.6 18.2 19.8 21.3 22.9 24.4
                        Nearly Frictionless Economy               Economy with Binding Margin Requirements
Figure 3. Consumption Impact Effects of a Negative Productivity Shock in the Sudden Stop Region of Equity & Bonds
                                       (percent deviations from long run average)




      a. Nearly Frictionless Economy                                           b. Economy with Binding Margin Requirements
Figure 4. Current Account-GDP Ratio Impact Effects of a Negative Productivity Shock in the Sudden Stop Region of Equity & Bonds
                                      (percentage points difference from long run average)




             a. Nearly Frictionless Economy                                     b. Economy with Binding Margin Requirements
Figure 5. Equity Price Impact Effects of a Negative Productivity Shock in the Sudden Stop Region of Equity & Bonds
                                    (percent deviations from long run average)




       a. Nearly Frictionless Economy                                    b. Economy with Binding Margin Requirements
   Figure 6. Conditional Responses to a Negative, One-Standard-Deviation Productivity Shock

                   High Leverage State1/                                                       Low Leverage State2/

                         consumption                                                                consumption
1.0                                                                        1.0


0.5                                                                        0.5


0.0                                                                        0.0


-0.5                                                                       -0.5


-1.0                                                                       -1.0


-1.5                                                                       -1.5
        2     4    6       8      10     12        14   16   18                    2    4       6      8     10     12   14   16   18
                                                                                                    equity price
                          equity price
1.0                                                                       1.0



0.5                                                                       0.5



0.0                                                                       0.0



-0.5                                                                      -0.5



-1.0                                                                      -1.0



-1.5                                                                      -1.5
        2     4    6       8      10     12        14   16   18                    2    4     6      8      10     12    14   16   18


                       current account-GDP ratio                                            current account-GDP ratio
1.2                                                                       1.2
                                                                          1.0
0.8                                                                       0.8
                                                                          0.6
0.4                                                                       0.4
                                                                          0.2
0.0                                                                       0.0
                                                                          -0.2
-0.4                                                                      -0.4
                                                                          -0.6
-0.8                                                                      -0.8
        2     4    6       8      10     12        14   16   18                    2    4     6      8      10     12    14   16   18
                                                             BMR   NSCG           SCG

       1/ Forecasting functions of each variable’s equilibrium Markov process conditional on initial states α=0.938
       and b=-4.68, which imply a leverage ratio of 0.029 and a debt/GDP ratio of 0.597.
       2/ Forecasting functions of each variable’s equilibrium Markov process conditional on initial states α=0.938
       and b=-3.38, which imply a leverage ratio of 0.021 and a debt/GDP ratio of 0.434.
 Figure 7. Ergodic Distributions of Domestic Equity and Bond Holdings in NSCG and SCG Economies

                                                  Domestic Equity


0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
       0.84 0.85 0.85 0.86 0.86 0.87 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.90 0.90 0.91 0.91 0.92 0.93 0.93 0.94 0.95




                                                      Bonds
0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

  0
       -5.2   -3.1   -1.0   1.0   3.1   5.2    7.3    9.4      11.4   13.5   15.6   17.7   19.8   21.8   23.9

                Economy with Non-State-Contingent Guarantees          Economy with State-Contingent Guarantees
Figure 8. Equity Pricing Function in the Low Productivity State




        a. Economy with Binding Margin Requirements




      b. Economy with Non-State-Contingent Guarantees




        c. Economy with State-Contingent Guarantees
