                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                FINANCIAL CRISES, 1880-1913:
                           THE ROLE OF FOREIGN CURRENCY DEBT

                                           Michael D. Bordo
                                        Christopher M. Meissner

                                          Working Paper 11173
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11173


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




We thank Antonio David and Wagner Dada for excellent research assistance. Comments from Luis Catão,
Barry Eichengreen, Marc Flandreau, Daniel Lederman, Kim Oosterlinck, Anna Schwartz and participants
at a conference at Humboldt University Berlin are also appreciated. Errors remain our responsibility. The
financial assistance from ESRC grant RES 000-22-0001 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

 © 2005 by Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Financial Crises, 1880-1913: The Role of Foreign Currency Debt
Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner
NBER Working Paper No. 11173
March 2005
JEL No. F33, F34, N20

                                           ABSTRACT

What is the role of foreign currency debt in precipitating financial crises? In this paper we assemble

data for nearly 30 countries between 1880 and 1913 and examine debt crises, currency crises,

banking crises and twin crises. We pay special attention to the role of foreign currency and gold

clause debt, currency mismatches and debt intolerance. We find fairly robust evidence that more

foreign currency debt leads to a higher chance of having a debt crisis or a banking crisis. However,

a key finding is that countries with noticeably different backgrounds, and strong institutions such as

Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Norway, and the US deftly managed their exposure to hard

currency debt, generally avoided having too many crises and never had severe financial meltdowns.

Moreover, a strong reserve position matched up to hard currency liabilities seems to be correlated

with a lower likelihood of a debt crisis, currency crisis or a banking crisis. This strengthens the

evidence for the hypothesis that foreign currency debt is dangerous when mis-managed. We also see

that countries with previous default histories seem prone to debt crises even at seemingly low debt

to revenue ratios. Finally we discuss the robustness of these results to local idiosyncrasies and the

implications from this representative historical sample.

Michael D. Bordo                                      Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics                               Faculty of Economics
New Jersey Hall                                       University of Cambridge
Rutgers University                                    Austin Robinson Building
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1284                          Sidgwick Avenue
and NBER                                              Cambridge CB3 9DD
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu                                ENGLAND
                                                      and NBER
                                                      chris.meissner@econ.cam.ac.uk
      Financial Crises, 1880-1913: The Role of Foreign
                        Currency Debt*


                                            March 3, 2005


                                       Michael D. Bordo
                                  Rutgers University and NBER

                                  Christopher M. Meissner
                    University of Cambridge, King’s College and NBER


                                               Abstract
     What is the role of foreign currency debt in precipitating financial crises? In this paper we
     assemble data for nearly 30 countries between 1880 and 1913 and examine debt crises,
     currency crises, banking crises and twin crises. We pay special attention to the role of
     foreign currency and gold clause debt, currency mismatches and debt intolerance. We
     find fairly robust evidence that more foreign currency debt leads to a higher chance of
     having a debt crisis or a banking crisis. However, a key finding is that countries with
     noticeably different backgrounds, and strong institutions such as Australia, Canada, New
     Zealand, Norway, and the US deftly managed their exposure to hard currency debt,
     generally avoided having too many crises and never had severe financial meltdowns.
     Moreover, a strong reserve position matched up to hard currency liabilities seems to be
     correlated with a lower likelihood of a debt crisis, currency crisis or a banking crisis. This
     strengthens the evidence for the hypothesis that foreign currency debt is dangerous when
     mis-managed. We also see that countries with previous default histories seem prone to
     debt crises even at seemingly low debt to revenue ratios. Finally we discuss the
     robustness of these results to local idiosyncrasies and the implications from this
     representative historical sample.


                                    1. Introduction

        The period from 1870-1913 was a period of globalization in both goods and
financial markets comparable to the present era of globalization. Also it was a period
rife with emerging market financial crises with great resonance for the experience that
we have observed in the past decade. In both eras many emerging countries faced
frequent currency crises, banking crises and twin crises. They also faced a number of
debt crises. In the terminology of Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) many of these
countries suffered from original sin. The external debt that they accumulated to

*
  We thank Antonio David and Wagner Dada for excellent research assistance. Comments from Luis
Catão, Barry Eichengreen, Marc Flandreau, Daniel Lederman, Kim Oosterlinck, Anna Schwartz and
participants at a conference at Humboldt University Berlin are also appreciated. Errors remain our
responsibility. The financial assistance from ESRC grant RES 000-22-0001 is gratefully
acknowledged.


                                                    1
finance their development was almost strictly denominated in foreign currency or in
terms of gold (or had gold clauses) before 1914, just as emerging market debt today is
almost entirely denominated in dollars, euros or yen. When the exchange rate
depreciates, debt service in gold or foreign currency becomes very difficult leading to
default, the consequent drying up of external funding and economic collapse.
       The emerging country experience was in contrast to that of the advanced core
countries which were financially mature, had credibility and could issue bonds
denominated in terms of their own currency. There were few crises in these countries.
This leads us to ask whether these very different debt structures might play a role in
explaining the difference in crisis incidence. We also wonder if debt management
policies that created or alleviated balance sheet mismatches as discussed in Goldstein
and Turner (2004) mattered. Finally we examine whether poor reputation and
accumulated default experience was a problem as hypothesized by Carmen Reinhart,
Kenneth Rogoff and Miguel Savastano (2003) in their work on debt intolerance.
       We have developed a database to allow us to identify and distinguish original
sin and balance sheet crises from more traditional currency and banking crises for
roughly 30 countries (both advanced and emerging) from 1880-1913. We have data
both on type of crisis incidence and on the fundamentals that economists believe are
determinants of crises.
       Our results do not find unambiguous support for the idea that hard currency
debt for emerging markets is always associated with more financial turbulence. In
fact, we find evidence that the emerging markets of the day that had significant
amounts of original sin can be divided into two sub-groups. One group includes
countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Italy and Portugal each of which suffered a
financial catastrophe between 1880 and 1913. The other group, including Australia,
Canada, New Zealand, Norway, and the US, had relatively little trouble with financial
crises in terms of frequency or virulence. We ascribe this to special country
characteristics that other independent peripheral countries did not possess.
       We also find that many countries matched their hard currency liabilities with
hard currency reserves or took out such debt in proportion to their export earning
potential. This helped reduce exposure to currency and banking crises and kept
banking and currency crises that did occur from becoming too severe. Nevertheless,
even after controlling for the mismatch position, original sin still appears to be
associated with crises for many vulnerable countries. Finally there is a possibility that


                                           2
countries with better international repayment records were able to avoid debt crises
despite high levels of debt.



2. History, Financial Crises, Balance Sheets and Hard Currency Debt



        In this paper we view banking trouble, currency crises and debt crises that
occur in the same or consecutive years as inter-related phenomena. This is perhaps
different from first generation models that viewed currency crises as events arising
from unsustainable fiscal policy under a pegged exchange rate. It is also different
from a strand of the literature which views banking crises as arising uniquely from
poor supervision, weak structure or stochastic liquidity runs. Our view is that while
some countries had crises that unfolded in ways the older generation of models would
predict, other countries faced financial meltdown by having twin (banking and
currency crises) or even triple crises where in addition to a large depreciation and
disruption in the banking sector the sovereign debt went into default. One important
factor determining the ultimate outcome may be an interaction between the nature of
the debt contracts in place and the robustness of the financial system. Our framework
for thinking about financial crises is very much parallel to that enunciated in Mishkin
(2003) which in turn is inspired by an open-economy approach to the credit channel
transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Balance sheets, net worth and
informational asymmetries are key ingredients in this type of a model.
       In our view, initial trouble might begin in the banking sector for a number of
reasons. One possibility is that international interest rates rise. This worsens the
balance sheets of non-financial firms and banks alike. As the number of non-
performing loans rises and net worth falls, a decline in lending can occur contributing
further to output losses. At this point, internationally mobile capital may take a
decidedly pessimistic view of returns in the debtor country and either stop coming in
(a sudden stop) or reverse itself leaving significant short-term financing gaps. This
reversal leads to more trouble in the financial sector and obviously increased stress for
non-financial firms which are forced to cut investment because of the lack of
financing. Governments may have trouble making interest payments on debt coming
due as capital markets become unwilling to continue rolling debt over. The capital
flow reversal, if large enough, could also force the abandonment of an exchange rate


                                            3
peg and a large change in the nominal exchange rate. Floating regimes could also see
large depreciation occur under such a scenario.
         A contemporary view of the impact of such exchange rate changes is that they
may be contractionary.1 This is where original sin enters the picture. Since the
majority of obligations for nearly all countries are in foreign currency or, in the late
nineteenth century, denominated in terms of a fixed amount of gold, depreciation vis-
à-vis creditor countries or breaking the link between gold and the domestic currency
could lead to increases in the real value of debt. This is a redistribution of wealth from
domestic borrowers to their creditors who are expecting a certain amount of gold or
foreign currency.2 When net worth matters for lending decisions, this decline in the
net worth of creditors can lead to another round of “disintermediation” causing
widespread bankruptcies due to liquidity problems. All else equal, the deterioration to
debtors’ balance sheets would be more severe the greater the amount of fixed interest
rate hard currency debt outstanding.
         There is some contention in the literature as to whether all is in fact equal.
Goldstein and Turner (2003) have argued that often countries insure themselves
against exchange rate movements. Hard currency debt can be, and often is, backed up
by hard currency assets. Alternatively, countries could have enough export capacity to
make offset changes in liabilities due to exchange rate swings. To gauge the actual
effect of original sin one must take account of the mismatch position or the entire
balance sheet position of an economy. We describe how we do this below. Moreover,
Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003) have argued that original sin is a proxy for a
weak financial system and poor fiscal control. As we describe below, we control for
some of these fundamentals too, allowing for a test of this hypothesis.



2.1 The Role of Original Sin




1
 Theoretical work by Céspedes, Chang and Velasco (2004) demonstrates how under certain very
plausible circumstances original sin can lead to contractionary depreciations.
2
  Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2003) argue that what matters is the aggregate external
mismatch and if all debt is domestic, that one sector’s losses are the others’ gains. Our view however is
that net worth matters. When a debtor’s net worth deteriorates, borrowing capacity falls, and the capital
markets seize up. This is one reason why we focus on domestic and external hard currency debt rather
than just foreign holdings (or issues) of hard currency debt.


                                                   4
        It has been the case since at least the 18th century that debt issued on
international capital markets has been denominated in the currency of the market of
issue and not the currency of the issuing country. It has also long been noted that such
debt can become more onerous to repay in the face of depreciations, and that since
emerging markets often face rapid exchange rate depreciations associated with sudden
stops and reversals of capital inflows or very loose monetary policy, these countries
are more often the victims of such a volatile combination.
        Over the last ten years, these phenomena have started to be addressed in the
economics literature. Eichengreen and Hausmann (1997) argued that the danger of
exchange rate fluctuations in the face of foreign currency borrowing might oblige
many countries to adopt hard currency pegs. They coined the term “original sin”
because they argued foreign currency denominated debt was imposed by international
capital markets. Nations with poor reputations, and even nations with good
reputations or solid fundamentals, are obliged to issue debt in key international
currencies. In other words, domestic policies or problems were not the only reason
countries could not borrow in their own currencies. Because of “original sin” and the
problems that could be generated in the face of a devaluation, Eichengreen and
Hausmann (1999) argued that exchange rate policy was of the utmost importance
even for those countries where fundamentals and fiscal policies were sound but which
might fall victim to a liquidity run.
        While we have a bit more to say about the origins of original sin in Section
4.4, one key controversy remains. Exactly how harmful is original sin? Early work by
Eichengreen and Hausmann used mainly anecdotal evidence both on the incidence of
original sin and its effects. Very recent work by the same authors along with Ugo
Panizza (Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza 2005) has shown that countries with
higher original sin have higher exchange rate volatility and higher macroeconomic
volatility. Flandreau (2003) argues that in the nineteenth century depreciation
increased the debt burden because of original sin which led to sovereign debt crises.
He illustrates this with reference to several cases. But we are unaware of any work
which has attempted to find a systematic empirical association between original sin
and financial crises.3

3
 Our conclusions differ from Flandreau’s as we take on a wider set of hypotheses and cases. Empirical
work by Flandreau and Zúmer (2004) which regresses sovereign bond yields on a ratio of interest
service to government revenues and a number of other variables also argues that hard currency or gold


                                                  5
         We collected data from various national sources on hard currency debt and
augmented and compared this with data made available by Flandreau and Zúmer
(2004). What we refer to as hard currency debt is debt that carried a gold clause or
was made payable at a fixed rate in a foreign currency.4 Our measure of original sin is
the ratio of this quantity to total public debt outstanding.
         This measure is different from, but related to, the measures of original sin
defined in Eichengreen Hausmann, and Panizza (2005). One of their measures of
international original sin for country i based on securities issued by residents and non-
                                                   Securities issued in currency i
residents internationally is OS i = max 1 −                                        ,0 .
                                                   Securities issued by country i
         One key difference between markets today and in our period is that recently
debt has been issued in quite a few small country currencies by agents from leading
countries allowing opportunities for debt swaps. That is, for some countries, the
numerator and the denominator in the difference term differ substantially because
many other countries issue debt in their currency. To the best of our knowledge it
does not appear that foreigners pre-1914 were issuing debt in other exotic currencies.
In the pre-1914 case, original sin was not reduced through swaps (Flandreau 2003 p.
20) hence we can restrict attention in the numerator of this expression to securities
issued in local currency (without gold clauses) only by residents.
         The other key difference between our measure and the workhorse measure in
Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2005) is that we look at debt issued in domestic
and international markets instead of looking only at international issues. One reason
we view this as important is because many domestic issues of the day carried gold
clauses. As described above, in the case where monetary authorities devalued the
local currency in terms of gold this would have a similar effect to a depreciation when
a country had foreign currency debt. In either event, real debt repayments for local


debt was dangerous. Their tests are quite different from ours since our dependent variables are debt
crises, banking crises, currency crises or twin crises. Frankel and Rose (1996) examined “currency
crashes,” external debt and exchange rate fluctuations but their approach to measuring original sin, its
impact and the type of crises considered is different than ours.
4
  Our data appendix has more to say about the structure of this debt. Flandreau and Zúmer (2004)
highlight just some of the difficulties in defining this type of debt. Italian bonds for example had de
facto gold clauses for foreigners but not for residents, but de jure gold clauses for both classes of
creditors for a certain proportion of the debt. Likewise, Spain arbitrarily implemented a residency
distinction for manner of repayment around 1900. US debt was sometimes vague ex ante about the
terms of repayment and often repayment was promised “in specie”. Mostly this was meant to be gold
but could have meant silver which secularly depreciated against gold after 1873. Still our measure is at
least a good proxy for the variable of interest.


                                                   6
currency gold clause debt and for foreign currency debt would both increase.5 Hence,
we do not classify debt as “debt issued in currency i" if it contained a “gold clause”
stipulating a fixed quantity of gold per unit of local currency payable. Only debt
payable in local paper currency without mention of the gold-local currency exchange
rate upon payment of coupons and principal is included in the ratio above.
         Figure 1 shows the ratio of hard currency government debt to total government
debt by country between 1880 and 1913. Our time series plots reveal most countries’
measure of original sin to be constant over time. Some countries’ situations
“worsened”. Japan became more exposed to foreign currency debt as it entered global
capital markets from the late 1890s. Argentina and Brazil converted local currency
paper debt into gold clause debt in the 1890s. Only Spain and Italy appear to have
decidedly decreased their reliance on hard currency debt relative to internal currency
debt. These nations often had floating currencies throughout the period. As noted by
Flandreau and Sussman (2005), their situations appear similar to those of Russia and
Austria-Hungary, countries which had relatively low degrees of original sin and
which also had floating currencies over most of the period we cover. These are the
counter-examples to those who believe that poor fiscal history, a shaky exchange rate
policy and economic backwardness are causes of original sin. Nearly all of these
countries had previous episodes of debt default and chronically poor fiscal situations.
We return to this story below.
         The long-run averages of our original sin measure in Figure 2 also reveal a
counterintuitive ranking, but are consistent with previous findings by Flandreau and
Sussman (2005) and Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2005). Financial centers
have less original sin. Small peripheral countries have a lot of original sin. Countries
with ostensibly rotten fiscal institutions and poor international track records have
intermediate levels of original sin. Notice that Spain, Russia, Austria-Hungary, Italy
and Argentina are all towards the lower middle of the spectrum. However, some
countries with sound fiscal, financial and monetary records, like Denmark and
Sweden also fall into this range. These countries, like others in western Europe, had
financial institutions that were evolving in the same direction as the core. The
question then becomes: are these fundamentals along with the historical and current

5
 We are finessing the question of what happens to the real exchange rate and prices in general. We
assume here that nominal depreciations are equivalent to real depreciations in the short-run perhaps




                                                   7
fiscal positions more important for explaining crisis incidence than the actual level of
hard currency debt?


2.2 Currency Mismatches


         Goldstein and Turner (2004) have argued that currency “mismatches” are the
main problem with foreign currency debt. Countries that have foreign currency
liabilities which are not offset by foreign currency assets may be more likely than
countries with more foreign assets to find it difficult to repay their foreign currency
debts in the event of a depreciation. On the margin, changes in the exchange rate can
become a problem the greater the mismatch as local currency assets lose value in
terms of the foreign liabilities. Goldstein and Turner have three key ingredients to
their overall measure of a nation’s mismatch. They first use the difference between all
reported foreign assets and foreign currency liabilities outstanding. They then divide
this measure by exports (or imports if the difference is positive) to account for
openness to trade.6 For example, the mismatch decreases when exports are higher
because a depreciation would likely attract a larger amount of extra revenue and thus
such a country would be more naturally hedged. Finally they pre-multiply this ratio by
the ratio of all reported foreign currency liabilities to all reported liabilities
outstanding.
         Data on bank and non-bank foreign assets is difficult to assemble today and
probably impossible for the pre-World War I era. We focus on the government’s
mismatch and believe this is a relatively good proxy for the economy-wide mismatch.
The functional form we choose is different from Goldstein and Turner and slightly




because of sticky prices. On the domestic side we assume going off gold or a depreciation implies a
depreciation of the local currency versus gold and domestic prices are constant over the short run.
6
  Goldstein and Turner choose a functional form so that the boost to exports from a depreciation
improves a nation’s balance sheet. Though the Goldstein and Turner (and our version of theirs) is one
measure of the balance sheet position, it is not the ideal measure of a nation’s balance sheet. There are
omitted ingredients that could make a difference to the balance sheet. For example, for this period, one
could theoretically refine this measure by including foreign currency and gold revenues collected
through tariffs, exports to gold standard countries, and imports from such countries as a measure of
hard currency earnings and liabilities, and foreign assets held in banks. Most of these data would be
impossible to collect for a reasonable number of observations. Also in Section 4 we discuss how the
omission in our mismatch measure of certain types of assets could explain the fact that some countries
with high original sin seem less crisis prone.


                                                    8
closer to that found in Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2003).7 For country i we
have


                     internatio nal reserves - total hard currency debt outstandin g .
Mismatch     i   =
                                                   exports


         Our measure of reserves usually only includes gold reserves held at the central
bank, in the banking system or held by the government treasury. The sources are
listed in the appendix. Total hard currency debt (domestic and international issues) is
calculated directly if the data is available or by multiplying the total debt outstanding
by the percentage of total debt that is payable in gold or foreign currencies. A higher
mismatch measure should be correlated with fewer financial crises. As such it
compares with the Goldstein and Turner measure. Nevertheless, it does take a
different functional form and potentially does leave out a significant fraction of total
assets and liabilities in the economy. One should also note that as the mismatch
measure increases, damage to net worth of a country inflicted by a depreciation
should be smaller.8
         The mismatch measure above risks combining flow measures (exports) with
stock measures. As an alternative measure of mismatch, we substitute the amount of
total hard currency debt outstanding by the total amount of interest payments due in
gold or foreign currency. This is estimated as the product of the ratio of hard currency
debt outstanding to the total interest payments on all types of debt.9 Interest payments
come from Flandreau and Zúmer (2004) and are only available for a smaller set of
countries.


2.3 Debt Intolerance


7
  Eichengreen Hausmann and Panizza (2003) report that the correlation between their measure of
mismatch and the Goldstein and Turner measure is 0.82.
8
  Goldstein and Turner note that net worth increases with depreciation for net creditors. To get around
the fact that an increase in the denominator of mismatch would decrease the mismatch measure for net
creditors they divide by imports when assets exceed liabilities. For all of the results we present we
divide by exports. We also tried dividing by imports when appropriate. The two measures have a
correlation of 0.999. Our results do not change significantly when we divide by imports for those
observations with positive numerators.
9
  Of course different face value interest rates for paper and gold debts will affect how accurate this
measure is for the countries that have original sin measures between 0 and 1. The actual difference




                                                    9
         A new literature on sovereign financial difficulties has emphasized the role of
past defaults in creating current difficulties. Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003)
(RRS) have coined the term debt intolerance. This line of research tries to explain
why some countries are able to sustain very high debt to GDP ratios while other
emerging market countries run into debt problems with comparatively low debt to
GDP ratios. Their evidence suggests that past defaults generate poor sovereign
ratings. Countries with worse track records in international capital markets suffer
greater financial fragility due to increased borrowing costs at a given level of debt to
GDP. An alternative view might be that default history or sovereign ratings are
proxies for other underlying structural or institutional problems. Hence we would also
like to control for such fundamentals, as far as possible, to allow for the possibility of
graduation from debt intolerance.
         Given these hypotheses, we would like our tests to include a measure of
default history. Accordingly we take two routes to control for this. First we interact a
public debt to government revenue ratio with an indicator variable that equals one if a
country had at least one default episode between 1800 and 1880. Alternatively we
interact the debt to revenue ratio with an indicator equal to one if the country is in the
periphery.10 If the increase in the probability of a financial crisis for a marginal
increase in the debt to revenue ratio is larger for a peripheral country or a past
defaulter, we would argue there is evidence in support of the debt intolerance
hypothesis.


2.4 Other Data and Hypotheses

         The literature on predicting financial crises with econometric techniques is
abundant. Our approach is inspired by the pared down methodology of Frankel and
Rose (1996) who looked at currency crashes at the annual level. Many subsequent
papers have made modifications to this early attempt and have largely been equally
unsuccessful at accurately predicting any type of financial crisis.11 However, some
approaches and explanatory variables have done reasonably well in predicting crises

between the face value interest rate for a gold and paper debt was one percentage point for Brazil in the
1890s.
10
   The periphery indicator comes from Obstfeld and Taylor (2003). The periphery countries are
Argentina, Austria-Hungary, Brazil, Chile, Egypt, Finland, Greece, India, Italy, Japan, Mexico,
Portugal, Russia, Spain, Turkey, Uruguay.
11
   See Berg and Patillo (1999) for a broad comparison of some important papers in this literature.


                                                   10
or at least being strongly and statistically significantly correlated with crises in a way
consonant with priors based on economic theory.
           We attempt to control for the union of the variables from the extant literature
that are applicable to the time period at hand. The list includes total outstanding
government debt divided by government revenue, growth in the terms of trade, the
deviation of the real exchange rate from the period average, the current account
balance divided by nominal GDP, the yield spread between British consols and long-
term government bonds, an indicator for whether the country maintained a gold
standard, growth of the money supply, the ratio of gold reserves in the banking system
to notes in circulation, and the GDP-weighted average spread on British consols for
long-term bonds. The variables used depend on which type of crisis we are examining
and are well indicated in the respective tables. Our sources, and definitions of these
variables are located in the data appendix.
           Our sample includes the 21 countries examined in Bordo, Eichengreen,
Klingebiel, and Martínez-Peria (2001). We have also added information on crises and
macro data for nine other countries. These new additions include Austria-Hungary,
Egypt, India, Mexico, New Zealand, Russia, South Africa, Turkey, and Uruguay. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the most comprehensive macro-historical data set
ever constructed to analyze the determinants of various types of financial crises.




2.5 Crises, 1880-1913


           In Figure 3 we present the frequency of various types of crises (banking,
currency, twin, debt and any type of crisis).12 This is the number of years a country
was in crisis divided by total possible years of observation. We use the country-year
as the unit of observation, and eliminate all country-years that witness ongoing crises
from the denominator to come up with a total number for years of observation. We
see the pattern found in Bordo et. al. (2001) in terms of the relative frequency of types
of crises (i.e., that the predominant form of crises before 1914 were banking crises,
followed by currency crises and twin and debt crises).13 Nevertheless the absolute


12
     Our crisis dates and the methodology we use to classify years of crisis are listed in the appendix.
13
     Debt crises were not demarcated by Bordo et al. (2001)


                                                      11
magnitude of the probability for each type of crisis increases slightly compared to
their figure with our addition of another ten countries.
         Figures 4 and 5 present scatter plots of the percentage of time a country was in
a crisis episode versus our measure of original sin and our mismatch variables.14
There appears to be a quadratic relationship between debt crises and original sin.
Countries with intermediate ranges of original sin seem to take longer to resolve their
debt crises than those at either end of the spectrum.
          It seems intuitive that the financial centers which were more economically
developed had fewer crises than nations like Russia, Argentina and Italy. But what
about the countries with high measures of original sin but fewer crises? These data
points include primarily the British offshoots like Australia, Canada, New Zealand
and the US but also small European countries like Norway and Finland. Perhaps this
hump-shaped relationship is some evidence that original sin is not always related to
more financial fragility. Perhaps these countries avoided crises because of their strong
financial systems and fiscal institutions, especially when compared to the southern
European periphery and the Latin American countries which make up most of the
observations in the middle ground. The next section controls for a host of other
plausible factors that might be omitted from this simple scatter plot, but we conclude
that for debt crises and banking crises this quadratic relationship is still visible.


3. Historical Evidence


         How well does the over-arching framework of financial crises discussed above
match up to the historical record? What role did contemporaries assign to hard
currency debt and fiscal mismanagement as causes of the numerous financial crises
that occurred between 1880 and 1913? We discuss the cases of Argentina, Brazil,
Australia and the US to address these questions. These places shared the distinction of
being peripheral capital importing countries, and so in these, and many respects, make
for good comparisons in a case study.15 Figures 6 through 9 plot the levels of our

14
   Our measure of the percentage of time spent in a crisis is the ratio of the number of years in which a
crisis first occurred or was ongoing divided by the number of years in the sample which is 34. For debt
crises, the numerator is the number of years in which there was no resolution or international
agreement on debt repayment.
15
   It is debatable whether the U.S. qualifies as a peripheral country in this period, indeed our periphery
indicator does not classify it as such. Its real income in both total and per capita terms was as high as
the advanced countries of western Europe that comprised the core countries. It was also similar in


                                                   12
original sin measure, the mismatch variable (measured using total debt outstanding)
and the gold reserve ratio for them. The original sin and mismatch variables look
fairly similar in levels. They also take the same paths in the run up to their crises. The
notable exception to this pattern is the evolution of the ratios of gold to bank notes in
circulation. These are rather high and fairly level for Australia and the US, but they
are low and decreasing for Brazil and Argentina. This highlights the division of the
periphery into the two sub-groups we mentioned above. All four of these countries
had a financial crisis in the 1890s. Brazil and Argentina had near total financial
meltdowns and sovereign debt defaults. Australia and the US experienced relatively
serious banking crises in 1893 but by no means faced financial disintegration. They
both avoided debt default and massive currency depreciations. The robustness of the
financial systems and the government’s fiscal position along with a few other
idiosyncratic factors make the difference between the outcomes.
        Perhaps the most notorious of the late nineteenth century crises is the Baring
crisis that hit London and Argentina in late 1890.16 In Argentina, this crisis was a
triple crisis involving a banking meltdown, a currency crisis and a suspension of
payments on national debt. The 1880s witnessed a “fiesta financiera”. Fiscal excess
and a dubious banking situation reigned. Government spending also took off in the
1880s. Much of the spending was financed by local and foreign borrowing, and it was
unaccompanied by short-term revenue increases. Bank lending to the national and
state governments increased at a harried pace. Foreign purchases of the large amount
of (paper peso) bonds issued by local mortgage banks rose throughout the 1880s. Note
issues by banks in excess of statutory levels also made the Argentine position even
more precarious. There was also a lack of political will to increase tax revenues from
import duties in the late 1880s.
        Borrowing became harder and harder for Argentina in the late 1880s. As
foreign lending started to dry up, the government propped up the mortgage banks
through the mortgage bond (cedulas) market by guaranteeing payment of these bonds
in gold which were originally issued in paper. This move increased Argentina’s hard
currency liabilities as a percentage of the total at a time when reserves were being



overall economic development. However before 1900 it was, like the other emergers, a major capital
importer. See Bordo and Schwartz (1996) and Flandreau and Jobst (2004).
16
   See Eichengreen (1997) for an in depth discussion of this event and a comparison between it and the
Mexican crisis of 1994.


                                                  13
used (unsuccessfully) to prop up the paper peso. Figure 6 shows how this
simultaneously raised the original sin measure and decreased the mismatch indicator.
       When the Bank of England raised its discount rate from 2.5 to 6 percent in
1889, the disaster exploded. Baring, overextended because of Argentina’s insolvency,
was bailed out by a consortium of British banks in a lifeboat operation arranged by
the Bank of England (Bordo 2003). The government of Argentina suspended
payments on its debts. The two major banks of Buenos Aires were liquidated in 1890.
The most notable facets of this crisis are its near textbook sequence of events and the
striking move by Argentine authorities to “dollarize” its debts when in such a
precarious position. The ease with which this occurred suggests that decreasing
currency risk made the debt seem more attractive for foreign investors. But of course
this would only be true as long as these investors neglected the possibility that
depreciation itself would cause the debt burden to become unsustainable.
       It is also extremely interesting that Brazil (also under a floating exchange rate
regime) undertook a local currency to hard currency debt conversion in 1890 similar
in effect to Argentina’s. The government converted 5 percent paper bonds to 4 percent
gold bonds and instituted collection of tariffs in gold in order to help pay these
obligations. Levy (1995) argues that authorities viewed gold bonds as a less expensive
way to fund deficits. The conversion itself helped change Brazil’s original sin
measure from less than 0.5 to nearly 0.7 (see figure 7). According to our data, the
Brazilian mismatch using total debt service worsened from –1.26 to –1.38 while the
mismatch measure using interest service improved from –0.058 to –0.049. Neither
move seems extremely large in comparison with the increase in the original sin
measure we have seen. But this conversion surely contributed to Brazil’s fragility
culminating in the banking crisis of 1897 and the currency and debt crisis of 1898.
       Like in Argentina, the run up to the Brazilian crisis witnessed fairly heavy
depreciation of the real and civil unrest. The price of coffee, an important export, also
tumbled. The depreciation of the real was caused by excessive note issues, weak bank
regulation and continual government pressure for advances. Moreover, the gold tariff
was eliminated in 1891 further damaging the government’s balance sheet. The
government re-assumed the monopoly over note issues from the domestic banks of
issue in 1895.
       All was not bleak in the 1890s. London markets accepted new issues from
Brazil, and these funds were used to continue servicing the external debt. Moreover,


                                           14
coffee prices recovered somewhat and rubber exports began to take off. If the
government had not embarked upon a number of new military operations and
continued with the construction of military installations up to 1898, the fiscal position
might not have looked so grim. As it happened, the banking crisis of 1897 and heavy
depreciation in 1897 conspired to create a currency crash and finally a suspension on
debt payments in 1898.
        For the US and Australia, the 1890s were also a turbulent decade. Australia
had a banking crisis in 1893. The US Treasury suffered heavy gold losses in 1891 (see
Figure 8). In 1893 the US was hit by a short-lived banking panic coupled with more
gold reserve losses. Despite the turbulence, neither country ended up with a debt
crisis, the exchange rates were not allowed to depreciate and the banking systems
withstood the pressure. Moreover it is worthwhile to note that, by our measures,
Australia at this time had a debt to revenue ratio of roughly nine which is in the 90th
percentile of our sample, and a slightly worse mismatch position than Brazil had in
the 1890s.
        The story of the crisis in Australia (see Figure 9) is that land speculation had
reached a frenzied pace by the early 1890s. Banks were lending for long-term
projects. Historians have cited them as being quite illiquid at this point. A tariff rise in
1892 contributed to falling government revenues probably weakening market
confidence at the same time. London markets also tightened up in response to global
financial turmoil in the early 1890s. Banks formed an association to protect
themselves in 1892, but public depositor confidence was shattered in 1893 when an
important bank was allowed to fail. Finally export prices fell making debt servicing
all the more difficult.
        Some observers have noted that the crisis was not all that severe and recovery
had begun by 1893 (Dowd 1992). Policy measures that surely helped alleviate the
severity of the crisis include: a five day bank holiday, the government allowing for a
slight increase in the legal maximum note issue, and paper money being declared
legal tender in New South Wales. Finally Dowd suggests that no balance sheet
problems or disintermediation occurred since there is no evidence that advances
declined during the period. Moreover, he observes that the biggest banks had
prudently prepared for the worst by 1890 by divesting themselves of “speculative
assets”.



                                            15
        In the United States a combination of luck and a strong financial system
averted a total meltdown in the 1890s. The main characteristic of the currency
turbulence in 1891 and in 1893 was the heavy loss of the Treasury’s reserves. Open
market purchases of securities by the Treasury, a tax of 40 cents per $1,000 on gold
exports, the McKinley tariff, and a bumper crop in the US which was swiftly exported
to Europe where there was a major crop failure all combined to avert massive disaster
and bring calm to markets by late 1891.
        In 1893 international markets once again doubted the US commitment to the
gold standard thinking the country might yet move to a de facto silver standard.17 The
closure of the mint to silver in June 1893 in India created expectations of continued
depreciation of silver in terms of gold. This would have meant continuing
depreciation against gold currencies of a silver-based dollar, and so provided a
possible speculative opportunity. In fact, a self-fulfilling attack on the dollar was
nearly successful. The Treasury’s gold reserves dropped quickly and obligations to
repay debt in gold stood at a high level. Markets speculated that gold reserves would
continue to diminish. This contributed to further gold outflows. In June of 1893 the
clearing house syndicate of New York met, but many banks were still pushed to the
limit of their legal reserve requirements. Nevertheless prominent political defeats for
pro-silver activists including the repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act (a sop to
pro-silver forces passed in 1890) helped assuage market fears. A rescue package
engineered by Belmont and Morgan, who purchased $62 million in bonds yielding
nearly $35 million in gold for the treasury, also helped suppress the attack.
        The strength of the US financial system and the Australian system in
comparison to the South American cases above is evident here.18 We think that the
outbreak of crisis in these examples follows a fairly systematic pattern very similar in
nature to the framework laid out above. This is so especially as it relates to credit
expansion, over-indebtedness, and vulnerability induced by rises in foreign interest
rates. But there is a major divergence at the point when we try to understand how hard
currency debt matters. For the two southern cone countries, hard currency debt proved
dangerous and default ensued. For Australia and the US, two places where all debt
was denominated in gold or foreign currency, balance sheet effects did not overcome

17
  Calomiris (1992) argues that markets were expecting a good chance of a temporary suspension of
gold convertibility and a small devaluation of the dollar.




                                                16
the economies. Exchange rate commitments did not fail. Most importantly, the
financial systems were robust. We think that this could be the key difference. These
cases illustrate why original sin is not always dangerous. The statistical work we turn
to now provides more support for these assertions.


4. Statistical Findings


         Our statistical approach is fairly basic. We seek mainly to find a multivariate
way to summarize the data by correlating crisis probabilities with a set of explanatory
variables.19 We use probit specifications, and the dependent variable is the first year
of a debt crisis, currency crisis, banking crisis or twin crisis. Our data set is an
unbalanced panel, and the observational unit is the country year. We omit country
years that include ongoing crises. Throughout, we control for the lack of statistical
independence between country observations by using heteroscedasticity robust,
country clustered standard errors.20 We first present specifications with as many
variables as is feasible and then as a robustness check we drop the most statistically
insignificant variables so as to avoid possible collinearity problems and to include
more observations.21
         One thing we find consistently, even when conditioning on other variables, is
a quadratic relationship between the ratio of hard currency debt to total debt and the
frequency of debt and banking crises. This suggests that original sin may contribute to
more financial crises but that sometimes the damage can be limited by other means.
         Holding       our measure of the currency mismatch constant however, no
relationship between original sin and currency crises is apparent. We view most
currency crises as a symptom of capital flight from a crumbling financial sector and
liquidity problems, and think that indirectly original sin is associated with currency

18
   Caballero, Cowan and Kearns (2004) look at the success of dealing with capital market shocks over
the last 100 years and make an interesting comparison between Australia and Chile.
19
   Endogeneity of the regressors as well as usual specification problems may be present in our
specifications. We attempted to mitigate endogeneity biases in un-reported specifications by using
lagged values of the explanatory variables. Results in these cases did not change drastically in
qualitative terms. Of course this solution is only valid if variables are not too persistent. Also using lags
creates measurement error issues which are likely to be problematic for estimation.
20
   We estimated random effects probit models as well but found them to perform weakly. The
estimated correlation between within country observations was poorly estimated.
21
   The appendix lists the key variables and their availability for each country so the reader can see what
the various samples look like. The issue of model specification is of course not trivial. We are taking a




                                                    17
crises. As the framework provided above would predict, we see that initial problems
in the banking sector (proxied by one-year ahead indicators of debt crises and banking
crises) are strongly associated with currency crises. Hence one possibility is that
original sin affects debt sustainability or the soundness of the banking sector, and then
these problems with debt and the banking system can create a currency run which
further contributes to balance sheet trouble and possibly financial implosion.
         Moreover, we document a link between currency crises and mismatches or
weak reserve positions. This is evidence supportive of the idea that the outbreak of
currency crises is the symptom of liquidity problems or perhaps deeper solvency
troubles in the economy which contribute to speculative capital outflows and sudden
stops. Some weak evidence shows that mismatches are associated with debt crises too.
Finally some inconclusive evidence points also to debt intolerance as a factor in debt
crises without ruling out a role for original sin or mismatches.


4.1 Debt Crises

         Table 1 presents results from various specifications where the initial year of a
debt crisis is the dependent variable. Column one presents a comprehensive
specification that includes a variable set as large as possible and which also allows for
controls for original sin and currency mismatches. We see that there is a quadratic in
original sin, in mismatches (as measured using interest payments rather than total debt
outstanding), and there is evidence of debt intolerance. These variables are
statistically significant (at better than the 90 percent level of confidence) at the means
for each of these controls.22 The size of the estimated coefficients is symptomatic of
the low predicted incidence of debt crises. Since the incidence in the sample is barely
two percent, this is understandable.




decidedly reduced form approach, and we use the econometrics as supplements to the qualitative
theoretical conclusions and historical record.
22
   As usual in a probit model, the actual marginal effect, the standard error and statistical significance
depend on the levels of the covariates in a nonlinear way. We calculated these effects for each
observation for particular specifications and found that magnitudes and statistical significance varied
considerably (e.g., see Figures 10 and 11). On the whole, we often find that the coefficients of interest
are statistically significant and have the most impact at the extremes of the empirical distributions.
Moreover the statistical significance of the interaction effect must be approached with caution. We are
interested in the statistical significance of the partial derivative of the probability with respect to say
hard currency debt at various values (e.g., the average) but do not always report the p-values here. For
simplicity we focus mainly on this first partial derivative.


                                                    18
         We interpret the quadratic in original sin as saying that more original sin is
associated with a higher likelihood of a debt crisis, but those observations with very
high levels of original sin face a lower likelihood. Again, these are the countries in the
areas of recent settlement like Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and the US which had
strong financial systems, good fiscal institutions intent and which borrowed largely
for productive investments.
         In terms of mismatch, there is evidence that past a certain level a better
mismatch position leads to a lower likelihood of a debt crisis.23 But the quadratic
pattern suggests that in the neighborhood of an intermediate level of mismatch a
marginally better mismatch is associated with a higher chance of a default. The reason
is likely to be because those countries that have in fact recently defaulted on their
debt, but still have the fundamentals that strongly suggest a default, have cut their
interest payments and thereby have drastically improved their mismatch position (e.g.,
Argentina and Brazil in the mid-1890s). This makes it appear as if intermediate
mismatch positions are associated with fewer crises when in fact the opposite is the
case. We think that the data show that better mismatches are intuitively associated
with a lower chance of a debt debacle.
         Most other variables have signs that fit our priors. Improvements in the terms
of trade, real depreciations, more gold reserves relative to notes outstanding, slower
growth of monetary aggregates, and a calmer international environment in capital
markets are all associated with lower probabilities of debt crises. The statistical
significance of the coefficients on these variables varies however. Meanwhile, lower
local bond spreads (statistically insignificant) and adherence to the gold standard
(statistically significant) imply a higher propensity to have a crisis. The positive
coefficient on the gold standard does not disappear if we include it in the other
specifications but the coefficient is not statistically indistinguishable from zero.24
         In Figure 10 we also present a scatter plot of the marginal effects of the hard
currency debt ratios (calculated at the actual values of the covariates) versus the actual
levels of hard currency debt. We see that for intermediate ranges of original sin that

23
   Recall that our mismatch variable increases as the mismatch decreases.
24
   Unreported, likelihood ratio tests between the shorter and longer models cannot reject their
equivalence. Perhaps the positive coefficient on the gold standard variable is compatible with theories
that argue rigid exchange rates amplify negative external shocks more than flexible rates. But since the
statistical significance varies a lot by specification we do not see overwhelming evidence for any
hypothesis suggesting a positive or negative coefficient here. See Edwards (2003) for a thorough
discussion of exchange rate regimes and crises.


                                                  19
the coefficient varies a lot but is likely to be positive whereas, towards the extremes,
the marginal effects are likely to be near zero or even negative. Figure 11 presents the
z-statistics for the test that the marginal effect is different from zero. When evaluated
at the actual values, only a minority of these have z-statistics high enough to be
considered statistically significant. Only the highest in absolute value are significant.
This roughly backs up the visual impression received from the previous figure.
         We also provide a measure of the fit of the model. This is gauged by the
percentage of actual crises that were predicted to be crisis episodes, and the
percentage of non-crisis years that are predicted to be non-crisis years. We use a
predicted probability of greater than 0.1 to classify a country as having a debt crisis.
This is a low threshold, but debt crises are relatively rare in the raw sample. (The
sample frequency is 0.01.) For the debt crises, the fit is relatively good and the type II
errors are mainly concentrated in the country years immediately preceding or coming
after actual crises.25
         Column 2 of Table 1 pares down the number of variables in the specification
and looks more closely at the relationship between original sin and debt crises. The
quadratic is still evident. The point where the partial derivative of the predicted
probability with respect to a change in the hard currency debt ratio is located around
0.35—the point where over a third of all debt becomes payable in hard currency. At
the average ratio of hard currency debt to total debt of 0.45, the marginal effect of an
increase in the hard currency to total debt ratio is not statistically distinguishable from
zero. It is also interesting to note that observations where the gold cover ratio is high
and the level of hard currency debt is very low or very high provide excellent
predictors for the outcome “no debt crisis”. For column 1 the statistical software
(Stata) reports that over 140 of such outcomes are completely determined. We believe
this is the reason why the statistical significance of these factors is so high, and we are
reassured that these findings are consistent with priors based on the theoretical
framework outlined above.26




25
   For other types of crises we fail to correctly classify many crisis episodes even at low thresholds. We
use the 0.1 barrier for currency and banking crises and 0.03 for the even rarer twin crises. Obviously
our tabulations are sensitive to these thresholds. Our maximum predicted probabilities rarely exceed
0.2 for any type of crisis. Further modifications to the methodology to allow for the “rare events”
nature of the data should be pursued in further work on the topic.
26
   The hard currency debt ratio is not a perfect predictor of debt crises.


                                                   20
         Column 3 shows that mismatches between interest payments in hard currency
and available reserves can also contribute to crises.27 Mismatch ratios extend from
-0.45 to 1.7, while the marginal effects, evaluated at each observation’s covariates and
defined as a function of the actual mismatch, extend from about –1 to 2.7. For
mismatch ratios from –0.45 to about 0.2 the marginal effects are zero or positive. For
mismatch ratios between 0.2 and 0.5, a marginally better mismatch position decreases
the predicted likelihood of a debt crisis (i.e., there is a negative coefficient). After a
mismatch ratio of around 0.5 is attained, the marginal effect returns to zero. This is to
say that there appears to be a point where additions to the reserve base relative to
foreign currency interest payments or increases in export capacity have a limited
effect on crisis probability. Our discussion above is one reason why improvements in
the mismatch ratio are associated with more crises at low/intermediate levels of the
variable.
         Column 4 addresses the relationship between debt intolerance and debt crises
in a slightly larger sample than in column 1. Like in column 1, an increase in the debt
to revenue ratio is negatively associated with crisis incidence when a country has no
previous default history. However, when a country had a default prior to 1880, higher
debt to revenue ratios increase the chance of having a debt crisis (p-value 0.06). This
would appear to be evidence in favor of the debt intolerance hypothesis, but it does
not come at the expense of a role for original sin or other debt management policies.
Moreover, there still appears to be a quadratic in original sin in this specification.




4.2 Currency Crises


         Column 1 of Table 2 presents an inclusive specification where the dependent
variable is the probability of having a currency crisis. There are 17 events to be

27
   We found no evidence that mismatches measured using total debt outstanding (instead of interest
payments due) were statistically significant. If we use the mismatch variable with debt outstanding in
column 1 instead of current interest payments, we find a statistically insignificant quadratic with nearly
the same shape as the reported regressions. If we enter the mismatch variable by itself without the
square term then there is a statistically significant and positive relationship between (better)
mismatches and debt crises. Our discussion of why there is a quadratic in mismatches probably
explains the counter-intuitive positive relationship and the insignificance of the quadratic of the
mismatch could be due to errors in trying to capture the actual mismatch position.



                                                   21
predicted in this sample. Few variables are statistically significant except for the
market portfolio spread and two indicator variables that indicate if a debt crisis or a
banking crisis occurred in the next year.
         The practical reason we include these leads for debt crises and banking crises
is because they are good proxies for initial troubles in the banking sector or
unsustainable debt levels.28 The theoretical reason is that we view a financial crisis
unfolding in three stages: First, problems in the banking sector and deterioration in
bank, firm and government balance sheets arise; this generates a currency crisis;
finally, a more widespread may arrive resulting in a full-blown banking crisis and/or
debt default. The results in Table 2 are consistent with this story.
          In terms of signs on the coefficients, we see still see a quadratic in original sin
(though of opposite shape to that found in Table 1), a negative relationship between
our mismatch variable and no sign of debt intolerance. Some incidental parameters in
the other variables have the expected signs while others do not. However, nothing in
column 1 besides the crisis leads and the market spread is statistically significant.29
         We pare down the specification in column 2 and find an intuitive negative
relationship between the mismatch variable (measured using total debt outstanding
rather than interest payments) which is significant only at the 81 percent level of
confidence. This is some very weak evidence that liquidity problems are at play in a
currency crisis. The trade balance has a positive sign as it did in the Frankel and Rose
(1996) study of the late twentieth century. Lagging this variable causes the magnitude
of the coefficient and its statistical significance to fall suggesting some endogeneity
problems.
         We give mismatches a second chance in column 3. Mismatches are associated
with a higher probability of a currency crash (p-value of 0.09). This finding does not
suggest that original sin is innocuous, but rather suggests that countries that have

28
   Better indicators for early trouble in the banking sector might include growth rates of non-
performing assets or bank insolvencies in the year of the currency crisis. None of these are available in
a systematic way. In terms of debt, various ratios could be used to judge sustainability. Another reason
we use this variable is to show how currency crises precede debt crises and hence indirectly feed
through to balance sheet problems associated with original sin.
29
   As Flandreau and Zúmer (2004) have emphasized, the debt revenue ratio and the original sin
variables can increase when the nominal exchange rate changes and when there is hard currency debt.
To the extent that this supports the argument that a banking crisis or a debt crisis is more likely with a
depreciation, then there is no problem here. One problem could arise if we predict currency crises with
variables that are functions of the nominal exchange rate. To avoid this issue we tried lagging such
variables in the currency crisis specifications. Our results regarding such variables in the currency crisis




                                                    22
original sin may be able to avoid currency crises if they manage to collect adequate
reserves or are sufficiently open. Moreover it may back up the argument in
Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2003) that original sin is a second best
outcome. If countries cannot issue own-currency debt and then are forced by market
discipline to hold costly reserves to insure themselves against currency speculation
this may not be socially optimal. Finally we note that a higher gold cover ratio is
associated with a lower probability of a crisis although it is not statistically
significant, and a greater trade surplus relative to GDP is associated with a higher
chance of a currency crisis.30
          In column 4 we drop some of the least significant variables and focus on debt
intolerance. This makes for a slightly larger sample. There is no sign that a spotty
record on debt combines with the debt burden to generate an increased chance of
currency crises. The interaction of the debt ratio with the periphery dummy is
negative and larger in absolute terms than the un-interacted coefficient. But all
coefficients are far from statistically significant. Though we do not report it, using the
pre-1880 default indicator only makes this negative result stronger. It also makes the
coefficient on mismatch become highly statistically significant and negative. This
implies that improvement in the mismatch is associated with less of a chance of a
crisis.
4.3 Banking Crises


          Banking crises also seem to be associated with original sin and currency
mismatches, but not with debt intolerance. The latter might be expected as
international perceptions of sovereign debt management and fiscal constraints might
not necessarily have an effect on the liquidity or solvency of the banking system. On
the other hand, banking trouble associated with currency mismatches and hard
currency liabilities might be expected. We have already seen that currency crises are
likely to be followed by incipient banking crises.
          When the exchange rate changes precipitously, bank balance sheets could be
at risk for various reasons.           In countries with bond based banking systems if

regressions are similar in qualitative terms when we use one or two lags of mismatch, external to total
debt and the debt to revenue ratio.
30
   The seemingly counter-intuitive result that net exporters have a higher chance of a crisis seems to
arise from the fact that the small peripheral countries in our sample tend to be net exporters while GB,




                                                  23
governments neglected to redeem their bonds in gold terms or had to default because
of the increased burden placed on them by gold debt, bank balance sheets could
suffer. For similar reasons, if loans are made by international banks or through
domestic banks that have international liabilities, currency depreciation could easily
impair the net worth of the banking sector. International lending through
correspondent banks was prevalent in South America e.g., through the Rothschilds
(Brazil) and the House of Baring (in Argentina). Moreover, our results suggest that
when countries have a stronger gold reserve position that the danger of hard currency
debt is lower.
         Column 1 of Table 3 shows again the quadratic relationship between hard
currency debt and banking crises. It also shows a significant and negative relationship
between our mismatch variable and the probability of a crisis. The existence of a
central bank, adherence to the gold standard, lower growth of the money supply (or of
the note circulation), appreciation of the real exchange rate, lower gold cover ratios,
higher trade deficits and improvement in the terms of trade are associated with lower
chances of a crisis. The square of original sin, mismatch, the trade balance and the
gold standard variable are significant at better than the 10 percent level.31 Little else is
statistically significant here, and the signs on the gold cover ratio and the trade
balance are opposite to what one might expect.
         Column 2 of Table 3 shows how the coefficients on the two controls for
original sin provide a quadratic fit, but both are statistically insignificant.
Nevertheless, the mismatch control has a negative sign and is significant at the 86
percent level of confidence. Column 3 drops the mismatch variable and provides
some more support for a link between original sin and banking crises as the standard
errors on the original sin variables shrink in relation to their point estimates making
them both significant at about the 90 percent level of confidence. Finally column 4
provides no evidence of debt intolerance. However mismatches are again significant
as is the negative relationship between the gold standard and banking crises.
         Table 4 shows that finding determinants of twin crises is more difficult. In the
comprehensive specification of column 1, only the trade balance is significant at


France and Switzerland, for example, have highly negative ratios for this variable and had of course
very few crises.
31
   The negative gold standard coefficient may be contradictory to the positive coefficient we found in
Table 1. Again, the results are fragile to the particular specification so there is little we can say
definitively.


                                                  24
conventional levels. Nevertheless the quadratic relationship between original sin and
such crises is evident and each coefficient is significant at a bit better than the 90
percent confidence level (p-values 0.083 and 0.060). In column 2 we control for
mismatches with an interaction between original sin and the reserve to import ratio.
We find that the debt revenue ratio is positively associated with twin crises (p-value
0.118) and that higher gold cover ratios and a more tranquil international environment
(p-value 0.053) are associated with fewer twin crises.32 The interaction terms suggest
that more reserves decrease the chances of having a twin crisis, but this effect is not
statistically significant. The specification in column 2 also suggests that a higher ratio
of reserves to imports is associated with a greater chance of a twin crisis. Perhaps this
is because crisis prone countries stock up on reserves prior to a crisis. Column 3
eliminates some of the variables and still finds a hump-shaped relationship (positive
below a ratio of about 0.5 and negative above) between original sin and twin crises
with each coefficient significant when evaluated at the means. Further specifications
revealed no particular relationships between our other measure of mismatches, default
history and twin crises.

4.4 Robustness and Reflections


         Above, we found some evidence that after a certain point more hard currency
debt relative to the total seemed to be associated with fewer debt crises and banking
crises. One possibility is that the level of original sin is correlated with factors or
characteristics of countries we have left out of the analysis. That is to say, perhaps
those most at risk take care to protect their financial systems from crises or have
effective ways of dealing with crises despite their high levels of original sin. If these
factors were in place constantly over time, an econometric solution to such a problem
is to include country-level indicator variables.
         Since this is infeasible to do in a limited dependent variable model with our
particular data configuration, we move to a “fixed effects” linear probability model
estimated by OLS. Table 5 re-specifies the models of column 1 from Tables 1 through
4 in this way. Like the previous results, the models fit fairly poorly since there are so

32
  Throughout the paper we have used the gdp-weighted spread on consols as a time-specific measure
of international capital market turbulence. It is also a fact that this measure declines strongly over time
and could be picking up other factors such as increased liquidity in international capital markets , a




                                                    25
few crises compared to non-crisis years. Many of the coefficients on the basic macro
controls are statistically insignificant. Nevertheless the results regarding the
coefficients on the original sin and mismatch variables are qualitatively very similar
to the findings in the previous tables.
         For debt crises, we find evidence of the very same “quadratic” pattern from
Table 1. We cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficients on hard currency debt
and its square are different from zero at the 95 percent confidence level. For currency
crises, the link between a crisis and original sin is indirect and seems to be coming
through the outbreak of banking problems or eventual debt crises. Also columns 3 and
4 show that better mismatches are associated with lower chances of having a banking
crisis or a twin crisis. The coefficients are highly statistically significant as well. For
these latter types of crisis it could be said that better reserve positions or being more
open to exports for a given level of original sin helped avoid trouble.
         We are also apparently left with the result that time-invariant underlying
fundamentals like empire status or resource endowments cannot explain how places
like the US, Canada, Australia and Scandinavia managed to carry high original sin
and also avoid severe financial crises. This suggests the possibility that these places
had a more active approach to managing crises or their financial systems were
structured in a way that helped stave off financial meltdown following a major
shock.33 Oppositely these is little evidence that places like Argentina, Brazil, Greece,
Italy, and Portugal faced financial meltdowns because of time-invariant characteristics
such as “bad government” or institutions or simply because they were in the
geographic or economic periphery.
         In part, such omitted factors that are hard to control for may be playing a role
in giving rise to the hump-shaped relationship between crisis probability and hard



more tranquil political environment, the shift from deflation after 1896 as Flandreau, Le Cacheux, and
Zúmer (1998) argue, and other environmental factors that change over time in step.
33
   The endogeneity of the level of original sin should be explored and other experiences across time
should be compared. The endogeneity bias would appear to be small. Eichengreen, Hausmann and
Panizza (2003, 2005), and Flandreau and Sussman (2005) take the view that original sin is inversely
related to country size. Having a financial center also decreases original sin. Being large and/or having
a financial center makes for liquid markets in the domestic currency and increases the demand for such
assets in the portfolio of international investors. Because of this, “endogeneity” may be less of an issue
than one might conjecture at the outset. Evidence from Australia, New Zealand and the US in Bordo,
Meissner and Redish (2005) suggests that wars and large shocks that closed international markets and
forced governments into the domestic markets catalyzed the process. Still other factors are obviously
necessary for these factors to be viable explanations.



                                                   26
currency debt.34 They probably explain why the positive marginal effect of original
sin becomes negative at high levels of original sin. Predicted values of having a debt
crisis from the regression in column 2 of Table 1 and the actual values of original sin
are shown in Figure 12. The countries at the far right end of the Figure (the US,
Canada and Australia) with heavy foreign currency debt were special cases.35 They
may have had other means of protecting themselves from reversals and long drawn
out crises.
         The US was lucky to have had a deep and relatively well-functioning financial
system allowing it to resolve crises rapidly. Public debt levels were fairly low, were
well-managed since Alexander Hamilton’s funding plan in 1790, and from a long
term perspective it had sound economic fundamentals. Canada, Australia and New
Zealand, had branch banking. The short maturities at which intermediaries lent their
funds allowed for more prudent risk-taking by borrowers. The dominions and the US
then shared the fundamentals, the fiscal institutions and the creditor protections
necessary to maintain good borrowing practices.
         The commitment and ability to maintain gold pegs in the British dominions
and colonies were stronger and more durable than in the independent countries with
sovereign governments and national monetary systems. New Zealand banks held large
sterling asset positions in London and also had an incentive to maintain the peg
against sterling. Creditors to the dominions often felt that repayment was a certainty
because many issues carried the guarantee of the British government. Debt was also
given trustee status later in this period. This channelled Trustee Saving Banks funds
into colonial securities, raising bond prices and making investors feel that such



34
   In other un-reported specifications, we tried using proxies for good institutions and financial
development in our probit models. We included the ratio of the money stock to GDP, a British Empire
indicator, a central bank indicator and a branch banking indicator. None of these variables eliminated
the quadratic pattern or gave rise to a conditionally positive relationship between original sin and debt
crises, currency crises or banking crises. In the debt crisis specifications it is not feasible to estimate the
equations with an empire dummy simply because no included dominion, colony or other member of the
British Commonwealth ever had a debt default in this period. This indicator would be a perfect
predictor of not having a debt crisis. So we are left clinging to the notion that the small countries with
lots of original sin like the US, Canada, Australia and New Zealand and perhaps the Scandinavian
countries were different along other dimensions than those captured by these proxy variables.
Caballero, Cowan and Kearns (2004) talk about currency-trust and country-trust which could be factors
at play here but which are not easily captured with any one explanatory variable.
35
   Two data points, Argentina in 1893 and 1894 just after the Baring Crisis, are notable exceptions to
the rest of the scatter. The fact that the crisis had not yet fully been resolved explains why the predicted
values are so high, and because of this we do not believe this negates the quadratic relationship we
have identified.


                                                     27
securities were less risky than they probably were. In such a case, this debt was less
likely to give rise to self-fulfilling crises.
           All of this suggests that without special relationships and the other
idiosyncrasies which allowed for a robust reaction in turbulent times unique to these
British offshoots and the U.S. (and perhaps others such as the Scandinavian
countries), original sin is positively associated with the frequency of crises. The
countries in the southern cone of Latin America and Southern and Eastern Europe
(e.g., Argentina, Brazil, Portugal, Spain, Italy, Greece and Russia) that embraced
global financial flows but did not adequately fortify their financial systems each faced
at least one severe financial crisis enveloping the banking system, the currency and
usually the national debt between 1880 and 1913. 36
         The other group of countries towards the left hand side of Figure 12 deserves
some mention too. First many financial centers like Great Britain, France and the
Netherlands are here. Their low levels of original sin, liquid markets and sound
fundamentals made crisis management easier. One notable exception that looks more
like a periphery country however seems to have been Austria-Hungary which had
established a significant domestic debt market in our period. This likely reflected
much improved fiscal fundamentals. (See Komlos and Flandreau 2002 and Komlos
1987).37
         A number of other European countries in the middle group that had lower
levels of original sin than the settler countries and Scandinavia but were financially
crisis prone (e.g. Spain, Portugal and Italy) had sizeable domestic currency debt
markets and some even had sovereign bond issues denominated in their own
currencies listed on the exchanges in London and Paris.These countries were quite
open to international trade and had developed financial centers much earlier,
reflecting their entrepot position within European trade ( Flandreau and Sussman
2005) Flandreau and Sussman 2005).
           While the precedent of domestic debt issue had been established in these
countries, fiscal and financial soundness did not prevail. In reaction to their

36
   Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (p.15 2003) might agree: “In particular, countries with strong
institutions, capable of running strong policies, are in the best position to cope with the potential
mismatch problem.” To solve the problem of original sin policy makers must then decide whether it is
easier to take steps to eliminate original sin or to fortify the financial system and live with original sin
in the medium run.
37
   There was also an effort to increase the transparency of the budgetary process and an increase in
creditors’ protection in this period. See Becker (1913).


                                                     28
vulnerability, some of these countries developed methods of crisis prevention to
mitigate their exposure to original sin such as the affidavit system whereby domestic
creditors were paid in paper money but foreigners were paid in gold (see Tattara
(2003) for a discussion). But these experiences also further demonstrate that hard
currency debt made it more difficult to manage a crisis event and the repercussions of
a bad shock were all the greater when not dealt with in a just and efficient way.
       Overall, our results suggest that the contemporary theoretical framework that
views balance sheets as important determinants of financial crises are just as valid
during the late nineteenth century. Like the late twentieth century, this period was one
of freely flowing cross-border capital flows that met with various levels of financial
sophistication and fiscal rigor in its global reach for yield. As financial weaknesses
became apparent, the markets reacted in ways reminiscent of the financial crises of
the 1990s.


Conclusions


       We believe we have found some interesting features in the data that have not
previously been systematically addressed in either the contemporary or the historical
literatures. Most importantly we find that hard currency debt may not always generate
financial crises. Some countries with very high levels of original sin were apparently
less prone to debt crises than those with intermediate levels. Aside from these extreme
cases where original sin seems less dangerous, there appears to be a positive
relationship between original sin and the incidence of debt crises.
       It is interesting that we find that holding our currency mismatch measure
constant, more original sin makes countries more crisis prone up to a certain point and
then less vulnerable to debt crises which were often the culmination of a full-blown
financial catastrophe. One plausible explanation is that countries with high levels of
original sin also had natural hedges, better balance sheets or better ways of dealing
with financial stress which are hard to quantify. This is compelling because
anecdotally we know that the dominions had large sterling balances and that they had
good fiscal institutions. A question for further research is whether it was the structure
of their financial systems or the actual level of sterling bank assets which we cannot
pick up. We tend to think it is the former rather than the latter.



                                            29
         Holding original sin levels constant, we also find that mismatches matter.
When countries have hard currency obligations, they seem less prone to debt, banking
or currency crises when they offset these liabilities with gold reserves or are more
open. This obviously does not negate the idea that original sin could be responsible
for currency and banking trouble. Those countries that do not hold sufficient reserves
in their banking sectors, which may be a reflection of either weak banking structure,
and/or a lack of political will to take adequate insurance, face a higher chance of a
crisis situation. The absence of original sin could be an improvement for such
countries if the goal is to reduce crisis incidence.38 At the same time, it also highlights
our key finding that countries can and have found ways to avoid financial fragility
when they have “dollarized” liabilities.
         The results above also tend to confirm that it is difficult to find robust
determinants of financial crises. This suggests that standard econometric approaches
may not be resoundingly successful or that the theory is too abstract to deal with the
messy reality of historical crisis episodes. These complications are in addition to the
other data problems we mentioned above. Still, as a means of summarizing the data,
multivariate analysis can be useful.
         The ostensible quadratic relationship between hard currency debt relative to
total debt and debt crises is the most novel. Why is it there? We believe that this
quadratic is obscuring a positive relationship between hard currency debt and debt
crises that exists for the average small, independent emerging market type of country.
         Our bottom line thus is that original sin often makes debt crises more likely
and makes avoiding currency and banking crises more difficult. But the lesson from
history for today’s emergers is that more careful debt management policies and the
development of sound fiscal and financial institutions become necessary to make it
possible for governments and firms to navigate the choppy waters of global financial
markets.




         38
            This of course leaves open the question of social optimality. Perhaps hard currency debt is a
disciplining device or asset holders would be worse off without hard currency debt. The question
would deserve more research.



                                                  30
References



Annuaire Statistique de la Belgique. Bruxelles: Institut national de statistique,
Ministère des affaires économiques, Various Issues.

Annuaire Statistique pour la Finlande. Various Issues.

Annuaire Statistique des Pays-Bas Gravenhage: Centrale Commissie voor de
Statistiek, Various Issues.

Annuario estatistico do Reino de Portugal. Lisboa. Various Issues.

Anuario Estadistico de Chile. Santiago: Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas. Various
Issues.

Anuario Estatistico do Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e
Estatística, Various Issues.

Anuario estadistico de la Republica Oriental del Uruguay Montevideo.Uruguay.
Direccion General de Estatistica. Various Issues.

Barbieri, Katherine (2000) The Liberal Illusion: Does Trade Promote Peace?
  Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Bazant, Jan (1968) Historia de la deuda exterior de México (1823-1946) Nueva serie
Colegio de Mexico. Centro de Estudios Históricos México : El Colegio de México.

Becker, Thorvald (1913) Les Emprunts d'Etat Finlandais. Societe d'
                                                                 Imprimerie Sana.
Helsinki

Beim, David O. & Calomiris, C.W. (2001) Emerging Financial Markets New York:
MacGraw-Hill, 2001.

Berg, Andrew and Catherine Patillo (1999) “Are Currency Crises Predictable? A Test.
IMF Staff papers, vol. 46, no. 2 June.

Bordo, Michael D. (2003) Market Discipline and Financial Crises Policy; An
Historical Perspective.” Research in Financial Services: Private and Public Policy. vol
15, pp154-182.

Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad
Martinez-Peria (2001) “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic
Policy vol. 32 pp 51-75.

Bordo, Michael D. and Marc Flandreau (2003) “Core Periphery, Exchange Rate
Regimes and Globalization” in Michael D. Bordo, Alan M. Taylor and Jeffrey G.



                                          31
Williamson eds. Globalization in Historical Perspective. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Bordo, Michael D., and Jonung, L. (1996). ‘Monetary regimes, inflation, and
monetary reform: An essay in honor of Axel Leijonhufvud.’ in Inflation, Institutions,
and Information: Essays in Honor of Axel Leijonhufvud (D. Vaz and K. Velupillai,
eds.). London: Macmillan.

Bordo, Michael D., Christopher M. Meissner and Angela Redish (2005) “How
‘Original Sin’ was overcome: the evolution of external debt denominated in domestic
currencies in the United States and the British Dominions 1800-2000.” in Barry
Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann (eds.), Other People’s Money Chicago:
University of Chicago Press

Bordo, Michael D. and Anna Schwartz (1996) “The Operation of the Specie standard-
Evidence for Core and Peripheral Countries” in de Macedo, Jorge, Eichengreen, B
and Reis, J (eds.) Currency Convertibility: The Gold Standard and Beyond,
Routledge, London.

Caballero, Ricardo, Cowan Kevin and Jonathan Kearns (2004) “Fear of Sudden
Stops: Lessons from Australia and Chile” NBER working paper 10519.

Calomiris, Charles (1992) “Greenback Resumption and Silver Risk: The Economics
and Politics of Monetary Regime Change in the United States, 1862-1900.” NBER
working paper w4166.

Céspedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang and Andrés Velasco (2004) “Balance Sheets
and Exchange Rate Policy” American Economic Review vol.94 (4) September.

Condliffe, J.B. (1925 ) A short history of New Zealand. Christchurch.

Crouchley, Arthur Edwin, (1938 )The economic development of modern Egypt
London ; New York [etc.] : Longmans, Green and co..

Crouchley, (1977) Arthur Edwin Investment of foreign capital in Egyptian companies
and public debt New York : Arno Press.

De Kock, Gerhard (1954) A history of the South African Reserve Bank (1920-52
Pretoria: J.L. van Schaik.

Dowd, Kevin (1992) "Free Banking in Australia," in Dowd, Kevin ed. The
Experience of Free Banking. Routledge: New York.

Du Velay, A. Essai sur l'histoire financière de la Turquie depuis le règne du Sultan
Mahmoud II jusqu'à nos jours . Paris : A. Rousseau, 1903

Edwards, Sebastian (2003) “Exchange Rate Regimes, Capital Flows and Crisis
Prevention” in Martin Feldstein ed. Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging
Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



                                         32
Eichengreen, Barry (1997) “The Baring Crisis in a Mexican Mirror” mimeo. UC
Berkeley.

Eichengreen, Barry and Ricardo Hausmann (1999), “Exchange Rates and Financial
Fragility” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. New Challenges for Monetary Policy
pp. 329-368.


Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann and Ugo Panizza (2003) “Currency
Mismatches, Debt Intolerance, and Original Sin: Why they are not the Same and Why
it Matters.” NBER working paper 10036.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann and Ugo Panizza (2005), “The Pain of
Original Sin,” in Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann (eds.), Other People’s
Money Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Flandreau, Marc (2003) “Crises and punishment: moral hazard and the pre-1914
international financial architecture” in Marc Flandreau ed. Money Doctors: The
Experience of International Financial Advising, 1850-2000. London: Routledge.

Flandreau, Marc and John Komlos (2002) Core of Periphery? The Credibility of the
Austro-Hungarian Currency, 1867-1913, mimeo. University of Munich.

Flandreau, Marc Le Cacheux, Jacques and Frederic Zúmer (1998) Stability Without a
Pact: Lessons from the European Gold Standard, 1880-1914. Economic Policy: A
European Forum. 0 (26) pp. 115-149.

Flandreau, Marc and Nathan Sussman (2005), “Old Sins,” in Barry Eichengreen and
Ricardo Hausmann (eds.), Other People’s Money, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Flandreau , Marc and Clemens Jobst (2004) “The Ties that Divide: A Network
Analysis of the International Monetary System, 1890-1910” mimeo. Institut d’Etudes
Politiques, Paris.

Flandreau, Marc and F. Zúmer (2004) The Making of Global Finance. OECD: Paris.
Data from http://www.eh.net/databases/finance/

Ferguson, Niall and Mortiz Schularick (2004) “The Empire Effect: The Determinants
of Country Risk in the First Age of Globalization,1880-1913.” mimeo New York
University.

Frankel, Jeff and Andrew K. Rose (1996) “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets:
An Empirical Treatment” (with Jeffrey Frankel), The Journal of International
Economics.

Furuya, S.Y. Japan’s Foreign Exchange and Her Balance of International Payments.
NY: Columbia University Press. 1928.




                                        33
Goldstein, Morris and Philip Turner (2004), “Controlling Currency Mismatches in
Emerging Market Economies” Washington: Institute of International Economics.

Hawke, G. R., The making of New Zealand: an economic history Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1985

Jones, M. T., and M. Obstfeld (2000): Savings and Investment Data for 13 Coun-
tries: Available on-line at http://www.nber.org/databases/jones-obstfeld/, National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Kahan, Arcadius. Russian economic history : the nineteenth century Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1989.

Kikuchi, Gunzo Das Staatsschuldenwesen seit der Restauration Japans Kaemmerer,
CA, Halle1904.

Goldsmith Raymond W. (1983) The financial development of India, 1860-1977 New
Haven London : Yale University Press.

Komlos, John (1987) "Financial Innovation and the Demand for Money in Austria-
Hungary, 1867-1913, Journal of European Economic History (16)3, pp.587-605

Kostelenos, George C. “Money and Output in Modern Greece: 1858-1938. Center for
Planning and Economic Research: Athens: 1995.

Leroy-Beaulieu, Paul (1883) Traité de la science des finances, 3. ed.. Paris,
Guillaumin et cie, Paris.

Levy, M.B. “The Brazilian Public Debt Domestic and Foreign 1824-1913” in
Reinhard Liehr (ed.) La deuda pública en América Latina en perspectiva histórica
Series: Bibliotheca Ibero-Americana; vol. 58 Publisher: Frankfurt am Main:
Vervuert..

Ludlow, Leonor and Carlos Marichal (coordinadores) Un siglo de deuda pública en
México. Lecturas de historia económica mexicana 1a ed México, D.F. : Instituto
Mora : Colegio de Michoacán : Colegio de México : Instituto de Investigaciones
Históricas-UNAM, 1998

Masayoshi Matsukata, M. (1899). Report on the Adoption of the Gold Standard in
Japan. Tokyo: Government Press.

Mavor, James An economic history of Russia Part: Vol.2 2nd. ed. rev. and enl.
London ; New York : Dent : E.P. Dutton, 1925

Meissner, Christopher M. (forthcoming) “New World Order: Explaining the
International Diffusion of the Gold Standard, 1870-1913” Journal of International
Economics.




                                          34
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2003) “Financial Policies and the Prevention of Financial Crises
in Emerging Market Countries” in Martin Feldstein ed. Economic and Financial
Crises in Emerging Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Molino, Evaristo (1898) Bosquejo de la hacienda pública de Chile, desde la
independencia hasta la fecha. Imprenta nacional, Santiago de Chile.

Mitchell, B. R. International historical statistics: Europe, 1750-1988. 3rd ed
Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1992

Mitchell, B. R. International historical statistics: the Americas, 1750-1988 2nd ed
Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1993

Mitchell, B. R. International historical statistics: Africa, Asia, Oceania, 1750-1988
2nd ed Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1993


Mülinen, Johann Friedrich Rudolph comte de (1875) Les finances de l'Autriche :
étude historique et statistique sur les finances de l'Autriche-Cisleithanienne
comparées avec celles de la France : d'après des publications officielles de
l'Administration impériale et royale des finances. Guillamin et cie. Paris.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor (2003) “Sovereign Risk ,Credibility and the
Gold Standard, 1870-1913 versus 1925-1931” Economic Journal vol. 113 (487) pp 1-
35

Pasvolsky, Leo and Moulton Harold (1924) Russian debts and Russian
reconstruction: a study of the relation of Russia's foreign debts to her economic
recovery New York: McGraw-Hill, 1924

Perez Siller, J. (1995) “La deuda y Consolidacion del Poder en Mexico, 1867-1896:
bases para la modernidad porfirista” in Reinhard Liehr (ed.) La deuda pública en
América Latina en perspectiva histórica Series: Bibliotheca Ibero-Americana ; vol. 58
Publisher: Frankfurt am Main : Vervuert ; Madrid : Iberoamericana.

Reinhart, Carmen, Kenneth Rogoff and Miguel Savastano (2003), “Debt Intolerance,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp.1-74.

Reserve Bank of India Banking and monetary statistics of India Bombay : Reserve
Bank of India., [1954]

Schumann, Christian Gustav Waldemar Structural changes and business cycles in
South Africa, 1806-1936/ London: P.S. King, 1938

Shaw, Stanford. “The 19th Century Ottoman Tax Reforms and Revenue System”
International Journal of Middle East Studies, 1975.

Smits, J., E. Horlings, and J. van Zanden (1999): The Measurement of Gross National
Product and its Components: The Netherlands, 1800-1913, Discussion paper,
N.W Posthumus Institute, Utrecht University.



                                         35
Tattara, G (2003) “Paper Money but a Gold Debt: Italy on the gold Standard”,
Explorations in Economic History, 40: 2 April, pp. 122-142.

Vázquez-Presedo, Vicente (1988) Estadísticas históricas argentinas (comparadas)
Buenos Aires: Ediciones Macchi.

Wilkins, Myra (1989) The History of Foreign Investment in the United States to 1914
Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.

Zamagni V. “Il debito pubblico Italiano 1861-1946: riconstruzione della serie
storica”, Rivista di storia economica, 3, XIV, dec. pp. 207-242, 1998.

Zamagni V. “Una rettifica” Rivista di storia economica, 3, xv, dec pp.339-342(1999).

Zubillaga, Carlos. El reto financiero: deuda externa y desarrollo en Uruguay (1903-
1933) Colección El Pasado inminente Montevideo: Editorial Arca: CLAEH, 1982




                                         36
                                 Data Appendix


General notes:

Debt: In general we have defined external debt or hard currency debt as the amount
outstanding of long-term debt issued abroad plus the amount outstanding of domestic
gold (or silver) debt. Internal debt refers to the outstanding stock of domestic paper
debt. However in a few cases listed below we have not been able to discern from the
sources how much of the “domestic” or internal debt was payable in gold. More work
will have to be put into these cases. However, one will note that for these cases the
total amount of domestic debt is rather small.


Real Exchange Rates: The real exchange rate is defined as the UK price level
divided by the local price level times the exchange rate (price of local currency per
pound). Price levels come from Obstfeld and Taylor (2003). We use the percentage
deviation from the within country average to obviate problems with levels. The
average is taken over the entire period 1880-1913.


Market portfolio spread: We use a GDP-weighted average spread of long-term
bonds against the British consol constructed by Obstfeld and Taylor (2003) to control
for time-specific international changes in capital markets.


Exchange rate regimes: Data on gold standard adherence comes from Meissner
(forthcoming) augmented with data from Obstfeld and Taylor (2003)


Default Indicator: Our default indicator was created if there were one or more
defaults prior to 1880. This data is taken from a spreadsheet underlying Reinhart,
Rogoff and Savastano (2003).


Crisis Dating: As in Bordo et. al ( 2001) we date currency and banking crises using
both qualitative and quantitative evidence. For all countries besides Austria-Hungary,
Russia, New Zealand, South Africa, Mexico, Turkey, Egypt, Uruguay and India we
have relied on the dates of Bordo et. al. We have tried to date currency crises, when



                                           37
possible, by using an approach based on the exchange market pressure (EMP)
methodology which looks at changes in reserves, the exchange rate and the interest
rate.
        Debt crisis dates were based on Beim and Calomiris (2001). Only private
lending to sovereign nations is considered when building those default dates. Not
every instance of technical default is included in the chronology, the authors
identified periods (six months or more) where all or part of interest/principal
payments were suspended, reduced or rescheduled. Some of those episodes are
outright debt repudiations, while others were reschedulings agreed upon mutually by
lenders and borrowers. Also data is taken from a spreadsheet underlying Reinhart,
Rogoff and Savastano (2003).




                                         38
Table A.1 Crisis Dates, 1880-1913




                                    39
             Table A.1 (continued) Crisis Dates, 1880-1913




                                                                                      South Africa
                             Netherlands



                                           New Zealand




                                                                                                                      Switzerland




                                                                                                                                                          Uruguay
                                                                  Portugal




                                                                                                             Sweden
                                                         Norway
                    Mexico




                                                                             Russia




                                                                                                                                    Turkey
           Japan




                                                                                                     Spain




                                                                                                                                                  USA
                                                                                                                                             UK
Year
   1880              DC                                                                                                             DC

   1881                                                                                BC

   1882                                                                                              DC

   1883
   1884              BC                                                                                                                            BC

   1885                                                                      DC

   1886
   1887
   1888
   1889                                                                                BC

   1890                                                                                                                                      BC    CC

   1891                                                           BC,CC      CC                                                                    CC      DC

   1892                                                            DC

   1893                                     BC                                                                                                    BC,CC

   1894
   1895
   1896
   1897                       BC                                                                             BC

   1898
   1899
   1900     CC

   1901     BC

   1902
   1903                                     CC                                         BC

   1904     CC

   1905
   1906
   1907     BC       BC                                                                                      BC                                    BC

   1908     CC

   1909
   1910
   1911
   1912
   1913                                                                                                                                                    BC




Note: CC represents currency crises, BC represents banking crises, DC represents debt crises.




                                                                                 40
Table A.2 Data Availability for Countries and Years




                                      41
Table A.2 (continued) Data Availability for Countries and Years




                                      42
Argentina

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Total funded debt from 1880 to 1913 from Vázquez-Presedo (1988).
The external debt data from 1880 to 1891 comes from Conde (1995). The percentage
of debt serviced in gold was taken from Flandreau and Zúmer.
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor.
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Obstfeld and Taylor
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Australia

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Total debt: Ferguson and Schularick; Percentage of debt payable in gold
or foreign currency, Bordo, Meissner, Redish (2005)
Government revenue: Mitchell
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Mitchell
Imports: Mitchell
Nominal GDP: Bordo et. al.
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Mitchell
Notes in circulation: Mitchell
GDP-weighted average spread on British consol: Obstfeld and Taylor (2003)


Austria-Hungary
Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: The source is the statistical yearbooks for both countries. External debt
consists of domestic gold debt and foreign currency debt. Internal debt is domestic
paper debt. Data for 1880 is from Flandreau and Zúmer
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Mitchell
Nominal GDP: Obstfeld and Taylor


                                         43
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Belgium

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Total Public debt from Annuaire Statistique and Fenn’s Compendium.
Level of debt payable in gold is from Flandreau and Zúmer
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Obstfeld and Taylor
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Brazil

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Debt in Foreign Currency (1880-1914), Domestic Paper and Gold Debt
1880-1912 from Statistical Yearbook and Levy (1995). For 1913 and 1914 The data
given in the sources for external debt only included foreign currency debt and was
denominated in sterling.
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Clemens and Williamson
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Taylor and Obstfeld and Bordo et. al.
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Canada

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Bordo, Meissner and Redish
Government revenue: Mitchell
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Mitchell
Imports: Mitchell


                                        44
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Mitchell
Notes in circulation: Mitchell

Chile

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: External and Domestic Debt from 1880 to 1897 from Molino (no
information about domestic gold debt). From 1898 onwards the source is the
statistical yearbook for Chile for internal gold, external and domestic paper debt.
1911-1912, total and foreign debt come from Ferguson and Schularick
Government revenue: Mitchell
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Barbieri
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: 1887-1895, Molino
Notes in circulation: Mitchell

Denmark

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: For 1880, 1886 and 1890 the source is Fenn’s Compendium. No
information about domestic gold debt was available but our numbers are highly
consistent with Flandreau and Zúmer’s for the total debt payable in gold.
Total debt: 1881, 1882, 1884, 1885, 1887-1889, 1891-1893 Ferguson and Schularick.
1894-1913, Statistical Yearbook Debt payable in gold 1881-1885, 1887-1889, 1891-
1893 Flandreau and Zúmer; 1894-1913 Statistical Yearbook.
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.,
Yield spread between British consols: Clemens and Williamson
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Egypt

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: 1880 to 1915 total public debt, Government revenues and government
expenditures from Crouchley (1938). Consumer Price indexes 1913 to 1915, Money
supply 1901-1915 (includes Currency and Bank notes in circulation and deposits in


                                         45
savings banks), are from Mitchell and Crouchley. For foreign trade aggregates and
crisis dates the source is Crouchley.
Government revenue: Mitchell
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Barbieri
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Obstfeld and Taylor
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Not available
Notes in circulation: Not available

Finland

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: 1880-1915 public debt in marks from statistical yearbook. 1881, 1891
foreign and domestic debt from Fenn’s Compendium. It appears that the entire debt
was external before 1915. Yearbook presents total debt from 1880 to 1901 and then
only foreign debt from 1901 to 1915, but the values for external and total debt in 1901
are the same. If we consider the data from Fenn’s ratio of external to total was 88% in
1881 and 92% in 1891!
Government revenue: not available
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Mitchell
Imports: Mitchell
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Data generously made available by Alan M. Taylor,
UC Davis.
Gold reserves: Obstfeld and Jones
Notes in circulation: Mitchell

France

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic paper
debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.,
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer



                                          46
Germany

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: State debt is excluded Flandreau and Zúmer
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.
Yield spread between British consols: Clemens and Williamson
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Greece

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: 1881, External and Total debt from Fenn’s. 1885-1913 Flandreau and
Zúmer
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Prices from Flandreau and Zúmer, exchange rates, Bordo and
Jonung
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Kostelenos
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

India

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Funded rupee debt and funded sterling debt from Reserve Bank of
Australia Banking and Monetary Statistics of India. No information about domestic
gold debt. Money supply data from Goldsmith (1983).
Government revenue: Mitchell
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Mitchell
Imports: Mitchell
Nominal GDP: Obstfeld and Taylor
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Not avaialable
Notes in circulation: Mitchell


                                        47
Population: Clemens and Williamson

Italy

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Total and foreign debt from Zamagni (1998 and 1999). Foreign debt
includes only rendita interest paid abroad in foreign currency or gold. See Flandreau
and Zúmer for a short discussion on this point.
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor (2003)
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Japan

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Internal and external debt from 1892 to 1913, Statistical Yearbook of
Japan, no information was given about domestic gold debt. 1882 and 1887 foreign
and total debt from Fenn’s (no information about domestic gold debt). Total debt
1880 to 1891 from Kikuchi (1904). 1897 foreign debt source is Furuya (1928)
includes government foreign bonds, domestic bonds sold abroad, domestic bonds
shipped abroad and corporation bonds. This series hence may contain some paper
bond issues held abroad which would contaminate our measure of original sin. The
amounts would not be large we conjecture.
Government revenue: Mitchell
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Mitchell
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.,
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor (2003)
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Obstfeld and Jones
Notes in circulation: Masayoshi, M.

Mexico

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: External and Internal debt from Barzant (1968), Ludlow & Marichal
(1998) and Perez-Siller(1995). Only Includes federal debt, no information about
domestic gold or silver debt. Total debt and “foreign debt” 1881, 1883, 1885, 1891,
1892, 1895, 1897-1904, 1906-1910, Ferguson and Schularick
Government revenue: Mitchell


                                          48
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Barbieri
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Not available
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor (2003)
Growth of the money supply: Mitchell. Money supply includes deposits in
commercial banks and currency and bank notes in circulation.
Gold reserves: not available
Notes in circulation: Mitchell
Population: Clemens and Williamson

Netherlands

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Total consolidated debt sources are statistical yearbook and Fenn’s.
Except 1882-1885 Flandreau and Zúmer. Following Flandreau and Sussman,
Netherlands had no hard currency debt.
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports and Imports: Smits, Horlings and van Zanden
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Taylor and Obstfeld
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: 1880-1899 measured as the growth of M3. 1901-1913
Growth of money supply is the growth of M2. Data generously made available by
Alan M. Taylor.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

New Zealand

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Bordo, Meissner and Redish
Government revenue: Mitchell
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Imports: Mitchell
Exports: Mitchell
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al. Taylor and Obstfeld and.
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Not available
Notes in circulation: Mitchell

Norway



                                       49
Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: External and domestic debt from statistical yearbook. No information
about domestic gold debt. It is possible that the domestic debt actually had gold
clauses, and we will have to look into this further. Still, the amount of domestic debt
as a part of the total is very small.
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Mitchell
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo and Jonung
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Peru

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic paper
debt: Not available
Government revenue: Mitchell.
Terms of trade: Clemens and Williamson
Real exchange rate: Not available
Current account surplus Not available
Nominal GDP: Not available
Yield spread between British consols: Clemens and Williamson
Growth of the money supply: Not available
Gold reserves: Not available
Notes in circulation: Not available
Population: Clemens and Williamson

Portugal

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic paper
debt: Total debt, 1880-1913, Flandreau and Zúmer; Percentage of debt serviced
in gold, Flandreau and Zúmer
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: 1880-1890 Growth of circulation in hands of public
and commercial bank deposits. Data from Alan M. Taylor. 1891-1913, Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Mitchell



                                           50
Russia

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: 1880, 1887, 1891 total debt from Fenn’s. 1880 hard currency debt from
Fenn’s. Foreign debt is reported as including domestic gold debt and internal debt.
Total debt: 1881-1884, 1885-1886, 1888-1890, 1893, 1894, Ferguson and Schularick.
1885 total debt Moulton and Pasvolsky (1924) 1895 to 1913, total debt. Percentage of
debt serviced in gold, 1884-1913, Flandreau and Zúmer
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Clemens and Williamson
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Current account surplus: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al., Taylor and Obstfeld and..
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

South Africa

Before union the data is constructed as an aggregate from available data from Cape of
Good Hope, Natal, Orange Free State and Transvaal.

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Bordo, Meissner, Redish
Government revenue: Mitchell
Terms of trade: Not available
Real exchange rate:
Exports: Global Financial Database
Imports: Global Financial Database
Nominal GDP: 1911-1913, Mitchell
Yield spread between British consols: Not available
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et al.
Gold reserves: Not available
Notes in circulation: Not available
Population: Schuman.

Spain

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: External and internal debt from Datos basicos para la historia financiera
de Espana. No information about gold debt.
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor


                                         51
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Data underlying Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Sweden

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Total debt (dette publique en obligations) and internal debt 1913
Statistical Yearbook of Sweden. Foreign debt 1880, 1887, 1891 from Fenn’s. No
information about domestic gold debts.
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Switzerland

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: 1880-1913 Flandreau and Zúmer
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Turkey

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Not Available
Government revenue: 1884-1900 Du Velay (1903) for 1880, 1901-1903, 1908-1910
Shaw (1975)
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Not Available


                                       52
Exports: Global Financial Database
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: NA
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: Not available.
Gold reserves: Not available.
Notes in circulation: Not available.
Population: Clemens and Williamson

Great Britain

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: 1880-1913 total debt Flandreau and Zúmer. Great Britain had no hard
currency debt in this period to our knowledge.
Government revenue: Flandreau and Zúmer.
Interest service on debt: Flandreau and Zúmer
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Flandreau and Zúmer
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al.
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Flandreau and Zúmer
Notes in circulation: Flandreau and Zúmer

Uruguay

Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Internal and External debt from Statistical Yearbook, no information
about domestic gold debt.
Government revenue: Mitchell
Terms of trade: Not Available
Real exchange rate: 1900-1913 Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Barbieri
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Clemens and Williamson
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor
Growth of the money supply: 1901-1913 Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Not available.
Notes in circulation: Mitchell
Population: Clemens and Williamson

USA
Total outstanding government debt, external hard currency debt and domestic
paper debt: Total Debt, 1880-1913: Ferguson and Schularick. All debt is payable in
gold following Bordo, Meissner and Redish.
Government revenue: Mitchell
Terms of trade: Obstfeld and Taylor
Real exchange rate: Obstfeld and Taylor
Exports: Barbieri


                                       53
Imports: Barbieri
Nominal GDP: Bordo et al., Taylor and Obstfeld and..
Yield spread between British consols: Obstfeld and Taylor (2003)
Growth of the money supply: Bordo et. al.
Gold reserves: Obstfeld and Jones
Notes in circulation: Mitchell




                                       54
       Table 1 Determinants of Debt Crises

Regressors
                                                     (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)
Hard currency debt as                               6.44                2.32                 ---               3.44
a percentage of total debt                        (1.89)**             (0.92)*                               (1.07)**

Square of hard currency                            -4.71               -3.46                 ---              -4.33
debt ratio                                        (2.05)**            (0.61)**                               (0.82)**

Debt/Revenue                                       -0.40                0.16                0.23              -0.05
                                                 (0.11)**              (0.07)*            (0.08)**            (0.12)
Debt/Revenue*Pre-1880 Default                        1.04                 ---                ---               0.28
                                                 (0.26)**                                                     (0.15)
Pre-1880 Default                                   -8.81                 ---                 ---              -2.74
                                                 (2.83)**                                                    (1.18)*
Mismatch                                             7.41                ---                4.16                ---
                                                   (4.17)                                 (1.67)*
Square of mismatch                                  -25.7                ---              -11.40                ---
                                                 (13.13)*                                  (6.61)
Growth of terms of trade                          -31.93               -13.98             -13.22             -16.56
                                                  (19.66)             (11.42)              (9.86)            (14.24)
ln (deviation of real exchange                      -6.02               -2.39               -2.46             -3.22
rate from period average)                          (4.33)              (1.72)              (1.77)             (2.06)

Trade balance/GDP                                   -4.94                ---                 ---                ---
                                                   (5.22)
Spread on UK consol                                 -0.18                ---                 ---                ---
                                                   (0.17)
Gold standard dummy                                  1.65                ---                 ---                ---
                                                  (0.73)**
Growth of the money supply                          -1.59                ---                 ---                ---
                                                   (3.14)
Gold reserves/notes in circulation                 -12.01                -3.76              -5.69              -4.32
                                                  (3.43)**              (2.11)            (1.41)**           (1.19)**
Market portfolio spread                              3.44                1.92               2.40                1.77
                                                  (1.72)**             (0.77)*             (1.15)*            (0.86)*
constant                                            -3.88                -5.72              -6.30              -3.80
                                                   (3.67)             (1.31)**            (2.24)**           (1.31)**
Number of obs                                        371                  533                427                533
Percentage of Correct Positives                       83                66.67               66.67              66.67
Percentage of Correct Negatives                       97                  98                  97                 98
Psuedo R-squared                                     0.60                0.45               0.45                0.48
log-likelihood value                               -12.11                -17.9             -17.21             -17.04
Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a debt crisis. "Robust" clustered standard errors are in
parentheses. See the text for precise definitions of variables. Positive signifies crisis year; * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%




                                                         55
           Table 2 Determinants of Currency Crises

Regressors
                                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)               (4)
Hard currency debt as                                -0.53               -0.34                 ---               ---
a percentage of total debt                          (0.72)              (0.71)

Square of hard currency                              0.40                0.18                  ---               ---
debt ratio                                          (0.75)              (0.76)

Debt/Revenue                                        -0.03                -0.03               -0.06             -0.04
                                                    (0.04)              (0.04)              (0.04)             (0.04)
Debt/Revenue*Periphery indicator                     -0.09               -0.11                 ---             -0.09
                                                    (0.10)              (0.10)                                 (0.09)
Periphery indicator                                   0.72               0.59                  ---              0.47
                                                    (0.44)              (0.50)                                 (0.46)
Mismatch                                             -0.08               -0.12               -0.07             -0.12
                                                    (0.11)              (0.10)              (0.04)             (0.08)
Growth of terms of trade                              8.72               7.56                  ---               ---
                                                    (6.35)              (6.82)
ln (deviation of real exchange                        0.19                -0.1               0.02               0.06
rate from period average)                           (0.66)              (0.78)              (0.78)             (0.75)

Trade balance/GDP                                      0.79              1.31                3.25              2.65
                                                     (1.73)             (1.81)              (1.45)*           (1.26)*
Spread on UK consol                                   -0.02              -0.04                 ---               ---
                                                     (0.07)             (0.08)
Gold standard dummy                                    0.43                ---                 ---               ---
                                                     (0.52)
Growth of the money supply                            -0.89                ---                 ---               ---
                                                     (1.01)
Gold reserves/notes in circulation                    -0.34               -0.18               -0.19             -0.13
                                                     (0.45)              (0.44)              (0.27)             (0.40)
Market portfolio spread                                0.73               0.75                0.47               0.48
                                                   (0.18)**            (0.20)**            (0.16)**           (0.16)**
Debt Crisis in t +1                                    0.83               0.68                0.42               0.50
                                                    (0.34)*             (0.34)*              (0.33)             (0.38)
Banking Crisis in t +1                                 0.74               0.68                0.71               0.70
                                                    (0.31)*             (0.27)*             (0.30)*            (0.30)*
constant                                             -3.00                -2.69               -2.24             -2.48
                                                   (0.79)**            (0.57)**            (0.29)**           (0.47)**
Number of obs                                          499                 505                 613               613
Percentage of Correct Positives                        23.5               17.6                23.5               23.5
Percentage of Correct Negatives                        95.4               95.8                96.4               96.1
Psuedo R-squared                                       0.12               0.10                0.10               0.11
log-likelihood value                                 -63.8                -65.3               -69.6            -68.57
Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a currency crisis. "Robust" clustered standard errors are in
parentheses. See the text for precise definitions of variables. Positive signifies crisis year. * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%




                                                              56
       Table 3 Determinants of Banking Crises
Regressors
                                                 (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
Hard currency debt as                           1.32                0.62               1.10                ---
a percentage of total debt                     (0.71)              (0.92)             (0.67)

Square of hard currency                        -2.36                -0.90              -1.20               ---
debt ratio                                    (0.70)**             (0.84)             (0.71)

Debt/Revenue                                   -0.05                -0.05              -0.01            -0.05
                                               (0.05)              (0.04)             (0.02)            (0.05)
Debt/Revenue*Periphery indicator               -0.04                  ---                ---              ---
                                               (0.08)
Periphery indicator                            -1.15                 ---                ---                ---
                                               (0.92)
Debt/Revenue*Pre-1880 Default                    ---                 ---                ---              -0.10
                                                                                                         (0.07)
Pre-1880 Default                                 ---                 ---                ---               0.02
                                                                                                         (0.52)
Mismatch                                        -0.17               -0.07               ---              -0.16
                                               (0.07)*             (0.05)                               (0.08)*
Growth of terms of trade                        -7.01                 ---               ---              -6.67
                                                (5.47)                                                   (5.52)
ln (deviation of real exchange                  -0.81               -0.24              -0.21             -0.33
rate from period average)                       (0.85)             (0.72)             (0.70)             (0.29)

Trade balance/GDP                                6.50                4.93               4.17             4.60
                                              (2.11)**             (1.98)*            (1.83)*           (2.41)
Central bank indicator                          -0.54                -0.12              -0.02            0.07
                                                (0.43)              (0.28)             (0.23)           (0.32)
Gold standard dummy                             -0.87                -0.33              -0.23           -0.65
                                               (0.42)*              (0.33)             (0.28)           (0.35)
Growth of the money supply                       1.03                0.67               0.65              ---
                                                (1.11)              (0.87)             (0.88)
Gold reserves/notes in circulation               0.82                0.99               0.65              0.78
                                                (0.47)            (0.40)**           (0.25)**            (0.48)
Market portfolio spread                          0.38                0.41               0.39              0.42
                                                (0.30)              (0.27)             (0.25)            (0.25)
constant                                        -0.82                -2.26              -2.43            -1.95
                                                (0.84)            (0.39)**           (0.34)**           (0.53)**
Number of obs                                    485                  549                549              491
Percentage of Correct Positives                  27.7                10.5                5.2               21
Percentage of Correct Negatives                   96                 97.1               98.1              96.6
Psuedo R-squared                                 0.11                0.07               0.06              0.08
log-likelihood value                           -68.46                -76.9              -77.8            -74.1
Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a banking crisis. "Robust" clustered standard errors are in
parentheses. See the text for precise definitions of variables. Positive signifies crisis year. *significant at 5%;
** significant at 1%




                                                         57
        Table 4 Determinants of Twin Crises


Regressors
                                                   (1)                  (2)                (3)
Hard currency debt as                             1.33                 0.39               1.51
a percentage of total debt                       (0.77)               (0.47)             (0.61)*

Square of hard currency                          -1.83                  ---               -1.46
debt ratio                                       (0.98)                                  (0.72)*

Hard currency ratio*(reserves/imports)              ---                -1.21                ---
                                                                      (0.89)
Reserves/Imports                                    ---                1.42                 ---
                                                                     (0.66)*
Debt/Revenue                                      0.008                0.04               0.03
                                                 (0.08)               (0.03)             (0.02)
Debt/Revenue*Periphery indicator                  -0.05                  ---               ---
                                                 (0.13)
Periphery indicator                               -0.42                 ---                 ---
                                                 (0.65)
Mismatch                                          -0.09                 ---                 ---
                                                 (0.09)
Growth of terms of trade                         -11.39                 ---                 ---
                                                 (8.38)
ln (deviation of real exchange                     0.18                -0.13              0.09
rate from period average)                        (0.47)               (0.37)             (0.33)

Trade balance/GDP                                 5.14                  ---               3.11
                                                 (2.6)*                                  (1.80)
Spread on UK consol                               0.08                  ---                ---
                                                 (0.06)
Gold reserves/notes in circulation               -0.52                 -1.57              -0.56
                                                 (0.61)              (0.53)**            (0.41)
Market portfolio spread                           0.12                  0.25              0.16
                                                 (0.22)               (0.13)             (0.15)
constant                                         -2.04                 -2.68              -2.58
                                                (0.51)**             (0.45)**           (0.25)**
Number of obs                                     497                   625                605
Percentage of Correct Positives                    50                    50                 50
Percentage of Correct Negatives                   89.9                   87               88.7
Psuedo R-squared                                  0.13                  0.10              0.11
log-likelihood value                             -35.6                 -38.3              -37.9
Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a twin crisis. "Robust" clustered standard
errors are in parentheses. Positive signifies crisis year. See the text for precise definitions of
variables. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%



                                                    58
           Table 5 “Fixed Effects” Linear Probability Specifications

Regressors                                   Debt Crises        Currency Crises    Banking Crises      Twin Crises
                                                 (1)                  (2)               (3)                (4)
Hard currency debt as                            0.14               -0.11                0.14              0.08
a percentage of total debt                      (0.10)              (0.14)              (0.16)            (0.10)

Square of hard currency                         -0.29               -0.06               -0.19             -0.19
debt ratio                                     (0.11)**             (0.14)              (0.16)            (0.11)

Debt/Revenue                                     0.01               0.004               -0.01             0.002
                                                (0.01)              (0.01)             (0.01)             (0.01)
Debt/Revenue*Periphery indicator                  ---               -0.01              0.0003             0.003
                                                                    (0.02)             (0.01)             (0.01)
Debt/Revenue*Pre-1880 Default                    0.01                 ---                 ---               ---
                                                (0.01)
Mismatch                                         0.11               -0.01               -0.03             -0.02
                                                (0.09)              (0.01)             (0.01)**          (0.01)**
Square of mismatch                              -0.11                 ---                 ---               ---
                                                (0.08)
Growth of terms of trade                        -0.39                0.66               -0.72             -0.51
                                                (0.43)              (0.58)              (0.62)            (0.41)
ln (deviation of real exchange                  -0.22                0.02               -0.11             -0.03
rate from period average)                      (0.06)**             (0.08)              (0.08)            (0.05)

Trade balance/GDP                               -0.18               -0.01                0.29              0.1
                                                (0.20)              (0.29)              (0.30)            (0.20)
Spread on UK consol                              0.04                 ---                 ---               ---
                                               (0.01)**
Central bank indicator                            ---                 ---                0.02               ---
                                                                                        (0.08)
Gold standard dummy                             -0.02                -0.08              -0.08               ---
                                                (0.03)               (0.04)             (0.04)
Growth of the money supply                       0.02                -0.12               0.23               ---
                                                (0.06)               (0.09)            (0.10)*
Gold reserves/notes in circulation                0                   0.03               0.03              0.01
                                                (0.07)               (0.06)             (0.07)            (0.04)
Market portfolio spread                         -0.01                 0.04               0.02             -0.002
                                                (0.02)               (0.03)             (0.03)            (0.02)
Debt Crisis in t +1                               ---                 0.08                ---                ---
                                                                     (0.05)
Banking Crisis in t +1                            ---                 0.1                 ---               ---
                                                                    (0.04)*
constant                                         -0.14                0.05               0.04              0.01
                                                (0.06)*              (0.09)             (0.11)            (0.06)
Number of obs                                     371                 499                485               497
R-squared                                         0.06               0.004              0.008              0.01
F-stat                                            6.81                1.34               1.93              2.02
Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a banking crisis. Estimation is by OLS.
"Robust" clustered standard errors are in parentheses. See the text for precise definitions of variables. Positive
signifies crisis year. *significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%



                                                           59
Ratio of Hard Currency Debt to Total Government Debt          Figure 1 Hard Currency Debt as a Percentage of Total Public Debt, 1880-1913



                                                              Argentina             Australia              Austria              Belgium                Brazil               Canada
                                                       1
                                                       .5
                                                       0




                                                                Chile               Denmark                Finland               France               Germany                Greece
                                                       1
                                                       .5
                                                       0




                                                                India                 Italy                Japan                 Mexico              Netherlands          New Zealand
                                                       1
                                                       .5
                                                       0




                                                               Norway               Portugal               Russia              South Africa            Spain                Sweden
                                                       1
                                                       .5
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                1880 1890 1900 1910   1880 1890 1900 1910

                                                             Switzerland         United Kingdom         United States           Uruguay
                                                       1
                                                       .5
                                                       0




                                                        1880 1890 1900 1910   1880 1890 1900 1910   1880 1890 1900 1910   1880 1890 1900 1910

                                                                                                                     Year
                                                       Graphs by country




                                                                                                                     60
             Figure 2 Average Ratio of Hard Currency Public Debt to Total Public Debt,
             1880-1913



             1.00
             0.90
             0.80
             0.70
Percentage




             0.60
             0.50
             0.40
             0.30
             0.20
             0.10
             0.00



                                                 Country




                                                  61
Figure 3 Crisis Frequency in Percent Probability per Year, 1880-1913.




                                        7
                                        6


                 Probability per Year
                                        5
                                        4
                                        3
                                        2
                                        1
                                        0
                                           k ing


                                                     ncy


                                                                n


                                                                        t
                                                            Twi


                                                                    De b


                                                                            A ll
                                        Ban


                                                       re
                                                   Cu r




                                                        Type of Crisis




                                                               62
             Figure 4 Crisis Frequencies By Country versus the Average Level of Hard
             Currency Public Debt to Total Public Debt, 1880-1913




               0.4

              0.35
                                                                                              Debt Crises
               0.3

                                                                                              Twin Crises
              0.25

               0.2
                                                                                              Currency Crises
percentage




              0.15
                                                                                              Banking Crises
               0.1

              0.05

                0

             -0.05

              -0.1
                  -0.2      0          0.2             0.4            0.6           0.8   1

                                Average ratio of hard currency debt to total debt




                                                         63
Figure 5 Crisis Frequencies by Country versus the Average Level of the
“Mismatch” Measure, 1880-1913




              0.4

             0.35                                                                                              Debt Crises
              0.3
                                                                                                               Twin Crises
             0.25

              0.2
                                                                                                               Currency Crises
percentage




             0.15
                                                                                                               Banking Crises
              0.1

             0.05

                0

             -0.05

              -0.1
                  -10 -9   -8   -7   -6   -5 -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                       Average "Mismatch"




Notes: The mismatch variable for debt crises uses interest payments. The mismatch for other
types of crises uses debt outstanding. See text for explanations.




                                                                 64
   Figure 6 Original Sin, Mismatch and Gold Cover Ratio for Argentina, 1880-1913


        1.25

            1

        0.75

          0.5                                                                                                                                            Ratio of Hard Currency
                                                                                                                                                         Debt to Total Debt
        0.25

            0
Ratio




                                                                                                                                                         Mismatch
        -0.25

          -0.5

        -0.75
                                                                                                                                                         Gold Reserves/Notes in
           -1                                                                                                                                            Circulation

        -1.25

          -1.5
               80

                           82

                                   84

                                           86

                                                   88

                                                           90

                                                                   92

                                                                           94

                                                                                   96

                                                                                           98

                                                                                                   00

                                                                                                           02

                                                                                                                   04

                                                                                                                           06

                                                                                                                                   08

                                                                                                                                           10

                                                                                                                                                   12
            18

                        18

                                18

                                        18

                                                18

                                                        18

                                                                18

                                                                        18

                                                                                18

                                                                                        18

                                                                                                19

                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                                19
                                                                                   Year




   Figure 7 Original Sin, Mismatch and Gold Cover Ratio for Brazil, 1880-1913


          1.25

             1
          0.75

            0.5
                                                                                                                                                        Ratio of Hard Currency
          0.25                                                                                                                                          Debt to Total Debt
             0
          -0.25
  Ratio




           -0.5                                                                                                                                         Mismatch
          -0.75

             -1
          -1.25
                                                                                                                                                        Gold Reserves/Notes in
           -1.5                                                                                                                                         Circulation
          -1.75

             -2

          -2.25
                  0

                           82

                                   84

                                           86

                                                  88

                                                          0

                                                                  2

                                                                          4

                                                                                  6

                                                                                          8

                                                                                                  00

                                                                                                          02

                                                                                                                  04

                                                                                                                          06

                                                                                                                                 8

                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                 2
                 1 88




                                                        1 89

                                                                1 89

                                                                        1 89

                                                                                1 89

                                                                                        1 89




                                                                                                                                1 90

                                                                                                                                        1 91

                                                                                                                                                1 91
                         18

                                 18

                                         18

                                                18




                                                                                                19

                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                        19




                                                                                   Year




                                                                                                65
        Figure 8 Original Sin, Mismatch and Gold Cover Ratio for the United States
        1880-1913

        1.25
             1
        0.75
           0.5
        0.25                                                                                                                             Ratio of Hard Currency
                                                                                                                                         Debt to Total Debt
             0
        -0.25
           -0.5
Ratio




                                                                                                                                         Mismatch
        -0.75
            -1
        -1.25
           -1.5
                                                                                                                                         Gold Reserves/Notes in
        -1.75                                                                                                                            Circulation
            -2
        -2.25
           -2.5
               80

                         82

                                84

                                       86

                                              88

                                                     90

                                                            92

                                                                   94

                                                                          96

                                                                                 98

                                                                                        00

                                                                                               02

                                                                                                      04

                                                                                                             06

                                                                                                                    08

                                                                                                                           10

                                                                                                                                  12
             18

                       18

                              18

                                     18

                                            18

                                                   18

                                                          18

                                                                 18

                                                                        18

                                                                               18

                                                                                      19

                                                                                             19

                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                19
                                                                           Year




        Figure 9 Original Sin, Mismatch and Gold Cover Ratio for Australia, 1880-1913


              1.5
            1.25
                  1
            0.75
              0.5
                                                                                                                                          Ratio of Hard Currency
            0.25                                                                                                                          Debt to Total Debt
                  0
           -0.25
             -0.5
   Ratio




                                                                                                                                          Mismatch
           -0.75
                  -1
           -1.25
             -1.5
           -1.75                                                                                                                          Gold Reserves/Notes in
                                                                                                                                          Circulation
                  -2
           -2.25
             -2.5
           -2.75
                    80

                           82

                                  84

                                         86

                                                88

                                                       90

                                                              92

                                                                     94

                                                                            96

                                                                                   98

                                                                                          00

                                                                                                 02

                                                                                                        04

                                                                                                               06

                                                                                                                      08

                                                                                                                             10

                                                                                                                                    12
                  18

                         18

                                18

                                       18

                                              18

                                                     18

                                                            18

                                                                   18

                                                                          18

                                                                                 18

                                                                                        19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                  19




                                                                               Year




                                                                                        66
Figure 10 Marginal Effect of the Ratio of Hard Currency Debt to Total Debt



                                              .3
  Marginal Effect of Hard Currency Debt Ratio
       -.1         0    -.2 .1       .2




                                                   0     .2               .4              .6              .8    1
                                                              Hard Currency Debt as a Percentage of Total

Notes: Figures are calculated based on the model in column 1 of Table 1.


Figure 11 Z-Statistics by Observation from a Test of the Hypothesis that the
Marginal Effect is Zero
                               4
                               2
         z-statistic
             0                 -2
                               -4




                                                   -.2   -.1                0               .1             .2   .3
                                                               Marginal Effect of Hard Currency Debt Ratio



                                                                              67
                                             Figure 12 Actual and Predicted Debt Crisis Frequencies by Country versus the
                                             Ratio of Average or Actual Hard Currency Public Debt to Total Public Debt,
                                             1880-1913




                                          0.6                                                                   Argentina, 1893


                                          0.5                                                                                         Actual Crisis
Predicted Probability, Actual Frequency




                                                                                                                Argentina, 1894       Frequency and
                                                                                                                                      Average Hard
                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                      Currency Debt
                                                                                                                                      Ratio
                                          0.3


                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                      Predicted Crisis
                                                                                                                                      Probability and
                                          0.1                                                                                         and Actual Hard
                                                                                                                                      Currency Debt
                                            0
                                                                                                                                      Ratio


                                          -0.1
                                              -0.2        0           0.2              0.4             0.6            0.8         1
                                                                    Ratio of hard currency debt to total debt




                                             Notes: Predicted values come from the probit “regression” in column 2 of Table 1.
                                             See text for other definitions.




                                                                                             68
