NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL CONTROLS, SUDDEN STOPS
AND CURRENT ACCOUNT REVERSALS
Sebastian Edwards
Working Paper 11170
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11170
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

This is a revised version of a paper presented at the National Bureau of Economic research Conference on
“International Borrowing,” Santa Barbara, California, December 16-18, 2004. I am grateful to the
participants in the Cambridge Pre-Conference meeting for their very helpful comments and suggestions. I
thank Roberto Alvarez for his comments and excellent assistance. I am particularly grateful to my discussant
Alan Taylor for his very useful comments.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Controls, Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 11170
March 2005
JEL No. F30, F32
ABSTRACT
In this paper I use a broad multi-country data set to analyze the relationship between restrictions to
capital mobility and external crises. The analysis focuses on two manifestations of external crises:
(a) sudden stops of capital inflows; and (b) current account reversals. I deal with two important
policy-related issues: First, does the extent of capital mobility affect countries’ degree of
vulnerability to external crises; and second, does the extent of capital mobility determine the depth
of external crises

as measured by the decline in growth – once the crises occur? Overall, my

results cast some doubts on the assertion that increased capital mobility has caused heightened
macroeconomic vulnerabilities. I find no systematic evidence suggesting that countries with higher
capital mobility tend to have a higher incidence of crises, or tend to face a higher probability of
having a crisis, than countries with lower mobility. My results do suggest, however, that once a crisis
occurs, countries with higher capital mobility may face a higher cost, in terms of growth decline.
Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sedwards@anderson.ucla.edu

1

I.

3/3/2005

Introduction
During the last few years a number of authors have argued that free capital

mobility produces macroeconomic instability and contributes to financial vulnerability in
the emerging nations. For example, in his critique of the U.S. Treasury and the IMF,
Stiglitz (2002) has argued that pressuring emerging and transition countries to relax
controls on capital mobility during the 1990s was huge mistake. According to him, the
easing of controls on capital mobility was at the center of most (if not all) of currency
crises in the emerging markets during the last decade -- Mexico 1994, East Asia 1997,
Russia 1998, Brazil 1999, Turkey 2001, and Argentina 2002. These days, even the IMF
seems to criticize free capital mobility and to provide (at least some) support for capital
controls. Indeed, in a visit to Malaysia in September 2003 Horst Koehler, then the
Fund’s Managing Director, praised the policies of Prime Minister Mahatir, and in
particular his use of capital controls in the aftermath of the 1997 currency crisis
(Financial Times, September 15th, 2003; page 16).
Supporters of capital controls have argued that restricting capital mobility has two
important potential benefits: (a) It reduces a country’s vulnerability to external shocks
and financial crises; and (b) it allows countries that have suffered a currency crisis to
lower interest rates, implement pro-growth policies, and emerge out of the crisis sooner
than what they would have done it otherwise. According to this view, controlling capital
outflows would give crises countries additional time to restructure their financial sector in
an orderly fashion.1
The evidence in support of these claims, however, has been mostly country
specific, and not particularly convincing. Some authors have claimed that by restricting
capital mobility Chile was able to avoid the type of macroeconomic turmoil that affected
the rest of Latin America during the 1990s (Stiglitz 1999).2 Also, it has been argued that
Malaysia’s imposition of controls on capital outflows in the aftermath of the Asian debt
1

Most well-trained economists would agree that there are trade-offs associated with the imposition of
capital controls. Whether the costs offset the benefits is a complex empirical question, whose answer will
depend on the specificities of each particular country. Doing a full-blown cost-benefit analysis is well
beyond the scope of this paper, however.

2

3/3/2005

crisis helped the country rebound quickly, and resume a growth path (Kaplan and Rodrik,
2002). According to other authors, however, the experiences of both Chile and Malaysia
with capital controls have been mixed at best (Dornbusch 2002, Johnson and Mitton
2001, De Gregorio et. al. 2000). What is particularly interesting about this debate is that
after many years it continues to be mostly centered on the experiences of a handful of
countries, and that much of it has taken place at an anecdotal level. There have been very
few studies that have provided multi-country evidence on whether capital controls indeed
reduce vulnerability, and/or reduce the costs of crises.3 This paucity of multi-country
studies is partially explained by the difficulties in measuring the degree of capital
mobility across time and countries (Eichengreen 2001).
In this paper I use a broad multi-country data set to analyze the relationship
between restrictions to capital mobility and external crises. The analysis focuses on two
manifestations of external crises that have received considerable attention during the last
few years: (a) sudden stops of capital inflows; and (b) current account reversals.4 I am
particularly interested in dealing with the following two specific questions:
•

Do capital controls reduce the probability of a major external crisis
(defined as a sudden stop or a current account reversal)?

•

And, once a crisis has occurred, do countries that restrict capital mobility
incur in lower costs – measured by reductions in growth -- than countries
that have a more open capital account?

In analyzing these issues I rely on two complementary approaches: First, I use a
methodology based on the computation of non-parametric tests and frequency tables to
analyze the incidence and main characteristics of both sudden stops and current account
reversals in countries with different degrees of capital controls. And second, I use a

2

See, however, De Gregorio et al (2000). Some authors have also argued that the absence of crises in India
and China is an indication of the merits of controlling capital mobility. It is difficult, however, to take
these claims seriously.
3
There have been, however, a number of cross-country studies that have tried to determine whether capital
controls have an effect on economic growth. For a survey, see Eichengreen (2001).
4
For a discussion on these two phenomena see, for example, Calvo et. al. (2004) and Edwards (2004a).

3

3/3/2005

regression-based analysis that estimates jointly the probability of having a crisis, and the
cost of such crisis, in terms of short-term declines in output growth.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section II I provide a selected
survey of recent efforts to measure the degree of capital mobility. I review various
indexes, and I discuss their strengths and weaknesses. In Section III I deal with the
evolution of capital account restrictions during the last thirty years. The section opens
with an analysis on the evolution of capital account openness based on a new index,
which I have constructed by combining three data sources: (1) The index developed by
Quinn (2003); (b) the index by Mody and Murshid (2002); and (c) country-specific
information obtained from various sources, including country-specific sources. Section
IV deals with the anatomy of sudden stops and current account reversals. I analyze their
incidence, and the extent to which these two phenomena are related. This analysis is
performed for three groups of countries classified according to the degree of capital
mobility: “low capital mobility,” “intermediate capital mobility” and “high capital
mobility” countries. My main interest in this analysis is to compare the two extreme
groups: low and high capital mobility. In Section V I report new results on the costs of
external crises characterized by sudden stops and/or current account reversals. I am
particularly interested in determining if the cost of a crisis – measured in terms of lower
growth – is different for countries with different degrees of capital mobility. I use
treatment regressions to analyze whether restricting capital mobility reduces
vulnerability and the costs of crises. Finally, in Section VI I provide some concluding
remarks. The paper also has a data appendix.
Before proceeding it is important to stress that in this paper I do not provide a
full-fledge cost-benefit analysis of capital controls. I deal in detail with two important
aspects of the problem – capital controls and vulnerability, and the growth consequences
of crises under different intensity of controls --, but I don’t cover all the consequences of
control policies. In particular, I don’t deal with many microeconomic consequences and
costs of a policy of capital controls (see Forbes 2003, for this type of discussion).

4

II.

3/3/2005

Measuring the Degree of Openness of the Capital Account
Most analysts agree that during the last few decades there has been an increase in

the degree of international capital mobility. There is less agreement, however, on the
exact nature (and magnitude) of this phenomenon. The reason for this is that it is very
difficult to measure in a relatively precise way a country’s degree of capital mobility.
Indeed, with the exception of the two extremes – absolute freedom or complete closeness
of the capital account --, it is not easy to provide effective measures that capture the
extent of capital market integration. What has been particularly challenging has been
constructing indexes that allow for useful comparisons across countries and across time.
In this section I review a number of attempts at building indexes of capital mobility, and I
propose a new measure that combines information from two of the better indexes with
country specific data. I then use this new index to analyze the evolution of capital
account restrictions during the last three decades.
Historically, most emerging and transition countries have relied heavily on
different forms of capital account restrictions. While throughout most of the post World
War II period these have been aimed at avoiding capital “flight”, more recently countries
have tried to avoid (or at least slow down) large inflows of capital (Edwards 1999).
However, there has long been recognition that legal impediments on capital mobility are
not always translated into actual restrictions on these movements. This distinction
between actual and legal capital mobility has been the subject of policy debates,
including the debate on the effectiveness of capital controls.
There is ample historical evidence suggesting that there have been significant
discrepancies between the legal and the actual degree of capital controls. In countries with
severe legal impediments to capital mobility -- including countries that have banned capital
movement --, the private sector has traditionally resorted to the overinvoicing of imports and
underinvoicing of exports to sidestep legal controls on capital flows (Garber 1998 discusses
more sophisticated mechanisms). For example, the massive volumes of capital flight that
took place in Latin America in the wake of the 1982 debt crisis clearly showed that, when
faced with the “appropriate” incentives, the public can be extremely creative in finding ways
to move capital internationally. The question of how to measure, from an economic point
of view, the degree of capital mobility and the extent to which domestic capital markets are

5

3/3/2005

integrated to the world capital market continue to be the subject of extensive debate (See
Dooley, Mathieson and Rojas-Suarez 1997, for an early and comprehensive treatment of the
subject. See Eichengreen 2001, for a more recent discussion).
In two early studies Harberger (1978, 1980) argued that the effective degree of
integration of capital markets should be measured by the convergence of private rates of
return to capital across countries. In trying to measure the effective degree of capital
mobility, Feldstein and Horioka (1980) analyzed the behavior of savings and investments in
a number of countries. They argue that if there is perfect capital mobility, changes in
savings and investments will be uncorrelated in a specific country. That is, in a world
without capital restrictions an increase in domestic savings will tend to "leave the home
country", moving to the rest of the world. Likewise, if international capital markets are fully
integrated, increases in domestic investment will tend to be funded by the world at large and
not necessarily by domestic savings. Using a data set for 16 OECD countries Feldstein and
Horioka found that savings and investment ratios were highly positively correlated, and
concluded that these results strongly supported the presumption that long term capital was
subject to significant impediments. Frankel (1991) applied the Feldstein-Horioka test to a
large number of countries during the 1980s, including a number of Latin American nations.
His results corroborated those obtained by the original study, indicating that savings and
investment have been significantly positively correlated in most countries. In a
comprehensive analysis on the degree of capital Montiel (1994) estimated a series of
Feldstein-Harioka equations for 62 developing countries. Using the estimated regression
coefficient for the industrial countries as a benchmark he concluded that the majority of the
Latin American nations exhibited a relatively high degree of capital mobility – indeed much
larger than what an analysis of legal restrictions would suggest.
In a series of studies Edwards (1985, 1988) and Edwards and Khan (1985) argued
that degree of convergence of domestic and international interest rates could be used to
assess the degree of openness of the capital account (see also Montiel 1994). The
application of this model to the cases of a number of countries (Brazil, Colombia, Chile)
confirms the results that, in general, the actual degree of capital mobility is greater than what
the legal restrictions approach suggests. Haque and Montiel (1991), Reisen and Yeches
(1993) and Dooley (1995) have provided expansions of this model that allow for the

6

3/3/2005

estimation of the degree of capital mobility even in cases when there are not enough data on
domestic interest rates, and when there are changes in the degree of capital mobility through
time. Their results once again indicate that in most emerging countries “true” capital
mobility has historically exceeded “legal” extent of capital mobility. Dooley et al (1997)
developed a method for measuring the changes in the degree of capital mobility in emerging
countries that recognizes the costs of undertaking disguised capital inflows. The model is
estimated using a Kalman filter technique for three countries. The results suggest that all
three countries experienced a very significant increase in the degree of capital mobility
between 1977 and 1989. Edwards (2000a) used a “time-varying coefficients” variant of
this approach to analyze the way in which Chile’s actual degree of capital mobility evolved
through time.
Some authors have used information contained in the International Monetary Fund’s
Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions to construct indexes on capital controls
for a panel of countries. Alesina, Grilli and Milesi-Ferreti (1994), for example, constructed
a dummy variable index of capital controls. This indicator -- which takes a value of one
when capital controls are in place and zero otherwise -- was then used to analyze some of
the political forces behind the imposition of capital restrictions in a score of countries.5
Rodrik (1998) used similar index to investigate the effects of capital controls on growth,
inflation and investment between 1979 and 1989. His results suggest that, after controlling
for other variables, capital restrictions have no significant effects on macroeconomic
performance. Klein and Olivei (1999) used the IMF’s Exchange Arrangements and
Exchange Restrictions data to construct an index of capital mobility. The index is defined as
the number of years in the period 1986 and 1995 that, according to the IMF, the country in
question has had an open capital account. 6 In contrast to Rodrik, their analysis suggests that
countries with a more open capital account have performed better than those that restrict
capital mobility.7 Milner (1996), Leblang (1997), Razin and Rose (1994) and Chinn and
5

Edison et al (2002) provide a very useful summary (Table 1 of their paper) of 12 different measures of
capital account restrictions used in recent studies on the relation between capital controls and economic
performance.
6
A limitation with this indicator is that it dos not say if the index’s number (i.e. the percentage of years
with restrictions) refers to most recent or most distant years in the time window being considered.
7
As Eichengreen (2001) points out, some authors supplement the information form the IMF’s Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions with information on the extent of restrictions on current
transactions. See also Frankel (1992).

7

3/3/2005

Ito (2002) have also used indicators based on the IMF binary classification of openness.
The standard approach is to use line E.2 of the annual summary published in the Annual
Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. In an early attempt to use
this IMF report, Edwards (1989) used the detailed information in the individual country
pages to analyze the way in which restrictions on capital mobility changed in the period
immediately surrounding a major exchange rate crisis.
A major limitation of these IMF-based binary indexes, however, is that they are
extremely general and do not distinguish between different intensities of capital restrictions.
Moreover, they fail to distinguish between the type of flow that is being restricted, and they
ignore the fact that, as discussed above, legal restrictions are frequently circumvented. For
example, according to this IMF-based indicator, Chile, Mexico and Brazil were subject to
the same degree of capital controls in 1992-1994. In reality, however, the three cases were
extremely different. While in Chile there were restrictions on short-term inflows, Mexico
had (for all practical purposes) free capital mobility, and Brazil had in place an arcane array
of restrictions. Montiel and Reinhart (1999) have combined IMF and country-specific
information to construct an index on the intensity of capital controls in 15 countries during
1990-96. Although their index, which can take three values (0, 1 or 2) represent an
improvement over straight IMF indicators, it is still rather general, and does not capture the
subtleties of actual capital restrictions. These measurement difficulties are not unique to
the capital flows literature, however. In fact, as Rodrik (1995) and Edwards (1998) have
argued, the literature on trade openness and growth has long been affected by serious
measurement problems.
In an effort to deal with these measurement problems, Quinn (1997) constructed a
comprehensive set of cross country indicators on the degree of capital mobility. His
indicators cover 20 advanced countries and 45 emerging economies. These indexes have
two distinct advantages over other indicators: First, they are not restricted to a binary
classification, where countries capital accounts are either open or closed. Quinn uses a 0
through 4 scale to classify the countries in his sample, with a higher number meaning a
more open capital account. Second, Quinn indexes cover more than one time period,
allowing researchers to investigate whether there is a connection between capital account
liberalization and economic performance. This is, indeed, an improvement over

8

3/3/2005

traditional indexes that have concentrated on a particular period in time, without allowing
researchers to analyze whether countries that open-up to international capital movements
have experienced changes in performance.8 In an interesting exercise, Edison et al (2002)
compared Quinn’s (1997) index with an index based on the number of years that,
according to the Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions, a country has had a
closed capital account. They found that for most (but not all) countries and period there
was a correspondence between the two indicators.
Chinn and Ito (2002) built a new index based on the IMF binary data. Their index
is the average of the first standardized principal component of each of four categories of
transactions considered by the Fund. Chinn and Ito consider their index to be in the spirit
of the work by Edwards (2001) and Klein and Olivei (2001), and argue that, in contrast
with the simple 0-1 IMF-based indexes, they are able to capture the intensity of capital
restrictions. An advantage of this index constructed by Chinn and Ito is that it is
available for 105 countries for the period 1977-1997.
More recently Quinn and Toyoda (2003) and Quinn (2003) used detailed data
obtained from the International Monetary Fund to develop a new index of capital
mobility for 59 countries. This index goes from 1 to 100, with higher values denoting a
higher degree of financial integration. Thus, countries with stricter capital controls have
a lower value of this index. For a small number of these countries the index is available
for the period 1950-1999; for most of them it is available for five years: 1959, 1973,
1982, 1988 and 1997. And, for a core number of countries the index is available since
1890 (for details see Quinn 2003). Mody and Murshid (2002) also used IMF data as the
bases for their index of financial integration. This index covers 150 countries for (most
of) the period 1966-2000, and is tabulated from a value of zero to four. This index takes
the value of zero in case that a country has a closed capital account, closed current
account, places restrictions in their exports receipts, and operates under multiple
exchange rates. Both these new indexes (Quinn and Mody-Murshid) represent a
significant improvement over previous attempts at measuring the variation across time
and countries of capital restrictions.
8

Note, however, that the basis information used by Quinn to construct this index also comes from the
IMF’s Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions.

9

3/3/2005

In a recent paper Miniane (2004) has proposed a new measure based on detailed
country-specific data compiler by the IMF. Since 1996 the Fund’s Annual Report on
Exchange Rate Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions, has published a very detailed
and disaggregated index of capital account restrictions that distinguishes between 13
different categories. This level of disaggregation is a marked improvement over the pre1996 Annual Report data, which considered only six categories -- bilateral payments
arrangements, restrictions on current account transaction payments, restrictions on capital
account restrictions, import surcharges, advanced deposits on imports, and export
proceeds surrending. Miniane has extended the more detailed 13-categories index
backward to 1983 for 34 countries. He shows that this new measure is more accurate
than the older less detailed one.
Although these new indexes on capital restrictions represent a major improvement
with respect to earlier indicators, they still have some limitations, including the fact that
in spite of the authors’ efforts, the indexes do not distinguish sharply between different
types of restrictions (i.e. controls on FDI vs. portfolio flows; controls on inflows vs.
controls on outflows).9 Second, these indexes tend to blur the distinction between
exchange restrictions -- including the required surrendering of exports’ proceeds -- and
capital account restrictions. Third, they do not deal in a systematic way with the fact that
many countries controls are (partially) evaded. This means that an ideal index of capital
account restrictions would make a correction for the “effectiveness” of the controls (see
De Gregorio et. al 2000 for an attempt to deal with this issue for the case of Chile).
Most of the indexes discussed above have tried to capture the overall degree of
capital mobility in particular countries at a particular moment in time. A number of
authors, however, have concentrated on the degree of openness of the stock market.
Most of these studies have tried to analyze the effect of the opening of the stock market
on several macroeconomic and microeconomic variables. For this reason, these studies
make a significant effort to date correctly different liberalization efforts. Early and
ambitious efforts along these lines were made by Bekaert (1995), Bekaert and Harvey
9

The Quinn (1997) index considers separately capital account receipts and payments. Johnston and
Tamirisa (1998) is one of the few papers where an attempt is made to distinguish between controls on
capital inflows and on various types of outflows. Their index, however, covers only one year. For related
work see Tamirisa (1999).

10

3/3/2005

(1995, 2000), and Bekaert et al (2002). An important point made by these authors is that
using the “official” or “legislative” dates of stock market liberalization may be highly
misleading. For this reason, the authors use data on actual net capital flows to date stock
market liberalization episodes in a score of countries. More specifically, they argue that
liberalization episodes may be date by identifying breakpoints in the net capital flows
data.10 In a recent study, Edison and Warnock (2002) have used data on stock markets
compiled by the International Finance Corporation to construct a new index of
restrictions on ownership of stock by foreigners. This index – which was constructed for
29 countries – has a high degree of correlation with the index by Bekaert et al (2002).11
Shatz (2000) has built an index on capital account restrictions on the bases of restrictions
on foreign direct investment in 57 countries. This index has been used by Desai et al
(2004) in a study on the way in which multinational firms deal with capital controls.
The selective survey presented in this subsection vividly captures the difficulties
that researchers have encountered in their efforts to measure the degree of capital
mobility of particular countries at particular points in time. It also shows that this is a
rapidly moving area of research, which is likely to continue to evolve in the future. Most
recent efforts to improve measurement have focused on moving away from coarse
“closed-open” binary indexes, and have dealt with two issues: (a) capturing the fact that
when it comes to controls there are “grey areas,” and that there are gradations of
restrictions; and (b) allowing comparisons of the intensity of controls across countries
and time. In both of these areas there have been considerable improvements in the last
few years.
III.

The Evolution of Capital Mobility in the World Economy: 1970-2001
In this section I analyze the evolution of capital mobility in a large number of

countries – both advanced and emerging – during the last three decades. The first step is
to discuss a new index on capital mobility; I then provide evidence of the extent to which
countries have liberalized their capital account in the last ten years.

10

See also Henry (2000).
See Edison et. al (2002) for a survey of studies on the effect of capital account restrictions on stock
markets.
11

11

3/3/2005

III.1 A New Index of Capital Mobility
In order to analyze the evolution of capital account restrictions I constructed a
new index on capital mobility that combines information from Quinn (2003) and Mody
and Murshid (2002), with information from country-specific sources. In creating this
new index a three steps procedure was followed: First, the scales of the Quinn and Mody
and Murshid indexes were made compatible. The new index has a scale from 0 to 100,
where higher numbers denote a higher degree of capital mobility; a score of 100 denotes
absolutely free capital mobility. Second, I use Stata’s “impute” procedure to deal with
missing observations in the new index. In order to impute preliminary values to the
missing observations we use data on the two original indexes (Quinn and Mody and
Murshid), their lagged values, openness as measured by import tariffs collections over
imports, the extent of trade openness measured as imports plus exports over GDP, and
GDP per capita.12 In the third step, I use country-specific data to revise and refine the
preliminary data created using the “impute” procedure discussed above. The new index
covers the period 1970-2000, and has data for 163 countries (although not every country
has data for every year). It is important to note that although this new index is a clear
improvement over alternative indexes, it still has some shortcomings, including the fact
that it does not distinguish very sharply between restrictions on capital inflows and
restrictions on capital outflows.13
In Figure 1 I present the evolution of the new index for six groups of countries:
(1) Industrial; (2) Latin America and the Caribbean; (3) Asia; (4) Africa; (5) Middle East
and North Africa; and (6) Eastern Europe. This figure clearly captures the fact that the
degree of capital mobility has increased in every one of these six regions during the last
three decades. A comparison of the 1970-1989 and the 1990-2000 period suggests that,
on average, the industrial countries made the most progress in moving towards greater
capital mobility; their average index went from 66.5 to 88.8. The Middle East and North
African countries, on the other hand, experienced only moderate capital account
liberalization. Their capital mobility index went from an average of 41.3 to 49.1. Figure
12

See Aizenman and Noy (2004) on the relationship between trade account openness and capital account
openness.
13
See the discussion in the preceding section for an analysis of the shortcomings of different indexes. See
also Eichengreen (2001) and Edwards (1999).

12

3/3/2005

1 also shows that this process of financial openness has followed different patterns in the
different regions. For instance, in the industrial countries it has been a relatively smooth
process; in the Latin American countries, on the other hand, it is possible to see stricter
capital account restrictions during the 1970s and 1980s, with an increase in the extent of
capital mobility in the 1990s. In Asia, there was an increase in capital mobility during
the early 1990s, followed by a somewhat abrupt imposition of controls after the 1997
crises. Since then, capital mobility has increased somewhat. Not surprisingly, Eastern
Europe is the region that has experienced the greatest discrete jump in the degree of
capital mobility.
As a way of gaining further insights into the evolution of capital mobility during
the period 1970-2001, I used data on the new index on capital mobility to divide the
sample into three equal-size groups depending on the extent of mobility. These groups
have been labeled High, Intermediate and Low mobility.14 This three-way division of the
sample clearly captures the fact that the degree of capital mobility has increased
significantly during the last thirty years. In 1970, 44% of the observations corresponded
to Low mobility; 26% to Intermediate; and 30% to High mobility. In the year 2000, in
contrast, 24% of the observations corresponded to Low mobility; 25% to Intermediate;
and 52% to High mobility. Table 1 contains summary data on the index of capital
mobility for the Low and High mobility groups.15 As may be seen, the mean and median
values of the index are very different across groups. Indeed a test with the equality of
means indicates that the null hypothesis is rejected at a high degree of confidence (tstatistic = 136.9).
In order to illustrate which type of country belongs to each group, in Table 2 I
present a list of a subset nations with High and Low capital mobility. These subsets focus
on the “extremes” of the distributions, and capture countries with Very High mobility
(index value equal or higher than 87.5) and Very Low mobility (index value lower or

14

Since the unit of analysis is a country/year observation, and there has been a trend towards higher
capital mobility (see Figure 1), most observations in the High mobility group correspond to recent
country/year observations. Likewise, by construction most (but by no means all) observations in the Low
mobility group correspond to early (1970s and 1980s) country/year observations.
15
In much (but not all) of the analysis that follows I will deal only with the Low and High restrictions
groups. That is, in many of the results that follow the group of countries with Intermediate restrictions has
been dropped.

13

3/3/2005

equal to 12.5).16 As may be seen, while the number of countries with Very High capital
mobility increased from decade to decade, the number with Very Low mobility declined,
until in the 1990-2000 decade there were no nations with an index value below 12.5.
Finally, in Table 3 I present a list of countries that during a five year period
experienced major changes in the extent of capital mobility: Panel A in Table 3 lists
countries that moved from High to Low mobility. As may be seen, there are relatively
few nations that went through a rapid and extreme closing of the capital account.
Interestingly, all cases correspond to countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, and
took place during the first half of the 1980s when the region was going through the debt
crisis. In Panel B of Table 3 I have listed countries that have gone through rapid capital
account liberalizations – these are countries that within five years have gone from Low
mobility all the way to High capital mobility -- skipping, as it were, the adolescence stage
of capital mobility. As may be seen, during the 1980s one emerging country (Uruguay)
and three OECD countries went through– Australia, Norway and Portugal -- this rapid
liberalization process. In contrast, during the 1990s an increasingly large number of
emerging countries – including many in Latin America and Africa – liberalized their
capital accounts rapidly.
IV.

The Anatomy of Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops: Is there a
Difference between High and Low Capital Mobility Countries?
Recent discussions on external crises have tended to focus on two related

phenomena: (1) sudden stops of capital inflows, defined as a situation where the flow of
capital coming into a country is reduced significantly in a very short period of time; and
(2) current account reversals, or major reductions in the current account deficit that take
place within a year or two.17 In this section I analyze these two phenomena during the
last thirty years, and I rely on nonparametric tests to investigate whether their incidence

16

These break-points were selected in an arbitrary fashion.
The term “sudden stops” was introduced by Rudi Dornbusch and has been popularized by Guillermo
Calvo and his associates. On sudden stops see, for example, Calvo et. al. (2004), and Edwards (2004a, b).
On current account reversals see Milesi- Ferreti and Razin (2000), Edwards (2002, 2004a,b) and Guidotti
et.al. (2004). See Taylor (2002) for a fascinating discussion on long term trends in current account
dynamics. On the long term interplay between capital flows and the current account, see Obstfeld and
Taylor (2004).
17

14

3/3/2005

and main characteristics have been different for countries with High capital mobility, and
countries with Low mobility.
IV.1

Incidence of Sudden Stops and Reversals
In this paper I have defined a “sudden stop” episode as an abrupt and major

reduction in capital inflows to a country that up to that time had been receiving large
volumes of foreign capital. More specifically, I imposed the following requirements for
an episode to qualify as a “sudden stop”: (1) the country in question must have received
an inflow of capital (relative to GDP) larger than its region’s third quartile during the two
years prior to the “sudden stop.” And (2), net capital inflows must have declined by at
least 5% of GDP in one year.18 On the other hand, a “current account reversal” –
reversals, in short -- is defined as a reduction in the current account deficit of at least 4%
of GDP in one year.19
Table 4 presents tabulation data on the incidence of sudden stops for the period
under study; Table 5 contains data on the incidence of current account reversals. In both
Tables I have considered six groups of countries – industrial, Latin America and
Caribbean, Asia, Africa, Middle East and North Africa, and Eastern Europe. Each Table
also includes a Pearson test for equality of incidence across groups of countries. As may
be seen, the total historical incidence of sudden stops has been 6.4%. Different countries,
however, have experienced very different realities, with the incidence being highest in the
Middle East (11.3%) and lowest in the industrial nations (3.7%). The tabulation on
reversals in Table 5 indicates that the aggregate incidence rate has been 12.8%; Latin
America, Africa and the Middle East have had the highest incidence at 16%, and the
industrial countries have had the lowest incidence at 2.4%.
From an analytical perspective sudden stops and reversals should be highly
related phenomena. There is no reason, however, for their relationship to be one-to-one.
Indeed, because of changes in international reserves it is perfectly possible that a country
that suffers a sudden stop does not experience at the same time a current account reversal.
In Table 6 I present two-way frequency tables for the “sudden stops” and the current
18

In order to check for the robustness of the results, I also used two alternative definitions of sudden stops,
which considered a reduction in inflows of 3 and 7 of GDP in one year. Due to space considerations,
however, I don’t report detailed results using these definitions.

15

3/3/2005

account deficit reversal, both for the complete sample as well as for the six regions. The
Table shows that for the complete sample (3,106 observations) 46.8% of countries
subject to a sudden stop also faced a current account reversal. At the same time, 22.8%
of those with reversals also experienced (in the same year) a sudden stop of capital
inflows. The regional data show that joint incidence of reversals and “sudden stops” has
been highest in Africa, where approximately 59.3% of sudden stops happened at the same
time as current account reversals, and in Latin America where 25% of reversals coincided
with sudden stops. Notice that for every one of the regions, as well as for the complete
sample, the Pearson χ2 tests have very small p-values, indicating that the observed
differences across rows and columns are significant. That is, these tests suggest that
although there are observed differences across these phenomena, the two are statistically
related. Interestingly, these results do not change in any significant way if different
definitions of reversals and sudden stops are used, or if alternative configurations of lags
and leads are considered.
IV.2 Sudden Stops, Reversals and Capital Controls
The tabulation results presented above, on sudden stops and current account
reversals (Tables 5 and 6), did not group countries according to their degree of capital
mobility. In Table 7 I report the incidence of both sudden stops and current account
reversals for the three categories of capital mobility defined above: High, Intermediate
and Low capital mobility. The Table also presents the p-values for Pearson tests on the
equality of incidence across regions, as well as t-statistics (and their p-values) on the
equality of incidence under High mobility and Low mobility on the one hand, and
equality of incidence under High mobility and Intermediate mobility, on the other hand
(these tests are presented both at the country-group as well as aggregate levels). The
results obtained may be summarized as follows:
•

For the complete sample, the incidence of current account reversals is
significantly lower for countries with High capital mobility than for countries
with either Intermediate or Low mobility. This aggregate result is somewhat

19

I also used an alternative definition. The qualitative nature of the results discussed below, were not
affected by the precise definition of reversals or sudden stops. See Edwards (2002).

16

3/3/2005

deceiving, however, since there are marked differences in incidence across
groups of countries.20 As may be seen from Table 7, for industrial countries
the incidence of reversals has been significantly smaller in countries with
High mobility. In Asia, on the other hand, countries with Low mobility have
had a significantly lower incidence of reversals than nations with High capital
mobility. For the rest of the country groups there are no statistical differences
in the incidence of reversals across degrees of capital mobility.
•

For sudden stops, the results for the complete sample suggest that there are no
statistical differences in incidence across countries with different degrees of
capital mobility. At the country groups levels there are some differences,
however. For industrial countries the incidence of sudden stops is smaller
under High capital mobility; the opposite is true for the Asian and Eastern
European countries. The t-statistics in Table 7 indicate that for Latin America,
Africa and the Middle East there are no statistical differences in the incidence
of sudden stops according to the degree of capital mobility.

The results presented in Table 7 were obtained when the contemporaneous value
of the index was used to classify countries as having High, Intermediate or Low degree of
capital mobility. It is possible to argue, however, that what matters is not the degree of
capital mobility in a particular year, but the policy stance on capital mobility in the
medium term. In order to investigate whether an alternative classification makes a
difference, I re-classified countries as High, Intermediate and Low capital mobility using
the average value in the index in the previous 5 years. The results obtained are reported
in Table 8; as may be seen, the results are very similar to those reported in Table 7.
IV.3 Banking Crises
In this sub-section I investigate whether sudden stops and current account
reversals have historically been related to banking crises. A number of authors have
argued that one of the costliest effects of external shocks is that they tend to generate
banking crises and collapses. Most analyses on this subject have focused on the joint
20

Indeed, according to the Person test the null hypothesis of equality of incidence across country-group
categories is strongly rejected.

17

3/3/2005

occurrence of devaluation crises and banking crises – see, for example, the discussion in
Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999). In this sub-section I take a slightly different approach,
and I investigate whether sudden stops and major current account deficits – not all of
which end up in devaluation crises, as established in Edwards (2004a) -- have been
associated with banking crises. I address this issue in Tables 9 and 10, where I present
two-way tabulations for current account reversals and a dummy variable that takes the
value of one if that year there has been a banking crisis (Table 9), and for sudden stops
and banking crises (Table 10).21 All panels in Table 9 – see, in particular, the Pearson χ2
tests for independence of rows and columns -- show that there has not been a significant
relation, between reversals and major banking crises. Interestingly, this is the case for all
three groups of capital mobility.
The results in Table 10 refer to sudden stops and banking crises, and are very
similar. They indicate that there has been no significant relation – at any level of capital
mobility – between sudden stops and banking crises (see he Pearson χ2 tests for
independence of rows and columns). It is important to note that this is the case
independently of the lag-lead structure considered. In sum, the results reported in Tables
9 and 10 indicate that, contrary to what some critics of capital account liberalization have
argued, higher capital mobility has not been associated with a higher occurrence of
banking crisis; banking crisis have occurred at the same rate in countries with High,
Intermediate and Low capital mobility.22
V.

Capital Controls and the Costs of External Crises
According to the analysis presented in the preceding section, there is no clear

evidence supporting the view that Low capital mobility countries – that is, countries that
impose heavy restrictions (or controls) on the mobility of capital – have a significantly
lower incidence of sudden stops or current account reversals. In this section I take the
analysis a step further, and I investigate whether current account reversals and sudden
stops have historically had significant costs, in terms of a lower GDP growth. More
21

The data on banking crises are from Glick and Hutchison (1999). When an alternative definition of
reversals is used the results are similar to those reported in this section

18

3/3/2005

important, in terms of the current paper, I analyze whether the (potential) costs of sudden
stops and reversals have been different in countries with different degrees of capital
mobility.
The section is organized as follows: I first present a preliminary analysis, where I
compare growth before and after sudden stops and current account reversal episodes, for
countries with different degrees of capital mobility. I then present results obtained from
an econometric analysis that estimates jointly – using treatment regressions – the
probability of having a crisis and the effect of the crisis on GDP growth. As pointed out,
the main interest in this analysis is to determine whether the extent of capital mobility
plays a role in explaining countries’ propensity to having crises, and the costs associated
with crises.
V.1

Sudden Stops, Current Account Reversals, Capital Controls and Growth: A
Preliminary Analysis
In Table 11 I present a “before and after” analysis on GDP per capita growth for

sudden stops and reversals. This analysis has been done for all countries, as well as for
countries grouped according to their degree of capital mobility. The “before” data
corresponds to average GDP per capita growth during the three years before the crisis. I
have computed two “after” rates of growth: (a) The year of the crisis, and (b) the average
during three years after the crisis. Panel A in Table 11 contains the results for one year
after the crisis; Panel B contains results for three year after the crisis. The first four
columns in both panels in Table 11 contain the average difference in the rate of growth
per capita after and before the crisis. Column one is for all countries; columns two
through four are for countries with High, Intermediate and Low capital mobility. The
numbers in parentheses are t-statistics for the null hypothesis that the “before and after”
rates of growth are equal. The final two columns – columns (E) and (F) – are diff-in-diffs
columns, which report the difference in the before and after growth rates for High and
Intermediate and High and Low capital mobility; that is the number in column (E) is
equal to Column (B) minus (C). The number in parenthesis is for the null hypothesis that
this diff-in-diff is equal to zero.
22

I also analyzed the incidence of sudden stops, current account reversals and IMF programs. The results
obtained indicate that there is no relation between sudden stops and reversals on the one hand, and IMF
programs on the other.

19

3/3/2005

As may be seen from Table 11, these preliminary results suggest that, generally
speaking, there are no significant differences in growth before and after the crises; this is
the case for all categories of capital mobility. Notice that only 3 out of the 24 t-statistics
in Table 11 are significant at conventional levels. As emphasized above, however, these
results are only preliminary, since no attempt has been made to control for other factors,
or to incorporate the determinants of the probability of a crisis.23 In the subsection that
follows I deal with these issues by using a treatment regression methodology.
V.2

An Econometric Analysis
In this sub-section I present results from an econometric analysis that deals with

two questions: (a) does a higher degree of capital mobility increase the probability of a
crisis (defined as a sudden stop or as a current account reversal)? (b) Does the degree of
capital mobility affect the cost of crises, once they occur? The discussion proceeds as
follows: I first present a simple analysis on the effects of sudden stops and current
account reversals on growth (section V.2.1); I then present results from the joint
estimation of crises’ probabilities and dynamics of growth equations (Section V.3).
V.2.1

Growth Effects of Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals: Preliminary
Econometric Results
As in Edwards and Levy-Yeyati (2004), the point of departure of the empirical

analysis is a two-equation formulation for the dynamics of real GDP per capita growth of
country j in period t. Equation (1) is the long run GDP growth equation, while equation
(2) captures the growth dynamics process.
(1)

g* j = α + x j β + r j θ + ω j.

(2)

∆ g t j = λ [ g* j – g t-1 j ] + ϕ v t j + γ u t j + ξ t j .
I have used the following notation: g* j is the long run rate of real per capita GDP

growth in country j; x j is a vector of structural, institutional and policy variables that
determine long run growth; r j is a vector of regional dummies; α, β and θ are
23

Hong and Tornell (2004), however, have used a similar methodology and found that there are growth
effects of crises. Their definition of crisis, however, is different from the two definitions I have used here.

20

3/3/2005

parameters, and ω j is an error term assumed to be heteroskedastic. In equation (2), g t j is
the rate of growth of per capita GDP in country j in period t. The terms v t j and u t j are
shocks, assumed to have zero mean, finite variance and to be uncorrelated among them.
More specifically, v t j is assumed to be an external terms of trade shock, while u t j
captures other shocks, including sudden stops and current account reversals. ξ t j is an
error term, which is assumed to be heteroskedastic (see equation (3) below for details),
and λ, ϕ, and γ are parameters that determine the particular characteristics of the growth
process. Equation (2) -- which has the form of an equilibrium correction model (ECM) -, states that the actual rate of growth in period t will deviate from the long run rate of
growth due to the existence of three types of shocks: v t j, u t j and ξ t j. Over time,
however, the actual rate of growth will tend to converge towards it long run value, with
the rate of convergence given by λ. Parameter ϕ, in equation (2), is expected to be
positive, indicating that an improvement in the terms of trade will result in a (temporary)
acceleration in the rate of growth, and that negative terms of trade shock are expected to
have a negative effect on g t j.24 The main interest from the perspective of the current
paper is whether sudden stops and current account reversals have a negative effect on
growth; that is, whether coefficient γ is significantly negative. In the actual estimation of
equation 1, I used dummy variables for sudden stops and reversals. An important
question – and one that is addressed in detail in the Subsection that follows – is whether
the effects of different shocks on growth are different for countries with different degrees
of capital mobility.
The system (1) - (2) was estimated using a two step procedure. In the first step I
estimate the long run growth equation (2) using a cross-country data set. These data are
averages for 1974-2000, and the estimation makes a correction for heteroskedasticity.
These first stage estimates are then used to generate long-run predicted growth rates to
replace g*j in the equilibrium error correction model (2). In the second step, I estimated
equation (2) using GLS procedure for unbalanced panels; I used both random effects and
fixed effects estimation procedures. The data set used covers 157 countries, for the
1970-2000 period; not every country has data for every year, however. See the Data
Appendix for exact data definition and data sources.
24

See Edwards and Levy Yeyati (2004) for details.

21

3/3/2005

The results from the first step estimation of equation (1) are not reported due to
space considerations.25 Table 12 presents the results from the second step estimation of
the growth dynamics equation (2). The first two equations refer to current account
reversals, while the next two equations focus on sudden stops. Finally, in equations
(12.5) and (12.6) I included both the sudden stops and the reversals variables as
regressors.
The estimated coefficient of [ g* j – g t-1 j ] is, as expected, positive, significant,
and smaller than one. The point estimates are on the high side -- between 0.81 and 0.88 -, suggesting that, on average, deviations between long run and actual growth get
eliminated rather quickly. For instance, according to equation (12.1), after 3 years
approximately 90% of a unitary shock to real GDP growth per capita will be eliminated.
Also, as expected, the estimated coefficients of the terms of trade shock are always
positive, and statistically significant, indicating that an improvement (deterioration) in the
terms of trade results in an acceleration (de-acceleration) in the rate of growth of real per
capita GDP. As may be seen from equations (12.1) and (12.2), the coefficient of the
current account reversals variable is significantly negative, indicating that reversals result
in a deceleration of growth. The point estimate is -2.01, indicating that, with other things
given, a reversal has on average resulted in a 2% reduction in short term growth on
average. The results from equations (12.3) and (12.4) refer to sudden stops. They show
that the estimated coefficients of the sudden stop dummies are significantly negative,
with a point estimate that ranges from -1.23 to -1.25. This suggests that while sudden
stops have also have a negative effect on per capita growth, their impact on growth has
not been as severe as the impact of reversal episodes.
The results in equations (12.5) and (12.6), where both the current account
reversals and the sudden stop dummies have been included, are particularly interesting:
while the reversal dummies continue to be significantly negative, the coefficient for the
25

In estimating equation (1) for long-run per capita growth, I follow the by now standard literature on
growth, as summarized by Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1995), and use average data for 1974-2000. In terms
of the equation specification, I include the following covariates: the log of initial GDP per capita; the
investment ratio; the coverage of secondary education; an index of the degree of openness of the economy;
the ratio of government consumption relative to GDP; and regional dummies for Latin American, Sub
Saharan African and Transition economies. The results are quiet standard, and support what by now has
become the “received wisdom” on the empirical determinants of long term growth.

22

3/3/2005

sudden stop dummy is not significant any longer. This suggests that what is costly – in
terms of lower GDP per capita growth – is not a sudden stop per se. Indeed, according to
these results, what is costly in terms of lower growth is a current account reversal. This
is an important finding, since it suggests that countries that experience a sudden stop, but
are able – through the use of international reserves – to avoid a current account reversal
will not face a significant decline in growth. More over, this result suggests that sudden
stops have an indirect (negative) effect on growth. According to this conjecture, the
occurrence of a sudden stop increases the probability of a current account reversal. The
reversal, in turn, will have a negative impact on GDP per capita growth. I formally
investigate this hypothesis in the Subsection that follows.
V.2.2

Joint Estimation
I use a “treatment effects” model to estimate jointly an equation on real GDP

growth and a probit equation on the probability that a country experiences a current
account reversal. The base empirical treatment effects model is as follows:
g* j

(2’)

∆ g t j = λ [ g* j – g t-1 j ] + ϕ v t j + γ u t j + θ (u t j × Openness t j) + ξ t j .

(3)

(4)

u tj

u*t j

=

α + x j β + r j θ + ω j.

(1’)

1,

if u*t j > 0

0,

otherwise

=

= w jt α + εjt .

As before, equation (1’) is the long term real growth equation, and equation (2’) is the
growth dynamics equation. u j t is a dummy variable (i.e. the treatment variable) that
takes a value of one if country j in period t experienced a current account reversal, and
zero if the country did not experience reversal. Accordingly, is the parameter of

23

3/3/2005

interest: the effect of the treatment on the outcome. Finally, (u t j × Openness t j) is a
variable that interacts u t j with a measure of openness. The coefficient of this interactive
variable θ will capture the effect of openness on the transmission of external shocks on
growth. In the estimation I used two alternative measures of openness: the index of
capital account openness presented in Section III of this paper; and a measure of trade
openness (defined as the ratio of exports plus imports over GDP).
According to equation (3), whether the country experiences a current account
reversal is assumed to be the result of an unobserved latent variable u* j t. u* j t, in turn, is
assumed to depend linearly on vector w j t. In the estimation, one of the w j t variables is
the degree of capital mobility, or financial openness. Some of the variables in w j t may
be included in x j t .26 β and α are parameter vectors to be estimated. µ j t and ε j t are error
terms assumed to be bivariate normal, with a zero mean and a covariance matrix given
by:
σ
(5)

1

If equations (2’) and (3) are independent, the covariance term

in equation (5)

will be zero. Under most plausible conditions, however, it is likely that this covariance
term will be different from zero (See Wooldridge 2002 for details). The model in
equations (1’) – (5) will satisfy the consistency and identifying conditions of mixed
models with latent variables if the outcome variable y j t is not a determinant of the
treatment equation -- that is, if y is not one of the variables in w in equation (3).27 As is
clear in the discussion that follows, in the estimation of the model (1’) - (5) we impose a
number of exclusionary restrictions; that is, a number of variables in vector wj t are not
included in vector xj t.

26

For details on the identification requirements for this type of models see, for example, Wooldridge
(2002).
27
Details on identification and consistency of models with mixed structures can be found in Maddala
(1983). See, also, Heckman (1978) and Angrist (2000).

24

3/3/2005

The system (1’) – (5) was estimated using a three-step procedure. The first step
consists of estimating the long run growth equation 91’). The results from this estimation
are used to compute the growth gap term [ g* j – g t-1 j ]. In the second step the treatment
equation on the probability of having a current account reversal is estimated using a
probit procedure. From this estimation a hazard is obtained for each j,t observation. In
the third step, the outcome equation (2’) is estimated with the hazard added as an
additional covariate; in this third step the outcome equation is estimated using fixed
effects. From the residuals of this augmented outcome regression, it is possible to
compute consistent estimates of the variance-covariance matrix (4) (See Maddala 1983,
and Wooldridge 2002 for details).
The Treatment Equation: Following work by Frankel and Rose (1996), MilesiFerreti and Razin (2000) and Edwards (2002) among others, in the estimation of the first
treatment (probit) I included the following covariates: (a) The index of capital mobility
discussed in Section III. If, as critics of capital mobility have argued, greater mobility
increases countries’ vulnerability to crises, the estimated coefficient should be
significantly positive. (b) The ratio of the current account deficit to GDP lagged one and
two periods. It is expected that, with other things given, countries with a larger current
account deficit will have a higher probability of experiencing a reversal. The best results
were obtained when the one-year legged deficit was included. (c) A sudden stop dummy
that takes the value of one if the country in question has experienced a sudden stop in that
particular year. Its coefficient is expected to be positive. (d) An index that measures the
relative occurrence of sudden stops in the country’s region (excluding the country itself)
during that particular year. This variable captures the effect of “regional contagion;” its
coefficient is expected to be positive. (e) The one-year lagged external debt over GDP
ratio. Its coefficient is expected to be positive. (f) An index that measures whether the
country in question has been subject to a banking crisis, the year in question. Its
coefficient will measure the extent to which banking and external (i.e. current account
reversals) have tended to occur jointly. (g) The ratio of net international reserves to
GDP, lagged one year. Its coefficient is expected to be negative, indicating that with
other things given countries with a higher stock of reserves have a lower probability of
experiencing a current account reversal. (h) Short term (less than one-year maturity)

25

3/3/2005

external debt as a proportion of external debt, lagged one period. Its coefficient is
expected to be positive. (i) The one-year lagged rate of growth of domestic credit. Its
coefficient is expected to be positive. (j) The lagged ratio of external debt service to
exports. Again, its coefficient is expected to be positive. (k) The country’s initial GDP
per capita (in logs). (g) Country fixed-effect dummies. In some of the probit regressions
I also included an index that measures the extent of dollarization in the country in
question. Also, in some specifications I included the ratio of FDI to GDP, and the public
sector deficit (both lagged). Their coefficients were not significant, however. Since
these variables were available for a relatively smaller number of observations than the
other variables, they were not included in the final specification of the probit equations
reported in this section.
In Table 13 I summarize the basic results obtained from the estimation of number
of treatment models for GDP growth (the coefficients of the country specific fixed-effect
variables are not reported due to space considerations). The table contains two panels.
The upper panel includes the results from the growth outcome equation (2’); the lower
panel contains the estimates for the “treatment equation,” or probit equation on the
probability of experiencing a current account reversal. As pointed out above, the
treatment observations correspond to current account reversal episodes, and the untreated
group is comprised of all country-year observations were there have been no reversals.28
Table 13 also includes the estimated coefficient of the hazard variable in the third step
estimation, as well as the estimated elements of the variance-covariance matrix (5).
Probability of Experiencing a Current Account Reversal: The probit estimates are
presented in the lower panel of Table 13. I discuss first the results in equations (13.1)
and (13.2), since they were estimated over a larger sample. As may be seen, the results
are similar across models and are quite satisfactory. Most of the coefficients have the
expected signs, and many of them are statistically significant at conventional levels. A
particularly interesting result is that in every equation the estimated coefficient of the
capital mobility index was negative (although it was not significant at conventional
levels). This was also the case when lagged values of this index were included to the
28

Naturally, countries and time periods included in the analysis are determined by data availability. For
many countries there are no data on the (potential) determinants of the probability of a current account
reversal, including data on external debt and its characteristics.

26

3/3/2005

estimation. These results suggest that, contrary to what has been argued by the critics of
financial liberalization, a greater degree of capital account openness has not increased the
degree of vulnerability in the world economy. If anything, these results provide some
(preliminary and weak) evidence suggesting that countries with a higher degree of capital
mobility have had a lower probability of experiencing a current account reversal. The
results in Table 13.B also indicate that the probability of experiencing a reversal is higher
for countries with a large (lagged) current account deficit, and a high external debt ratio.
Countries that have experienced a sudden stop also have a high probability of a current
account reversal, as have countries that are in a region where many countries experience
a sudden stop (that is, there is evidence of regional contagion). The coefficient of net
international reserves is negative as expected, and it is significant at the 10% level in
equations (13.1) and (13.2). The coefficients of the short-term debt and total debt service
have the expected signs, but tend not to be significant. The coefficients of initial GDP
per capita are negative but not significant. Overall, when different lag structures of the
regressors were considered, the nature of the results did not change.
An important policy issue has to do with the effects of dollarization and dollarized
liabilities on macroeconomic vulnerability and on the costs of crises. If, as argued by
Calvo et al (2003) countries with dollarized financial systems are particularly vulnerable
to external shocks, one would expect that dollarization would affect positively the
probability of facing a reversal. Unfortunately, there are no extensive data sets on
dollarization across countries and time. It is possible, however, to use a more limited
data set – both in terms of years and countries’ coverage – to further investigate this
issue. I use the data set recently assembled by Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003)
that covers 117 countries for the period 1996-201. This index goes from 1 to 30, with
higher numbers indicating higher degrees of dollarization. The results obtained when this
index is included in the treatment regression are reported in equation (13.3). As may be
seen, the estimated coefficient is positive and significant, indicating that a higher degree
of dollarization increases the probability of a country experiencing a current account
reversal.29 This result support findings by Edwards (2004a) and Calvo et. al. (2004).
29

The Reinhart et al (2003) dollarization index refers only to the period 1996-2002. I have assumed,
however, that the extent of dollarization detected by Reinhart et. al. applies to the 1976-2000 period. For
this reason the results reported here should be taken with a grain of salt.

27

3/3/2005

Notice, however, that due to the limited nature of the dollarization data, the number of
observations in regression (13.3) is significantly smaller than in the original regressions.
GDP Growth Models: The results from the estimation of the growth equation are
reported in Panel A of Table 13. I discuss first the results from the first two equations
that exclude the dollarization variable. As may be seen, the coefficient for the growth gap
variable is significantly positive and smaller than one, as expected. The point estimates
are similar to those reported in Table 12. Also, as in Table 12 the coefficients of the
terms of trade shocks are significantly positive. The coefficient of the current account
reversal variable is significantly negative, indicating that a current account reversal has a
negative effect on growth.
Interestingly, in both equations (13.1) and (13.2) the coefficient of the variable
that interact the reversal dummy and an index of trade openness are significantly positive.
This means that the less open the country is to trade, the higher will be the cost of a
current account reversal, in terms of lower growth. These results are consistent with a
number of open economy macroeconomic models, which postulate that the costs of
foreign shocks – including the costs of current account reversals -- are inversely
proportional to the country’s degree of openness. In Mundell-Fleming type of models,
for example, the expenditure reducing effort, for any given level of expenditure
switching, is inversely proportional to the marginal propensity to import. Recently,
Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003) developed a model where sudden stops result in abrupt
current account reversals, and in major real exchange rate depreciations. Depreciations, in
turn, are contractionary, with the extent of the contraction depending inversely on the
degree of trade openness of the economy. They argue that sudden stops and current
account reversals will have a greater impact in closed economies – such as Argentina –
than in more open ones, such as Chile.
In order to investigate the degree of capital mobility affects the cost of an external
crisis characterized by a current account reversal, in the equation (13.2) I also included a
variable that interacts the current account reversal with the capital mobility index. As
may be seen, the estimated coefficient is negative and significant at the 10% level.
According to these results the growth effects of a reversal are given by the following
expression:

28

(6)

3/3/2005

Growth effect = -3.93 + 0.02 × Trade Openness – 0.03 × Capital Mobility.

This means that, with other things given, the decline in GDP per capita growth will be
more pronounced in a country with a higher degree of capital mobility that in one with a
lower degree of capital mobility. Consider, for example, the case of two countries that
have the same degree of trade openness – say, 60%. Assume further that while one
countries has a low degree of capital mobility (an index of 25), the other country has a
high degree of mobility (index of 90). According to equation (6) the country with low
capital mobility will experience a decline in growth of 3.48% as a consequence of the
reversal. The country with high mobility, on the other hand, will experience a decline in
growth of 5.43%.
Finally, in equation (13.3) I included a dollarization index in the treatment
equation. As discussed earlier, the estimated coefficient is positive and significant,
indicating that countries with a higher degree of dollarization have a higher probability of
experiencing a reversal. Notice that in the outcome equation on GDP growth (13.3) the
reversal coefficient is still significantly negative. The coefficients of the two interactive
variables (reversal and trade openness, and reversal and capital mobility) are not
significantly any longer. This, however, is likely to be the result of using a much smaller
and restricted data set than in the two base equations.
To summarize, the results reported in this section indicate that current account
reversals are costly, in the sense that they result in a (temporary) reduction in GDP per
capita growth. Notice that this contrasts with results reported by Milesi-Ferreti and Razin
(2000), who argued that “reversals… are not systematically associated with a growth
slowdown (p. 303).” The results reported in this paper also indicate that it is the
reversals that are costly; once reversals are introduced into the analysis the coefficient of
sudden stops is not significant in the growth dynamics equations. The regression results
reported in Table 13 also indicate that the degree of capital mobility does not have a
significant effect on the probability of a country facing a crisis. However, these results
indicate that once a reversal has taken place, countries with a higher degree of capital
mobility will experience a deeper drop in growth.

29

3/3/2005

V.2.3 Endogeneity and Robustness
The results presented in Table 13 assume that capital mobility is exogenous to the
current account. In particular, it is assumed that the restrictions on capital mobility don’t
change if the probability of a reversal becomes higher. This, however, needs not be the
case. Indeed, some authors have argued that as a country’s external position worsens,
policy makers will have a temptation to heighten restrictions on capital mobility, and in
particular on capital outflows.30 If this is indeed the case, estimates that ignore potential
endogeneity will be biased.31 In order to address this issue I estimated the equation on
the probability of experiencing a current account reversal using an instrumental variables
probit procedure based on Amemiya’s generalized least squares estimators with
endogenous regressors. In the estimation I used two alternative sets of instruments: (a)
the first set includes change in the terms of trade (as a measure of external real shocks),
the world rate of interest (as a measure of external financial shocks), and a measure of
trade openness obtained as the fitted value from a gravity model of bilateral trade.32 (b) In
the second set of instruments, I added the three-year lagged current account balance to
the instruments in (a). The results obtained under both sets of instruments are very
similar, and are presented in Table 14. As may be seen, by and large, these IV probit
estimates confirm the results presented in panel B of Table 13 for the treatment
regressions. The signs of all coefficients have been preserved. It is important to notice,
however, that the coefficients of international reserves and external debt, which were
significant in Table 13, are not statistically significant at conventional levels in Table 14.
More important for the subject of this paper, the coefficient of the capital mobility index
continues to be negative and insignificant, indicating that the probability of a current
account reversal is not different for countries with a high degree of capital mobility than
for countries with a low degree of capital mobility.
In order to investigate further the robustness of the results reported in Tables 12
and 13 I analyzed the potential role of outliers, and I considered somewhat different
samples, as well as different specifications. These robustness checks indicate that, from a
30
31

See, for example, Edwards (1989).
Notice, however, that the results in Table 13 use the lagged value of the capital mobility index.

30

3/3/2005

qualitative point of view, the results discussed above are not affected by the choice of
sample, specification or outliers. Further research, however, should focus on generating
more detailed and comprehensive indexes of capital mobility.
VI.

Concluding Remarks
In this paper I have used a broad multi-country data set to analyze the relationship

between restrictions to capital mobility and external crises. The analysis focuses on two
manifestations of external crises that have received considerable attention during the last
few years: (a) sudden stops of capital inflows; and (b) current account reversals. I have
tried to deal with two important policy-related issues: First, does the extent of capital
mobility affect countries’ degree of vulnerability to external crises; and second, does the
extent of capital mobility determine the depth of external crises – as measured by the
decline in growth --, once the crises occur?
In analyzing these issues I relied on two complementary approaches: First, I used
a methodology based on the computation of non-parametric tests and frequency tables to
analyze the incidence and main characteristics of both sudden stops and current account
reversals in countries with different degrees of capital controls. And second, I used a
regression-based analysis that estimates jointly the probability of having a crisis, and the
cost of such crisis, in terms of short-term declines in output growth. Overall, my results
cast some doubts on the assertion that increased capital mobility has caused heightened
macroeconomic vulnerabilities. I have found no systematic evidence suggesting that
countries with higher capital mobility tend to have a higher incidence of crises, or tended
to face a higher probability of having a crisis, than countries with lower mobility. My
results do suggest, however, that once a crisis occurs, countries with higher capital
mobility tend to face a higher cost, in terms of growth decline.

32

As Aizenman and Noy (2004) have shown, there is a strong empirical connection between trade
openness and the degree of capital mobility. The use of gravity trade equations to generate instruments in
panel estimation has been pioneered by Jeff Frankel. See, for example, Frankel and Cavallo (2004).

31

3/3/2005

Figure 1
Capital Mobility Index

1

2

3

4

5

6

20
100
80
60
40
20

meancap

40

60

80

100

1970-2000

1970

1980

1990

Graphs by region code

2000 1970

1980

1990

2000 1970

1980

1990

year

1=Industrial countries, 2= Latin American and Caribbean, 3=Asia,
4=Africa, 5=Middle East, and 6=Eastern Europe

2000

32

3/3/2005

Table 1
Capital Mobility Index by Groups
Group

Mean

Median

St. Dev.

Low Capital Mobility

30.0

37.5

9.9

High Capital Mobility

82.5

87.5

12.3

33

3/3/2005

Table 2
Countries with Very High and Very Low Capital Mobility
1970-1979

1980-1989

1990-2000

Very High Capital Mobility
Bahrain
Gambia, The
Germany
Hong Kong, China
Lebanon
Panama
Switzerland
United Arab Em.
United States

87.5
87.5
96.3
95.0
87.5
100.0
93.8
87.5
95.0

Antigua and Barbuda
Bahrain
Germany
Hong Kong, China
Kuwait
Lebanon
Netherlands
Panama
Singapore
Switzerland
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Vanuatu

87.5
87.5
98.8
100.0
87.5
87.5
92.5
95.0
100.0
100.0
87.5
100.0
100.0
95.0
87.5

Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Guatemala
Hong Kong, China
Ireland
Italy
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Latvia
Lebanon
Lithuania
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Singapore
Sweden
Switzerland
United Arab Em.
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Vanuatu

87.5
96.6
100.0
100.0
87.5
95.4
90.9
100.0
100.0
100.0
93.1
96.6
87.5
87.5
87.5
87.5
87.5
100.0
93.1
100.0
97.7
87.5
100.0
87.5
100.0
100.0
93.1
87.5

Very Low Capital Mobility
China
Ethiopia
Iceland
Morocco
South Africa
Sri Lanka

0.0
12.5
12.5
3.8
7.3
12.5

Bangladesh
Iceland
Morocco
Sri Lanka
-

12.5
12.5
10.0
12.5
-

-

-

Very high capital mobility countries are those with average mobility index higher or equal than 87.5. Very
low capital mobility countries are those with average mobility index lower or equal than 12.5

34

3/3/2005

Table 3
Countries with Major Changes in Capital Mobility Index
1970-1974

1975-1979

1980-1984

1985-1989

1990-1994

1995-2000

-

-

From High to Low Capital Mobilitya
-

Uruguay
-

Barbados
Grenada
Haiti
Mexico
Nicaragua
Paraguay

-

From Low to High Capital Mobility
Australia
Portugal
Argentina
Colombia
Norway
Costa Rica
Ecuador
Uruguay
El Salvador
Egypt
Grenada
Guyana
Hungary
Haiti
Mexico
Iceland
Paraguay
Israel
Peru
Jamaica
Philippines
Jordan
Trin. & Tob.
Kenya
Lao PDR
Mauritania
Nicaragua
Rwanda
Uganda
Zambia
a
countries with high capital mobility index in period t-1, and low capital mobility index in period t.
b
countries with low capital mobility index in period t-1, and high capital mobility index in period t.
Index is high if it is higher than 50, Index is low if it is lower than 50.

35

3/3/2005

Table 4
Incidence of Sudden Stops
Region

No sudden stop

Sudden stop

Industrial countries
Latin American and Caribbean
Asia
Africa
Middle East
Eastern Europe

96.3
92.2
94.9
93.4
88.7
93.7

3.7
7.8
5.1
6.6
11.3
6.4

Total

93.6

6.4

Observations
Pearson
Uncorrected chi2 (5)
Design-based F(5, 14710)
P-value

2,943
18.84
3.76
0.002

36

3/3/2005

Table 5
Incidence of Current Account Reversals
Region

No Reversal

Reversal

Industrial countries
Latin American and Caribbean
Asia
Africa
Middle East
Eastern Europe

97.6
84.0
87.9
83.4
84.0
85.0

2.4
16.0
12.1
16.1
16.0
15.0

Total

87.2

12.8

Observations
Pearson
Uncorrected chi2 (5)
Design-based F(5, 14870)
P-value

2,975
77.88
15.57
0.000

37

3/3/2005

Table 6
Incidence of Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops*
All countries
Sudden stop
0
1
Total
2,587
107
2,694
96.0
4.0
100.0
89.1
53.2
86.7
1
318
94
412
77.2
22.8
100.0
11.0
46.8
13.3
Total
2,905
201
3,106
93.5
6.5
100.0
100
100
100
Pearson chi2(1) = 209.65 Pr = 0.000

Reversal
0

Reversal
0

1

Total

Pearson χ2(1)
P-value

Reversal
0

1

Total

Pearson χ2(1)
P-value

Industrial countries
Sudden stop
0
1
Total
552
19
571
96.7
3.3
100.0
98.2
82.6
97.6
10
4
14
71.4
28.6
100.0
1.8
17.4
2.4
562
23
585
96.1
3.9
100.0
100
100
100
23.06
0.000

0
328
96.5
87.7
46
85.2
12.3
374
94.9
100

Asia
Sudden stop
1
12
3.5
60.0
8
14.8
40.0
20
5.1
100
12.32
0.001

Total
340
100.0
86.3
54
100.0
13.7
394
100.0
100

0
605
96.2
87.1
90
75.0
13.0
695
92.8
100

Latin America
Sudden stop
1
24
3.8
44.4
30
25.0
55.6
54
7.2
100
67.60
0.000

Total
629
100.0
84.0
120
100.0
16.0
749
100.0
100

0
689
96.9
85.2
120
79.0
14.8
809
93.7
100

Africa
Sudden stop
1
22
3.1
40.7
32
21.1
59.3
54
6.3
100
68.85
0.000

Total
711
100.0
82.4
152
100.0
17.6
863
100.0
100

38

3/3/2005

Table 6 (Continuation)

Reversal
0

1

Total

Pearson χ2(1)
P-value

0
185
93.4
88.5
24
68.6
11.5
209
89.7
100

Middle East
Sudden stop
1
13
6.6
54.2
11
31.4
45.8
24
10.3
100
19.90
0.000

Total
198
100.0
85.0
35
100.0
15.0
233
100.0
100

0
195
94.7
89.9
22
78.6
10.1
217
92.7
100

Eastern Europe
Sudden stop
1
11
5.3
64.7
6
21.4
35.3
17
7.3
100
9.47
0.002

Total
206
100.0
88.0
28
100.0
12.0
234
100.0
100

39

3/3/2005

Table 7
Incidence of Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops
by Categories of Capital Mobility
(1-year for Capital Mobility Index)
Current Account Reversals
High

Int.

Low

Sudden Stops

t-testa
H=I

H=L

High

Int.

t-testa

Low
H=I

H=L

Industrial

1.1

3.5

16.7

1.71

6.40*

2.3

7.9

11.1

2.72*

3.01*

Latin America

14.6

18.2

15.9

1.04

0.44

7.2

7.1

8.9

0.05

0.72

Asia

16.1

18.0

7.3

0.35

2.65*

11.7

4.1

1.1

1.85

4.22*

Africa

14.3

19.7

15.0

1.31

0.18

5.9

8.1

5.5

0.80

0.16

Middle east

13.8

11.4

20.3

0.40

1.12

11.5

6.8

13.7

0.84

0.42

Eastern Europe

14.0

24.4

5.1

1.24

1.34

14.3

4.7

0.0

1.52

2.58*

Total

9.1

17.1

13.7

5.27*

3.45*

6.1

7.2

6.2

0.91

0.03

0.000

0.007

0.012

0.000

0.846

0.000

P-Value
a

Absolute value of t-test. * Significant at 5%.

40

3/3/2005

Table 8
Incidence of Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops
by Categories of Capital Mobility
(5-year average for Capital Mobility Index)
Current Account Reversals
High

Int.

Low

Sudden Stops

t-testa
H=I

H=L

High

Int.

t-testa

Low
H=I

H=L

Industrial

1.0

3.4

18.8

1.91

6.86*

2.4

5.8

12.5

1.89

3.19*

Latin America

14.9

16.0

14.8

0.32

0.03

7.7

7.9

7.7

0.06

0.01

Asia

15.3

21.5

5.6

1.17

2.96*

11.9

6.7

0.6

1.23

4.51*

Africa

12.8

19.4

15.0

1.49

0.54

5.6

8.1

5.6

0.79

0.00

Middle east

15.1

8.5

22.8

1.19

1.16

12.7

8.5

12.5

0.77

0.03

Eastern Europe

10.0

18.8

0.0

0.58

1.65

20.0

6.3

3.7

1.05

1.63

Total

8.7

15.9

13.1

4.82*

3.07*

6.2

7.6

5.7

1.18

0.43

0.000

0.001

0.001

0.000

0.972

0.003

P-Value
a

Absolute value of t-test. * Significant at 5%.

41

3/3/2005

Table 9
Banking Crises and Current Account Reversals

Reversal
0

1

Total

Pearson χ2(1)
P-value

Reversal
0

1

Total

Pearson χ2(1)
P-value

Total Sample
Banking Crisis
0
1
Total
2443
118
2561
95.4
4.6
100.0
87.1
86.1
87.0
363
19
382
95.0
5.0
100.0
12.9
13.9
13.0
2806
137
2943
95.3
4.7
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
0.10
0.75
Intermediate Mobility
Banking Crisis
0
1
Total
608
22
630
96.5
3.5
100.0
83.0
75.9
82.7
125
7
132
94.7
5.3
100.0
17.1
24.1
17.3
733
29
762
96.2
3.8
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
0.98
0.32

0
956
94.2
90.7
98
95.2
9.3
1054
94.3
100.0

High Mobility
Banking Crisis
1
59
5.8
92.2
5
4.9
7.8
64
5.7
100.0
0.16
0.91

Total
1015
100.0
90.8
103
100.0
9.2
1118
100.0
100.0

0
879
96.0
86.3
140
95.2
13.7
1019
95.9
100.0

Low Mobility
Banking Crisis
1
37
4.0
84.1
7
4.8
15.9
44
4.1
100.0
0.17
0.68

Total
916
100.0
86.2
147
100.0
13.8
1063
100.0
100.0

42

3/3/2005

Table 10
Banking Crises and Sudden Stops

Sudden Stop
0

1

Total

Pearson χ2(1)
P-value

Sudden Stop
0

1

Total

Pearson χ2(1)
P-value

0
2587
95.3
93.4
182
95.3
6.6
2769
95.3
100.0

Total Sample
Banking Crisis
1
128
4.7
93.4
9
4.7
6.6
137
4.7
100.0
0.00
0.99

Total
2715
100.0
93.4
191
100.0
6.6
2906
100.0
100.0

Intermediate Mobility
Banking Crisis
0
1
Total
688
28
716
96.1
3.9
100.0
92.7
96.6
92.9
54
1
55
98.2
1.8
100.0
7.3
3.5
7.1
742
29
771
96.2
3.8
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
0.62
0.43

0
980
94.3
93.6
67
93.1
6.4
1047
94.2
100.0

High Mobility
Banking Crisis
1
59
5.7
92.2
5
6.9
7.8
64
5.8
100.0
0.20
0.66

Total
1039
100.0
93.5
72
100.0
6.5
1111
100.0
100.0

0
919
95.7
93.8
61
95.3
6.2
980
95.7
100.0

Low Mobility
Banking Crisis
1
41
4.3
93.2
3
4.7
6.8
44
4.3
100.0
0.03
0.87

Total
960
100.0
93.8
64
100.0
6.3
1024
100.0
100.0

43

3/3/2005

Table 11
Before and After GDP per capita Growth
Event

Reversal
Sudden Stop

Reversal
Sudden Stop

All
(A)

High
(B)

Intermediate
(C)

-0.37
(1.07)
-0.88
(1.84)

-0.54
(0.71)
-1.29
(1.60)

0.75
(1.54)
0.08
(0.09)

-0.09
(0.34)
-0.61
(1.64)

-0.25
(0.51)
-0.31
(0.58)

0.75
(2.12)*
0.19
(0.31)

Low
(D)

High-Int.
(E)

High-Low
(F)

Panel A
-1.21
(2.18)*
-1.27
(1.52)

-1.29
(1.44)
-1.37
(1.17)

0.67
(0.71)
-0.02
(0.02)

Panel B
-0.69
(1.54)
-1.55
(2.11)*

-1.00
(1.66)
-0.50
(0.62)

0.44
(0.66)
1.24
(1.36)

The “before” data corresponds to average GDP per capita growth during the three years before the crisis. In
Panel A “after” rates of growth is for year of the crisis. In Panel B “after” is average growth rate during
three years after the crisis.
a
Absolute value of t-test. * Significant at 5%.

44

3/3/2005

Table 12
Current Account Reversals, Sudden Stops and Growth
(GLS Estimates)

Constant
Growth gap
Change in terms of trade
Reversal
Sudden Stop

(12.1)
R.E.

(12.2)
F.E.

(12.3)
R.E.

(12.4)
F.E.

(12.5)
R.E.

(12.6)
F.E.

-0.15
(1.16)
0.82
(42.10)*
0.06
(12.65)*
-2.01
(6.64)*
---

-0.14
(1.41)
0.86
(42.73)*
0.07
(12.19)*
-2.10
(6.72)*
---

-0.27
(2.62)*
0.81
(40.18)*
0.07
(11.31)*
---1.23
(2.82)*

-0.25
(2.44)**
0.87
(41.62)*
0.07
(10.74)*
---1.25
(2.77)*

-0.14
(1.32)
0.82
(40.76)*
0.08
(12.18)*
-1.80
(5.50)*
-0.54
(1.19)

-0.10
(0.97)
0.88
(42.28)*
0.08
(11.75)*
-1.97
(5.82)*
-0.60
(1.31)

Observations
1821
1821
1641
1641
1635
1635
Countries
90
90
81
81
81
81
R-squared
0.49
0.49
0.51
0.51
0.52
0.52
Absolute value of t statistics are reported in parentheses; country-specific dummies are included,
but not reported; *significant at 1%, **significant at 5%.

45

3/3/2005

Table 13
Growth, Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops: Treatment Effects Model
(Three Steps Estimates)
Variable
A. Results from Growth Equation
Growth gap
Terms of trade
Reversal
Reversal*Openness
Reversal* Capital Mobility
B. Results from “Treatment Equation”
Capital mobility (-1)
Current-Account deficit to GDP (-1)
Sudden stop
Sudden stops in region
Reserves to GDP (-1)
Domestic credit growth (-1)
Banking crisis
External debt to GDP (-1)
Short-term debt (-1)
Debt services (-1)
Initial GDP per capita
Dollarization
Hazard lambda

(13.1)

(13.2)

(13.3)

0.87
(32.63)*
0.07
(8.48)*
-5.35
(4.83)*
0.02
(2.22)**
---

0.87
(32.66)*
0.07
(8.43)*
-3.93
(2.86)*
0.02
(2.38)**
-0.03***
(1.70)

0.86
(25.76)*
0.07
(6.47)*
-6.72
(3.69)*
0.01
(0.97)
-0.005
(0.19)

-0.007
(1.47)
0.10
(8.16)*
0.67
(3.09)*
1.34
(2.08)**
-16.95
(1.87)***
0.0002
(1.33)
0.19
(0.79)
0.004
(2.11)**
-0.007
(0.75)
-0.002
(0.37)
-0.01
(0.05)
--1.18
(2.45)**

-0.007
(1.48)
0.10
(8.16)*
0.67
(3.08)*
1.34
(2.08)**
-16.85
(1.86)***
0.0002
(1.33)
0.18
(0.76)
0.004
(2.11)**
-0.007
(0.77)
-0.002
(0.36)
-0.01
(0.05)
--1.23
(2.56)**

-0.008
(1.56)
0.11
(5.93)**
0.63
(2.26)**
1.09
(1.43)
-5.47
(0.40)
0.0002
(1.12)
0.16
(0.63)
0.004
(1.47)
-0.0001
(0.00)
-0.001
(0.18)
-0.81
(2.97)*
0.24
(5.14)*
1.85
(2.85)*

Rho
0.29
0.30
0.45
Sigma
4.11
4.11
4.11
Wald chi2 (215)
1190.70
1190.74
786.2
Observations
1071
1069
647
Absolute value of z statistics are reported in parentheses; (-1) denotes a one-period lagged variable;
country-specific dummies are included, but not reported.
* significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 10%;

46

3/3/2005

Table 14
Determinants of Current Account Reversals: IV Probit Model
Variable
Capital mobility (-1)
Current-Account deficit to GDP (-1)
Sudden stop
Sudden stops in region
Reserves to GDP (-1)
Domestic credit growth (-1)
External debt to GDP (-1)
Short-term debt (-1)
Debt services (-1)
Initial GDP per capita

(14a)

(14b)

-0.004
(0.42)
0.064
(8.06)*
0.868
(4.74)*
1.761
(3.13)*
-2.935
(0.56)
0.0001
(0.66)
0.001
(1.10)
0.002
(0.39)
-0.008
(1.46)
0.094
(0.86)

-0.002
(0.19)
0.065
(8.33)*
0.861
(4.79)*
1.771
(3.25)*
-4.437
(0.84)
0.0001
(0.60)
0.001
(0.93)
0.004
(0.84)
-0.007
(1.29)
0.065
(0.58)

Observations
1071
1071
Absolute value of z statistics are reported in parentheses; (-1) denotes a one-period
lagged variable; country-specific dummies are included, but not reported. For a list of the
instruments used, see the test.
* significant at 1%.

47

3/3/2005

Appendix
Description of the Data
Variable

Definition

Source

Index of capital
mobility

Index: (low mobility) to 100 (high
mobility)

Author’s construction based on
indexes of capital restrictions
computed by Quinn (2003) and
Mody and Murshid (2002), and
on country specific data

Current-Account
Reversal

Reduction in the current account
deficit of at least 4% of GDP in one
year. Initial balance has to be indeed a
deficit

Author’s construction based on
data of current account deficit
(World Development Indicators)

Sudden Stop

Reduction of net capital inflows of at
least 5% of GDP in one year. The
country in question must have
received an inflow of capital larger to
its region’s third quartile during the
previous two years prior to the
“sudden stop.”

Author’s construction based on
data of financial account (World
Development Indicators)

Banking crisis

Dummy variable for occurrence of a
banking crisis

Glick and Hutchison (1999)

Dollarization

Index: 0 (low dollarization) to 30
(high dollarization)

Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano
(2003)

Terms of trade

Change in terms of trade-exports as
capacity to import (constant LCU)

World Development Indicators

Openness

Trade openness: exports plus imports
over GDP

World Development Indicators

Reserves to GDP

Net international reserves over GDP

World Development Indicators

Domestic credit
growth

Annual growth rate of domestic credit

World Development Indicators

External debt to
GDP

Total external debt over GDP

World Development Indicators

Short-term debt

Short-term debt as percentage of total
external debt

World Development Indicators

Debt services

Total debt services as percentage of
exports of goods and services

World Development Indicators

GDP per capita

GDP per capita in 1995 US$ dollars

World Development Indicators

48

3/3/2005

REFERENCES
Aizenman, Joshua and Ilan Noy. 2004. “On the Two Way Feedback Between Financial
and Trade Openness,”, NBER Working Paper No. 10496. (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Alesina, Alberto; Vittorio Grilli and Gian-Maria Milesi, 1994. “ The Political Economy
of Capital Controls”; in L. Leiderman and A. Razin, (eds.): Capital Mobility: The
Impact on Consumption, Investment and Growth.. Cambridge, New York and
Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 289-321.
Angrist, Joshua (2000). “Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with Dummy
Endogenous Regressors: Simple Strategies for Empirical Practice,” NBER TP 248.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1995): Economic Growth..Cambridge Mass.:
MIT Press.
Bekaert, Geert. 1995. "Market Integration and Investment Barriers in Emerging Equity
Markets," World Bank Economic Review, 9: 75-107.
Bekaert, Geert, Harvey, Campbell R. and Christian Lundblad. 2002. “Does Financial
Liberalization Spur Growth?, Working Paper, Duke University.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey. 2000. "Capital Flows and the Behavior of
Emerging Equity Market Returns," S. Edwards (ed.): Capital Flows and the
Emerging Economies: Theory, Evidence and Controversies. Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press: 159-194.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey. 1995. "Time-Varying World Integration,"
Journal of Finance, 50: 403- 444.

49

3/3/2005

Calvo, Guillermo A., Izquierdo, Alejandro and Ernesto Talvi (2003): “Sudden Stops, the
Real Exchange Rate, and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina'
s Lessons”, NBER Working
Paper No. 9828. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
Research).
Calvo, Guillermo A., Izquierdo, Alejandro and Luis Fernando.Mejia. 2004. On the
Empirics of Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects". NBER Working
Paper No. 10520. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
Research).
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito 2002. “Capital Account Liberalization, Institutional and
Financial Development,” NBER Working Paper No. 8967. (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
De Gregorio, Jose, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo Valdes. 2000. “Controls on Capital
Inflows: Do they Work?” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 63, pp. 59-83.
Desai, Mihir A., Foley, C. Fritz and Kristin J. Forbes. 2004. “Financial Constraints and
Growth: Multinational and Local Firm Responses to Currency Crises,”, NBER Working
Paper No. 10545. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
Research).
Dooley, Michael P. 1995. "A Survey of Academic Literature on Controls over
International Capital Transactions," IMF Working Papers 95/127, International
Monetary Fund.
Dooley, Michael, Donald Mathieson, and Liliana Rojas-Suarez 1997. “Capital Mobility
and Exchange Market Intervention in Developing Countries, “NBER Working Paper
No. 6247. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).

50

3/3/2005

Dornbusch, Rudi. 2002. “Malaysia: Was it Different?.” In S. Edwards and J. Frankel
(Eds.): Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets. The University of Chicago
Press.
Edison, Hali J., and Francis E. Warnock, 2003, “A Simple Measure of the Intensity of
Capital Controls,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 10 (1/2): 81–103.
Edison, Hali, Michael W. Klein, Luca Ricci and Torsten Sloek (2004) “Capital Account
Liberalization and Economic Performance: Survey and Synthesis,” IMF Staff Papers,
52(1): 220-256.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1985. “Money, the Rate of Devaluation and Interest Rates in a SemiOpen Economy: Colombia 1968-1982,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
17(1): 59-68.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1989. Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation and Adjustment,
Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1998. “Openness, Productivity and Growth: What Do We Really
Know?,” Economic Journal, 108 (447): 383-398.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1999. “How Effective are Capital Controls”. Journal of Economic
Perspectives. 13 (4): 65-84.
Edwards, Sebastian 2000a. “Capital Flows, Real Exchange Rates and Capital Controls:
Some Latin American Experiences,” in S. Edwards (ed) Capital Flows and the
Emerging Economies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 197-246.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2000b. “Interest Rates, Contagion and Capital Controls”. NBER
Working Paper No. 7801. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
Research).

51

3/3/2005

Edwards, Sebastian. 2001. “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging
Economies Different?” NBER Working Paper No. 8076. (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
National Bureau of Economic Research).
Edwards, Sebastian 2002. “Does the Current Account Matter?” in S. Edwards and J. A.
Frankel (Eds): Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press: 21-69.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2004a. “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current
Account Reversals, and Sudden Stops” (Fourth Mundell-Fleming Lecture). IMF Staff
Papers, 51 (Special Issue): 1-49.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2004b. “Financial Openness, Sudden Stops, and Current Account
Reversals” The American Economic Review, 94, (2): 59-64.
Edwards, Sebastian and Alejandra Cox-Edwards. 1991. Monetarism and Liberalization:
The Chilean Experiment, Second Edition with a New Afterword. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press
Edwards, Sebastian and Mohsin S. Khan . 1985. “Interest Rate Determination in
Developing Countries: A Conceptual Framework,”IMF Staff Papers, 32 (3): 377–
403.
Edwards, Sebastian and Eduardo Levy Yeyati. 2004. “Flexible Exchange Rates as Shock
Absorbers”, European Economic Review, forthcoming.
Eichengreen, Barry J. 2001, “Capital Account liberalization: What do Cross Country
Studies Tell us?” The World Bank Economic Review, 15: 341-365
Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka, 1980. “Domestic Saving and International Capital
Flows,” Economic Journal 90 (June): 314-29.

52

3/3/2005

Forbes, Kristin J. 2003. “One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls: Increased Financial
Constraints for Smallest Traded Firms,” NBER Working Paper No. 9777.
(Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 1991. “Quantifying International Capital Mobility in the 1980s”
NBER Working Paper No. 2856. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of
Economic Research).
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 1992. “Measuring International Capital Mobility: A Review,” The
American Economic Review, 82: 197–202.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Andrew K. Rose (1996): “Currency Crashes in Emerging
Markets: An Empirical Treatment.” Journal of International Economics, 41,
November 1996.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Eduardo Cavallo (2004): “Does Openness to Trade make
Countries More Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, or Less? Using Gravity to Establish
Causality” NBER Working Paper No. 10957.
Garber, Peter M. 1998. “Buttressing Capital Account Liberalization with Prudential
Regulation and Foreign Entry.” Essays in International Finance No. 207, Princeton
University Press.
Glick, Reuven and Michael Hutchison (1999): “Banking and Currency Crises: How
Common are Twins?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper No.
PB 99-07.
Guidotti, Pablo., Sturzenegger, Federico and Agustin Villar. 2003. “Aftermaths of
Current Account Reversals: Exports Growth or Import Contraction,” Documento de
Trabajo 06/2003. Universidad Torcuato Di Tella.

53

3/3/2005

Haque, Nadeem U. and Peter Montiel. 1991. “Capital Mobility in Developing
Countries: Some Empirical Tests,” World Development, 19(10): 1391-1398
Harberger, Arnold C. 1978. “Perspectives on Capital and Technology in Less Developed
Countries”, in M. Artis and A. Nobay (Eds): Contemporary Economic Analysis, 15169, London: Croom Helm.
Harberger, Arnold C. 1980.”Vignettes on the World Capital Market,” The American
Economic Review, 70 (2): 331-337.
Heckman, James. 1978. “ Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous Equation
System”, Econometrica 46: 931-960.
Henry, P. B., 2000. “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
Market Equity Prices, Journal of Finance, 55: 529-564.
Hong, Kiseok and Aaron Tornell. 2004. “Recovery from a Currency Crisis: Some
Stylized Facts, Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
Johnson, Simon and Todd Mitton. 2001. “Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence from
Malaysia”, NBER Working Paper No. 8521. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
Bureau of Economic Research).
Johnston, R. Barry and Natalia T. Tamirisa, 1998. “Why do Countries use Capital
Controls?” IMF Working Papers, 98-181.
Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Carmen M. Reinhart (1999): “The Twin Crises: The Causes
of Banking and Balance of Payments Problems,” The American Economic Review,
89(3): 473-500.

54

3/3/2005

Kaplan, Ethan and Dani Rodrik. 2002. "Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?" in S.
Edwards and J. Frankel (Eds.): Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets.
The University of Chicago Press.
Klein, Michael W. and Giovanni Olivei. 1999. "Capital Account Liberalization, Financial
Depth and Economic Growth," NBER Working Paper No. 7384. (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Leblang, David A. 1997. “Domestic and Systemic Determinants of Capital Controls in
the Developed and Developing World,” International Studies Quarterly, 41(3): 435454.
Maddala, G. S. (1983): Limited-Dependant and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics.
Cambridge University Press.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin. (2000), “Current Account Reversals and
Curreency Crises: Empirical Regularities” in P. Krugman (Ed), Currency Crises, U.
of Chicago Press.
Miniane, Jacques. 2004. “A New Set of Measures on Capital Account Restrictions,” IMF
Staff Papers, 51(2): 276-308.
Mody, Ahoka and Antu P. Murshid (2002). “Growing Up with Capital Flows,” IMF
Working Paper WP/02/75.
Montiel, Peter. 1994. “Capital mobility in Developing Countries: Some Measurement
Issues and Empirical Estimates,” World Bank Economic Review, 8 (3): 311-350.
Montiel, Peter and Carmen Reinhart. 1999. “Do Capital Controls and Macroeconomics
Policies Influence the Volume and Composition of Capital Flows? Evidence from the
1990s. University of Maryland.

55

3/3/2005

Quinn, Dennis P. 2003. “Capital Account Liberalization and Financial Globalization,
1890-1999: a Synoptic View,”, International Journal of Finance and Economics,
8(3): 189-204.
Quinn, Dennis P. 1997. “The Correlates of Changes in International Financial
Regulation,” American Political Science Review 91: 531-51.
Razin, Asaaf and Andrew K. Rose. 1994. “Business Cycle Volatility and Openness: An
Exploratory Cross-Section Análisis,” in L. Leiderman and Assaf Razin (Eds.):
Capital Mobility: The Impact on Consumption, Investment and Growth, Cambridge
University Press: 48-75.
Reinhart, Carmen M., Rogoff, Keneth S. and Miguel A. Savastano. 2003. “Addicted to
Dollars,” NBER Working Paper No. 10015. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
Bureau of Economic Research).
Reisen, Helmut and Hélène Yèches. 1993. “Time-Varying Estimates on the Openness of
the Capital Account in Korea and Taiwan,” Journal of Development Economics,
41(2): 285-305
Rodrik, Dani, 1998. “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?”, in Should the
IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility, Essay in International Finance No 207.
Princeton University.
Rodrik, Dani, 1995. “The Political Economy of Trade Policy,” in G. Grossman and K.
Rogoff (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3, Amsterdam, NorthHolland.
Shatz, Howard J. 2000. “The Location of U.S. Multinational Affiliates”. Cambridge,
Mass.:Harvard University Doctoral Dissertation

56

3/3/2005

Stiglitz, Joseph. 1999. “Bleak Growth Prospects for the Developing World,”
International Herald Tribune, April 10–11.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 2002. Globalization and its Discontents. W.W. Norton, New York and
London.
Tamirisa, Natalia T. 1999. “Exchange and Capital controls as Barriers to Trade,” IMF
Staff Papers, 46, 1:69-88.
Taylor, Alan 2002. “A Century of Current Account Dynamics,” NBER Working Paper
No. 8927.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2002): Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data,
Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press.

