                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             STABILIZATION POLICIES IN OPEN ECONOMIES




                        Richard C. Marston




                     Working Paper No. 1117




              NATIONPJJ BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                            May 1983

This study will appear as Chapter 17 of Handbook of International
Economics, edited by Ronald W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen
(North—Holland, forthcoming). The author would like to thank
Joshua Aizenman, Richard Herring, Howard Kaufold, Stephen
Turnovsky, Charles Wyplosz and the two discussants of the paper,
Richard Cooper and Mohsin Khan, and other participants at a
Princeton University Conference in May 1982 for their helpful corn—
rients on an earlier draft. Jean—Francois Dreyfus provided
excellent research assistance. Financial support was provided by a
German Marshall Fund Fellowship and a grant from the National
Science Foundation (SES—8OO64l'). The research reported here is
part of the NBERts research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1117
                                                    May 1983




                    Stabilization Policies in Open Economies

                                    AB STRAC


    This   study analyzes the theory of stabilization policy as it has

developed from the trade oriented models of the 1950's to the recent models

employing rational expectations. Throughout the study one model is presented

with appropriate modifications to take into account international capital

mobility, wage flexibility, and rational expectations. The Mundell—Fleming

model is presented but with an asset sector based on modern portfolio

theory. This same model is analyzed under conditions of full wage and price

flexibility, and the propositions associated with the monetary approach to the

balance of payments and the exchange rate are discussed. A simplified version

of the model is then used to examine the policy ineffectiveness propositions

of the new classical economics (as applied to open economies). The study

concludes with a brief review of the literature on the choice between exchange

rate regimes.

                                                Richard C. Marston
                                                Wharton School
                                                University of Pennsylvania
                                                Philadelphia, Pa. 19104

                                                215—898—7626
                              TABLE OF CONTENTS


1.   Introduction

2. Stabilization policy In the insular economy

     2.1. A model of trade and output

     2.2. Flexible exchange rates

     2.3. Fixed exchange rates

     2.4. Modification of the model

3. Capital mobility and the Mundell—Fleming propositions

     3.1. A model with internationally mobile capital

     3.2. Stabilization policy under fixed exchange rates

     3.3. Stabilization policy under flexible exchange rates

     3.4. The relative effectiveness of policies and other issues

4. Flexible wages and the monetary approach

     4.1. A model with flexible wages

     4.2. Effects of a devaluation with flexible wages

     4.3. Effects of monetary and fiscal policy with flexible wages

5. The role of policy in the new classical macroeconomics

     5.1. A model of an open economy under rational expectations

     5.2. Changes in the money supply

     5.3. Policy rules

6. Exchange rate regimes

     6.1. Domestic disturbances

     6.2. Foreign disturbances and insulation

     6.3. Optimal foreign exchange intervention
1. Introduction

     The modern open economy is not the one found in most macroeconomic

textbooks, an economy that occasionally imports Bordeaux wine but which

produces most of what it consumes at prices determined domestically. It is

rather an economy integrated with those abroad through commodity and financial

linkages which limit the scope for national stabilization policy. How that

happens is the subject of this chapter.

     Many of our ideas about stabilization policy can be traced to what

McKinnon (1981) calls the "insular economy" which we discuss in section 2. In

such an economy, which was the paradigm most common in the 1950's and earlier,

international capital mobility is low or non—existent, money supplies are

controlled by the national authorities and price linkages across countries are

limited. (Chapter 13 describes this economy in detail.) The literature on

stabilization since the 1950's has modified this paradigm in several essential

ways. The final product might not be recognized by its original craftsmen.

     It is useful to classify these progressive modifications in three

categories:

1) Capital mobility. Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962) showed the importance

of international financial linkages in determining the effects of

stabilization policy. Their work will be the focus of section 3, but the

propositions associated with Mundell and Fleming will be reexamined in the

light of recent portfolio balance theories of the asset markets.

2) Wage and price flexibility. Many recent studies, including those

associated with the monetary approach to the balance of payments and with the

new classical economics, have replaced the rigid wage assumption of Mundell

and Fleming with various forms of wage flexibility. In section 4 we introduce

wage flexibility into the Mundell-Fleming model and show how much difference



                                      1
this makes in determining the effectiveness of government policy. When wages

are flexible, wealth effects become of primary importance with the

accumulation of wealth moving the economy from short run equilibrium to a long

run steady state. We illustrate this wealth accumulation process using

Dornbusch's (1973) version of the monetary approach to devaluation.

3) Rational expectations and the natural rate hypothesis. No study of

stabilization policy is complete without the "new classical macroeconomics."

This literature combines the long—run wage and price flexibility of the

classical model with an explicit treatment of expectations that includes

assumptions about the availability of information which are crucial in

determining the effectiveness of stabilization policy. In section 5 we

reexamine standard propositions about policy using rational expectations and a

stochastic supply function; in section 6 we use the same model to reexamine

the choice between exchange rate regimes and the insulating properties of

flexible rates.

     Throughout the chapter, one general model is used to interpret

developments in the literature, with the model being progressively modified to

include international financial linkages, wage flexibility and stochastic

features. It focuses on a single national economy, although a foreign economy

is added later in the chapter. This economy is assumed to produce its own

(composite) good and to issue its own interest—bearing bond. In limiting

cases commodity arbitrage pegs the price of the good at purchasing power

parity and financial arbitrage pegs the interest rate at (uncovered) interest

parity. The chapter will show how stabilization policy is affected by each of

these linkages.

     A chapter which treats such a broad range of issues must draw the line

somewhere. We do not attempt to discuss the literature on non—traded goods or



                                       2
bonds. Nor do we discuss in detail the dynamic responses to policy changes

that have been a dominant feature of some recent models. (Chapters 15 and 18

analyze this literature.) Even so, our general model will be required to span

a wide range of recent developments. A single unifying framework will serve

to place these developments in a clear perspective.

2. Stabilization policy in the insular economy

     The balance of payments and exchange rate play very different roles in

stabilization policy depending upon whether or not there is capital

mobility. We begin the analysis of stabilization policy using a model without

any capital account. This is the model of Harberger (1950), Tinbergen (1952),

Tslang (1961), and above all Meade (1951), which dominated the literature on

international monetary economics until the 1960's.

     The model varies from one study to another, but a number of character-

istics are typical of most of the studies. First, the model is "Keynesian' in

that nominal wages are fixed, at least over the time horizon relevant for

policy. Second, the money supply is regarded as a policy instrument under the

complete control of the authorities. (Alternatively, the interest rate may be

controlled by the authorities.) All balance of payments flows are sterilized

by open market sales or purchases of securities or by other policy actions.

Third, the financial sector is simplified considerably by the immobility of

capital. Usually, portfolios contain only one asset other than money, and the

market for that asset is treated only implicitly. Finally expectations are

ignored.

     We introduce below a model of a small country that illustrates all of

these characteristics. The country is small in that it does not significantly




                                       3
affect foreign variables such as the price of foreign output.1 Next we

summarize some of the main conclusions about stabilization policy that can be

derived from this model. Some of these conclusions are very sensitive to the

precise specification of the model, so we conclude the section by discussing

modifications of the model.

2.1. A model of trade and output

     Since this model is a standard one in most respects, the description will

be brief. The model, consists of six equations:2

             Y=Z+G0+B,                                                              (2.1)
             Z   Z'(Y, r, A/P), 0 < Z < 1, V < 0, Z > 0,                            (2.2)

             B   B(Z,        PlPx),    1 < B < 0, Bf > 0, Bp < O                    (2.3)
             Y = Q(P/W),
                            Q > 0,                                                  (2.4)
            M/P =   m'(Y,   r, Alp),   m   > 0 , m' < 0, 0 < (A in/M) < 1,,         (2.5)

            X'='B.                                                                  (2.6)

Equation (2.1) describes the demand for output in the home country; it must




     'The   term small country often refers to a country producing the same good

as other countries, but the country in this model is assumed to produce its

own good except in the limiting case where domestic and foreign goods are

perfect substitutes.

     2The prime notation, V and m', is used to distinguish these

functions from the corresponding ones in the next section. Restrictions on

the partial derivatives are given directly following the function. The

notation used for derivatives is straightforward; Z', Z',            refer to the

partial derivatives with respect to the three arguments of the function. To

simplify the expressions, the derivatives are calculated at a stationary

equilibrium where all prices (and the exchange rate) are equal to one.


                                              4
equal expenditure by domestic residents (Z), and the government (G0) plus the

trade balance (B), all measured in units of domestic output. Expenditure by

residents (2.2) is a function of income (Y), the interest rate (r), and the

real wealth of domestic residents; real wealth is the sum (A) of money and

domestic bonds deflated by the domestic price (P).3 The trade balance (2.3)

is a function of domestic expenditure, foreign expenditure (Zr), and the terms

of trade, defined as        where P and    are the prices of domestic and

foreign goods, respectively, and X is the domestic currency price of foreign

currency. The trade balance is assumed to be negatively related to the terms

of   trade (B < 0), which is the case if the Marshall—Lerner condition is

satisfied.4

      The aggregate supply curve (2.4) describes the response of output

(income) to an increase in the price of the domestic good, holding constant

the nominal wage (W). Some models of this type fix the price of the good

itself, but not much is gained by this further simplification of the model.

The demand function for money (2.5) has a standard form familiar from models

of the closed economy. The restriction on the wealth elasticity includes two

limiting cases; the demand for money can be independent of wealth, as in the

quantity theory, or can be homogeneous of degree one in wealth, as in some




      3We assume that all bonds are issued by the government. We discuss below

the issue of whether bonds can be included in wealth.

      4That condition states that with initially balanced trade, a fall in the

terms of trade improves the trade balance if the sum of the import and export

demand elasticities exceeds unity. Note that the trade and current account

balances are identical in this model since we ignore transfer payments and

services.


                                       5
asset models. Equation (2.6) is a balance of payments equation describing the

accumulation of foreign exchange reserves (Fm).

     The four equations jointly determine four variables: the domestic price,

output, interest rate and either foreign exchange reserves or the exchange

rate, depending upon the exchange rate regime. We begin by describing the

flexible exchange rate regime.

2.2. Flexible exchange rates

     With capital immobile, the exchange rate is determined entirely by flow

conditions, as indicated by the balance of payments equation (2.6). Since the

balance of payments consists of the trade account only, the exchange rate must

adjust to keep the trade balance at zero:

              B(Z, Z, p/px) = 0.                                           (2.3)'

This leads to very strong conclusions about domestic policy. Domestic output

is determined as it would be in a closed economy:

          y        z + c0.                                                 (2.1)'

The three equations determining domestic variables, (2.1)', (2.4), and (2.5),

are now independent of the exchange rate and the parameters of the trade

balance function, so monetary and fiscal policies have effects similar to

those in a closed economy.

    Without describing the full solution of the model, we can illustrate the

effects of stabilization policy by calculating the multiplier for government

spending. As is usually the case, it is obtained by assuming that the

domestic price is constant (here we assume that       is infinite) and that the

domestic interest rate is pegged by monetary policy. Therefore,
                         1
           dG                ,   >   •                                      (2.7)
               0

The multiplier is identical to that of a closed economy; in particular, it is

independent of the parameters of the trade balance.


                                         6
     A second striking conclusion is closely related to the first: domestic

output and other domestic variables are independent of all foreign

disturbances. The exchange rate completely insulates the economy from changes

in foreign prices and foreign expenditure, the two foreign variables affecting

the trade balance, so no foreign disturbance can affect the economy. This

strong conclusion about insulation has often been used as an argument for

flexible rates, even though it is very sensitive to assumptions about capital

mobility.

2.3. Fixed exchange rates

     With fixed exchange rates, the trade balance directly affects output in

equation (2.1), so the effects of domestic policy are modified by interaction

with the foreign sector. Both monetary and fiscal policies are generally less

effective in changing domestic output than under flexible rates, because of

the leakage of expenditure onto imports. The multiplier for government

spending, for example, is

                   1 —                                                      (2.8)
           dG0         z(1  + Bz)
which is smaller than before, since —   1   < B < 0. A rise in government

spending leads to a leakage of private expenditure onto imports, whereas there

is no net effect on the trade balance under flexible rates.5



     51n the general model where interest rates are variable, a rise in

government spending could raise output more under fixed rates than under

flexible rates if expenditure were sufficiently sensitive to the interest

rate; a rise in the interest rate could reduce (crowd out) expenditure and

thus reduce imports. The trade balance would improve under fixed rates, so

the domestic currency would appreciate under flexible rates. This result is

precluded in versions of the open economy model where the trade balance is

expressed as a function of domestic output rather than expenditure.


                                        7
     Foreign disturbances now affect the economy through the trade balance.

An expansion abroad that raises foreign output, the foreign price, or both

leads to an expansion of domestic output. The domestic economy becomes

sensitive to foreign developments, including policies pursued by foreign

governments.

     Another much discussed result emerges from this same model. Under fixed

exchange rates, there is a conflict between internal and external balance when

a country is in one of two situations: with a balance of payments deficit and

unemployment or a balance of payments surplus and full employment.6 In either

case, fiscal and monetary policies have undesirable effects on either internal

or external balance. If there is a balance of payments deficit and unemploy-

ment, for example, an expansionary policy can eliminate unemployment, but it

also leads to a deterioration of the trade balance. What is required in this

situation, according to Johnson (1958), is an "expenditure switching" policy

which is aimed at lowering the trade deficit at any given level of output.

Corden (1960) examines various ways this policy could be carried out.

     One such expenditure—switching policy is a devaluation. In this model,

it unambiguously raises domestic output while improving the trade balance. In

the simplest version, with fixed prices and a pegged interest rate, the

multiplier for the change in the exchange rate is

           dY   — _________________ > 0,
           dX      1                                                       (2.9)
                        Z,(1 + Bz)

while the change in the trade balance is




     6The second of these situations is usually described as a balance of

payments surplus and "inflation", but models of this type are not well suited

for describing inflationary situations.


                                           8
              dB
                       —B 1 — Z'
                   —    P
          i-                           >0.                                210
                       l_ZJi(l+Bz)
Using these expressions, we can interpret the two analytical approaches to

devaluation often discussed in connection with models of this type, the

elasticities and absorption approaches. (For the two approaches, see

Robinson, 1937, and Alexander, 1952). According to the former, the trade

balance improves following a devaluation if the Marshall—Lerner condition is

satisfied, or B < 0. This condition is clearly based on a partial

equilibrium analysis of the trade sector alone. The absorption approach is

more concerned with the macroeconomic response to a devaluation; the trade

balance is said to improve following a devaluation if output rises more than

expenditure. That is the case in (2.10) provided the marginal propensity to

spend is less than one. We discuss a more recent approach to devaluation, the

monetary approach, in detail below.

2.4. Modifications of the model

     Many results obtained above depend upon characteristics of the model

which are more appropriate for a closed economy. Real domestic income, for
         J.
         .L            .. 1_
              uLJ.L1eu LU              __ 1
                          U equ.LvEli.euL.                     0.4- 4LU L& JJLL

economy real income is more appropriately defined as PYII, where I is a

general price index including foreign as well as domestic prices:

                   ,a (PfX)l_a                                            (2.11)

Real expenditure should similarly be redefined as PZ/I and expressed as a

function of real income. This respecification of the expenditure function

leads to what is known as the Laursen—Metzler effect of a change in the terms

of trade.7 A fall in the terms of trade, which reduces P/I, leads to a fall



     7See Laursen and Metzler (1950). Dornbusch (1980, pp. 78—81) has a clear

explanation of this effect.


                                             9
in domestic expenditure measured in terms of the general price index but a

rise in domestic expenditure measured in terms of the domestic good itself.

     Other changes in specification might be made for similar reasons. All

assets and wealth might be deflated by the general price index. Thus real

money balances might be defined as MIt and treated as a function of real

wealth, A/I, as well as real income. To the extent that expectations are

explicitly modelled, the interest rate in the aggregate demand function might

be specified in real terms as the nominal rate less the expected inflation

rate of the general price index (the latter denoted by lit). Finally,

aggregate supply might be made a function of the price index, if wages vary at

all. The first three of these changes will be adopted in the model introduced

in the next section; wages will be made a function of the price index in a

later section.

     How much difference do all of these changes make? The answer certainly

depends upon the actual magnitude of each effect. But notice that one

dramatic result is overturned in the model used above once the general price

level (and hence the exchange rate) is able to influence expenditure directly.

Flexible rates no longer insulate the domestic economy from foreign

disturbances. Indeed there are several channels through which the general

price level, and therefore the exchange rate itself, can affect domestic

variables.

3. Capital mobility and the Mundell—Fleming propositions

     Few studies in international economics have had as much impact on the

direction of research as those of Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962). These

studies showed how important capital mobility is to the conduct of

stabilization policy, thus overturning many earlier propositions about policy,

while redirecting attention towards the capital account and financial



                                      10
phenomena in general.

     The two studies differed in their assumptions about the degree of capital

mobility, Mundell assuming that there was perfect capital mobility between

domestic and foreign countries. Their propositions about stabilization policy

differed accordingly. Mundell's propositions were particularly dramatic. In

a small open economy,

     (1) monetary policy is ineffective in changing output under fixed

     exchange rates because capital flows offset a monetary expansion or

     contraction;

     (2) fiscal policy is ineffective in changing output under flexible rates

     because the exchange rate induces adjustments in the trade account which

     run counter to the fiscal policy.

In Fleming's model, where capital mobility was imperfect, each policy retained

some effectiveness under both exchange rate regimes. His conclusions

concerned the relative effectiveness of the two policies:

     (1) Monetary policy is more effective in changing output under flexible

     rates than under fixed rates;

     (2) fiscal policy is more effective in changing output under fixed

     exchange rates when capital is highly mobile, but this conclusion is

     reversed with low capital mobility.8

Both sets of propositions are modified -in more general models, as we shall see

below, but they have had a powerful influence on subsequent thinking about




    8Capital mobility is relatively low in his model if an increase in

government spending leads to a trade deficit larger than the capital inflow

induced by the corresponding increase in the interest rate. See Whitman

(1970) for a full discussion.


                                         11
stabilization policy. Whitman (1970) has provided a concise summary of these

and other studies in the same tradition.

    We will review these propositions within the context of a model somewhat

different from those used by Mundell and Fleming. We retain the fixed nominal

wage assumption characteristic of Keynesian models but modify the expenditure

function to incorporate terms of trade and wealth effects that may be

particularly important when there is a flexible exchange rate. The most

important change, however, is on the financial side. Fleming specified

capital flows as a function of the level of the interest rate, but modern

portfolio theory indicates that the stock of assets rather than the flow

should be a function of the interest rate.9 According to this latter view,

capital flows occur as a result of more general portfolio adjustments

encompassing money balances as well as domestic and foreign bond holdings. In

place of the balance of payments flow (the time derivative of foreign exchange

reserves), which was the center of attention in the Fleming model, we have an

equation explaining the stock of foreign exchange reserves; it is one of the

equations explaining asset market equilibrium.10 Other differences between



     9One implausible implication of the Fleming specification is that a rise

in the domestic interest rate causes a continuing inflow of capital, whether

portfolios are growing or not. Branson (1968) and Willett and Forte (1969)

were among the first to formulate the portfolio balance approach to the

capital account. In Mundell's (1963) model, with perfectly mobile capital,

this question of specification does not arise.

          is the case with most portfolio balance models, the model is

specified in continuous time. It can be specified in discrete time, as in

Henderson (1981) and Tobin and de Macedo (1980), and a balance of payments
(continued)


                                      12
the model here and its antecedents are discussed below.

     This section focuses on many of the issues that Mundell and Fleming

emphasized and on which later authors expanded,including the offsetting

effect of capital flows and the feasibility of sterilization. In addition, we

compare the relative effectiveness of stabilization policies under fixed and

flexible rates. The discussion draws on an excellent survey of these issues

by Henderson (1977).

3.1. A model with internationally mobile capital

     The model introduced in this section will be used to describe stabiliza-

tion policy in both this section and the next (where we consider a classical

model with flexible wages). The model is complicated because it includes

price and wealth effects and because domestic and foreign securities are

treated as imperfect substitutes. Behavior in the model, however, can be

summarized in a simple diagram which will be used to illustrate the effects of

different stabilization policies.

     We begin with the market for the domestic good:


           Y   Z + G0 + B ,                                                (3.1)

          f.   = z[9),    r—ir1, rf-f.r_w1, 4   ,                          (3.2)

                0 < Z < 1, Zr < 0, Zf < 0, ZA > 0


           B   B(z,      p/(px),    '1 < Bz < 0, Bf > 0, Bp < 0            (33)

           Y = Q(P/W),    Q > 0 .                                          (3.4)


equation can be derived from the rest of the model, but such a model bears

little resemblance to the earlier capital flow specification of Fleming and

others.


                                       13
The model is identical to the earlier one except for the expenditure equation

(3.2), where expenditure and disposable income are deflated by the general

price index, thus incorporating the Laursen—Metzler effect of a change in the

terms of trade. Disposable income is defined as income less taxes, the latter

being exogenous to the model.11 Expenditure is also a function of real

wealth, where wealth is now defined as the sum of money, domestic bonds and

foreign bonds held by the domestic private sector: A = M ÷         + X Fd.

Finally, expenditure is expressed as a function of the domestic and foreign

real interest rates. The nominal return on the foreign bond is defined as the

nominal foreign interest rate plus the expected appreciation of the foreign

currency,     both Interest rates are then expressed In real terms by

subtracting the expected rate of inflation of the general price index,


             = a   11   +
                            (1_a)rr


                                 0< e< 1,

                                 0< e< 1.

For this part of the analysis, expectations are modeled in two alternative

ways found frequently in the literature: regressive expectations (with ep and

eX being positive constants less than or equal to one) where a rise In the

current price or exchange rate leads to an expected fall in that variable

towards some stationary value (,      ) and   static expectations (with ep and eX




     11lnterest receipts and payments are Ignored in the model.

Alternatively, they could be explicitly introduced into the expressions for

disposable income and the current account but neutralized by taxes and

transfers. Allen and Kenen (1980, 40—42) describe how this can be done.


                                         14
being equal to zero) where the expected level of the price or exchange rate

rises with the current level so that no further change is expected. We

postpone until a later section a discussion of rational expectations.

     The equations for the goods market contain four endogenous variables of

interest to the analysis: Y, P, r, and either X or XFm (the level of foreign

exchange reserves). According to equation (3.4), however, changes in P are

always related to changes in Y as follows, dP =            so that we can
                                                   dY/Q,
eliminate price from all expressions in the model and thus concentrate on only

three variables.

     The curve labelled GG in figure 1 describes combinations of Y and r that

give equilibrium in the goods market. The slope of this curve reflects the

direct effects of output and the interest rate on expenditure (as well as the

indirect effect of the domestic price). To obtain an expression for this

slope, we first take the total differentials of equations (3.1)—(3.4) and

combine them in the compact form shown in the first row of the matrix in table

1. The matrix itself describes equilibrium under either flexible rates (XdFm

= 0) or fixed rates (dx =   0).   The expression G, +       reflects the direct

and indirect effects of higher output on the goods market, while Gr reflects

the direct effect of a higher interest rate. Since increases in Y or r both

raise the excess supply of the domestic good (i.e., G +           and Gr are

positive), the goods market curve GG must have a negative slope.

     The definitions and signs of      and all other coefficients are given in

the table. (To simplify these expressions, we have assumed that all prices,

including the exchange rate, are initially equal to one). All of the signs

follow directly from the earlier assumptions, with two exceptions: For A to

be positive, the elasticity of expenditure with respect to disposable income

must be less than one. This condition ensures that the Laursen—Metzler effect



                                        15
r
             G'                  L

                   NS                                            H
    G
                         N
                                      a
                                     'S
                                       'S
                                            N   'S
                                                     'S
                                                       'S
                                                            'S   (%f




        H


               L
                                                                       Y

        Figure 1. Increase in Government Spending




                           15a
                           TABLE 1. MODIFIED MUNDELL—FLEMING MODEL




(G + G/Q)               C                0                          dY
                                                   Cr                                  dG0

(L + LIQ)              Lx            —(1+s)
                                                   Lr              xciFm               dH
(H + H/Q)              Hx
                                         8
                                                   Hr               dr
                                                                                       —dH

     = [1 — (1 + Bz)Zy] > 0


     =    (1 + Bz)EA — a ep(Zr + Zf) + a                   —
                                                    ZAAI       B    > 0


A        (1—a)[Z —         —   T)]   > 0
                     Z(Y

Gx — —(1 + Bz)[A + e(Zr(1_a) —                           + zA(Fd — A(1—a))] + B < 0
                                                Zf(a))

Cr = —(1 + Bz) Zr > 0,


     =      > 0
L
L
    r =mr <0
     =
L        [m   Y(1—a) + a(m(.) —
                                         mA
                                              A)] > 0


         [(1—a)(m(')   —             —                     —
Lx =
                           m 'r)         mf   e + mA(F         A(1—a))] > 0 ,




H    —   h + h > 0


         [h Y(1—a) + a(h(.)          —
                                         hA   A)] < 0

     -                 -              h(.) + (h — hf)eX + hA(Fd — A(1—a))]
         [(1—a)(h(.)       hY) +                                                 >    O.




                                                    16
obtains; a fall in the terms of trade raises expenditure measured in terms of

the domestic good. The other exception concerns the sign of C. This model

allows the exchange rate to affect the goods market through three channels:

(a) relative price effects that work directly on the trade balance and through

the Laursen—Metzler effect on expenditure; (b) exchange rate and inflationary

expectations that drive the two real interest rates in different directions;

and (c) the effect of the exchange rate on real wealth (which can either rise

or fall in response to a rise in the exchange rate).'2 For Cx     to   be negative,

the relative price effect must outweigh the latter two effects (if either or

both are negative).'3 When Cx   is   negative, a rise in the exchange rate (a

devaluation or a depreciation of the domestic currency) shifts the CC schedule

to the right.

     The behavior of the financial markets is of central interest to the




         rise in the exchange rate has two effects on real wealth: it raises

the nominal value of wealth by Fd dX (when Fd is positive), but it lowers the

real value of any given ount of nominal wealth by A di        A(i—a)dX, since it

raises the cost of imported goods in the price index.

     13Under plausible conditions, these latter effects could both be equal to

zero. The net effect of a change in the expected exchange rate is equal to

zero when the partial derivatives of expenditure with respect to the two real

interest rates are proportional to the shares of domestic and foreign goods in

the consumption basket, Zr/Zf — a/(1—a).      The wealth effect of an exchange

rate change is equal to zero when the ratio of foreign assets to wealth is the

same as the proportion of foreign goods in the consumption basket, Fd/A

(1—a). Such a diversification rule is given in Dornbusch (1982). But Cx

could be negative under much weaker conditions.


                                         17
following discussion. The asset model described below is an open economy

version of the Tobin—Brainard model as developed by Black (1973), Boyer

(1975), Branson (1974), Girton and Henderson (1976, 1977) among others. Three

assets are assumed to be available to domestic investors; money, CM),

domestic bonds (Hd) and foreign bonds (F'1), the latter available at an

exogenous interest rate. There is no banking system in the model, so M also

represents the monetary base. Foreign investors may hold domestic bonds but

do not hold domestic money. The domestic demands for the two domestic assets

are described by equations (3.5) and (3.7), the domestic demand for the

foreign bond by (3.9), and the foreign demand for the domestic bond by (3.8).


           M m[.q._, r, r + iii'             -41 I    — Hm + X   F'   ,        (3.5)

                  0 < Y rfl/M 1 m < O mf < O 0 A mA/M                     1,



           Hd÷Hf=H0_Hm,                                                        (3.6)


           Rd —
                  h[f!._,   r,    r + x'      4i,                              (3.7)

                  h < 0, h > 0, hf (0, 1                 AhA/Hd,

                  —   h[y,       r —
                                       ir,   r, A/P]P       ,                  (3.8)

                  4< 0,      h> 0, h< 0, h> 0,

           X Fd       f[!!._ r, r +
                                             WV _4]i,                          (3•9)

                  fy<0 r<o' ff>0 1 AfA/(XF)s
The real demands for these assets are functions of real income, the expected

returns on domestic and foreign bonds, and real wealth. The restrictions on

the partial derivatives of the asset demands reflect the following assump-

tions: (a) all assets are assumed to be gross substitutes, i.e., a rise in



                                                 18
the own (cross) return raises (lowers) the demand for that asset; (b) a rise

in income raises the demand for money and lowers the demands for the other

assets, but the income elasticity of money demand is assumed to be less than

or equal to one; (c) a rise in wealth leads to an equal or more than

proportionate rise in the demand for domestic and foreign bonds, and an equal

or less than proportionate rise in the demand for money. These are all

plausible assumptions that have been frequently adopted in the literature.'4

     The asset demands of domestic residents as well as the expenditure

function introduced above are expressed as functions of real (domestic)

wealth, where wealth includes bond holdings as well as money holdings. Barro

(1974) has recently revived interest in the proposition that government bonds

do not represent net wealth. The basic question at issue is whether

individuals fully discount the future taxes implicit in any issue of

government debt. Buiter and Tobin (1979) discuss the strong assumptions

necessary for this proposition to hold, such as the absence of

intergenerational distribution effects.'5 Here we adopt the conventional

definition of financial wealth that ignores future taxes; this definition thus

may overstate the magnitude of the real effects discussed below when there is




     14Gross substitutibility is not a necessary consequence of expected

utility maximization, although it is almost always assumed in asset market

studies. Money demand is often assumed to be insensitive to wealth or to be

homogeneous of degree one in wealth; these assumptions are limiting cases of

the one adopted here.

     15Voluntary intergenerational gifts can neutralize the real effects of

involuntary redistribution by the government, but only under certain

conditions. See Buiter and Tobin (1979).


                                      19
at least partial capitalization of future taxes.16

     Equations (3.5) and (3.6) equate the demands for money and domestic

bonds, respectively, to their supplies. The supply of money is equal to the

assets held by the central bank, which consist of domestic and foreign

bonds. (We have omitted a balancing item which is needed to cancel capital

gains earned by the monetary authority on changes in the foreign exchange

rate.) The supply of domestic bonds consists of the total government issue

less that held by the central bank. The supplies of these assets are related

by sterilization policy. We consider below two possibilities, that the

authorities sterilize all foreign exchange flows or do not sterilize any. In

the former case, the domestic bonds held by the central bank become

endogenous, so it is useful to describe the change in its domestic assets as

the sum of two components:


           dHn_dR+SXdFm,                                                   (3.10)

The first term represents a discretionary change in domestic assets, indepen-

dent of sterilization policy; the second term describes the endogenous

response of domestic assets to a change in foreign exchange reserves. The

parameter s is the sterilization coefficient, which is assumed to vary between

zero and minus one. When no sterilization is carried out (s    0), the supply

of money is an endogenous variable under fixed exchange rates with the change




         related issue is whether exchange market intervention, which

transfers ownership of foreign assets from the private sector to the

government, can have any real effects. Obstfeld (1981) discusses the case

where the private sector "sees through" these transactions; it capitalizes

future transfers from the government financed by foreign interest payments (in

effect regarding official foreign exchange holdings as its own).


                                      20
in that supply given by dH + X dF'. When full sterilization is practiced

(a = —1), the supply of bonds available to the public becomes endogenous, with

the change in that supply given by -dH + X dF'.

      In figure 1, the curves labelled LL and RH describe combinations of Y and

r that give equilibrium in the markets for money and domestic bonds.17 The

slopes of these curves can be obtained from the equilibrium conditions for the

two asset markets summarized by the second and third rows of the matrix

expression in table 1.   The signs of the asset coefficients follow from the

earlier assumptions, with one exception. For Lx and Hx to be positive, the

transactions and expectations effects must outweigh the wealth effect in cases

where the latter is negative. (As discussed below, assumptions are frequently

adopted which make Lx    0). The relative slopes of LL and RH depend upon the

two assumptions adopted earlier regarding gross substitutability and wealth

elasticities • 18

     One additional characteristic of the HR schedule is of special

interest. It becomes infinitely elastic when domestic and foreign bonds are




     '7Stabilization policy has often been illustrated in a diagram with a

balance of payments curve instead of a bond market curve. Most of the studies

of the 1960's which specified capital flows as a function of the interest rate

level used such a diagram. Henderson (1981) uses a balance of payments curve

in a discrete time model based on asset demand functions like those presented

here. The alternative diagram presented here was developed by Boyer (1978a)

and Henderson (1979).

     18The relative slopes of these curves can be established under weaker

assumptions, as is evident from the expressions for (H + H/Q) and

(L + L/Q).

                                      21
perfect substitutes. (HH becomes flat as Hr =
                                                hr + h goes to infinity).
This was the assumption adopted by Mundell (1963) as well as by many other

authors since. We shall discuss its important implications below.

     Before proceeding further, we should clarify the nature of the short run

equilibrium described in table 1. All asset markets are assumed to be in

continuous equilibrium in the sense that existing stocks of assets are

willingly held. In this model, however, there is nothing to prevent asset

stocks from changing continuously through time. In particular, a government

deficit will generate a flow supply of government bonds:        =          —   T),
                                                                    P(G0
where H0 denotes the time derivative, dH0/dt. This flow supply is to be

distinguished from a discrete change in the supply of bonds at one point in

time associated, for example, with an open market operation, dH. Similarly,

a balance of payments surplus under fixed exchange rates will generate a flow
                                                           .1
supply of foreign exchange reserves: X Fm    P B + H —   x r • Thisflow
supply is to be distinguished from the discrete change In foreign exchange

reserves, X dF'', which occurs as a result of an instantaneous switch in

portfolios or a single exchange market operation.

     These flow supplies of assets, whether due to government deficits or

payments imbalances, affect output and other variables in the model by

altering gradually the stock of each asset, thereby moving the economy, In the

words of Blinder and Solow (1973), from one Instantaneous equilibrium to

another.'9 Because the stocks of assets change through time, the cumulative

effects of stabilization policies vary with the time span over which policies

are examined. (The longer the time span, however, the less tenable is the




     19Branson (1974) applied the closed economy analysis of Blinder and

Solow to the case of an open economy under fixed exchange rates.


                                      22
Keynesian assumption of fixed nominal wages.) To simplify the discussion

below, we focus mostly on the impact effects of policies and thus ignore the

effects of these flow supplies.20 In table 1, for example, only the impact

effects of policies are shown. Readers interested in the longer run effects

of the policies are referred to McKinnon and Oates (1966) and other studies.2'

3.2. Stabilization policy under fixed exchange rates

     Under fixed exchange rates, the equations of table 1 determine domestic

output and the interest rate on domestic bonds as well as foreign exchange

reserves CX Fm). The system of equations, in fact, is recursive under two

alternative assumptions regarding sterilization:

(1) With no sterilization (s     0), the equations describing equilibrium in

the goods and bond markets determine output and the interest rate, with the

money market equation determining the (instantaneous) change in foreign




     20wich rational expectations or perfect foresight, however, future

changes in stocks can affect endogenous variables immediately. Chapter 15

shows how, under perfect foresight, the eventual accumulation of wealth

through the current account affects the current values of endogenous

variables, including the exchange rate; chapter 18 analyzes'other dynamic

models under perfect foresight. We discuss rational expectations in section

5, but in models where the dynamics of asset accumulation are not essential to

the analysis.

     21McKinnon and Oates analyze a long run (stationary state) equilibrium

where wealth accumulation has ceased. Turnovsky (1976) examines the dynamics

around such a stationary state equilibrium using flow equations such as those

introduced above. See also Branson (1974) and Allen and Kenen (1980,

especially chapters 6 and 10).


                                       23
exchange reserves. In terms of figure 1, equilIbrium Is determined by the GG

and HH schedules, with the LL schedule shifting in response to changes in

foreign exchange reserves.

(2) With full sterilization (s — —1), the equations for the goods and money

markets determine output and the interest rate, with the bond equation deter-

mining the change in foreign exchange reserves. Equilibrium is determined by

the GG and LL schedules, with the HH schedules shifting in response to changes

in foreign exchange reserves.

     In this section we use this system of equations together with

accompanying diagrams to interpret two   types   of stabilization policies: an

increase in government spending and an open market expansion of the money

supply. The role of sterilization will be discussed in connection with

government spending where a geometric illustration of its effects is

particularly simple.

     The increase in government spending Is assumed to fall exclusively on

domestic goods. The spending is financed by the issue of government bonds

rather than by taxes, with the government deficit generating a flow supply of

bonds but no discrete change in the bond supply capable of affecting current

variables. With no sterilization, an Increase in spending leads to a rise in

output and the interest rate. In fIgure 1, point a is reached where the new

G'G' schedule intersects with a constant Hil schedule. The effect of the

policy on foreign exchange reserves is evident from the figure, since money

market equilibrium requires a rightward shift (not shown) of the LL curve to

point a and thus a rise in the money supply. The magnitude of the increase in

foreign exchange reserves depends upon the degree of substitutability between

domestic and foreign bonds, as reflected in the slope of HH. Since foreign

exchange reserves increase under fixed exchange rates, we should expect the



                                     24
domestic currency to appreciate under flexible rates as discussed below.

     Perfect substitution between domestic and foreign bonds (RH horizontal)

leads to no qualitative differences in the effects of fiscal policy on output

or foreign exchange reserves, although the interest rate would in that case

remain constant. Perfect substitution between domestic and foreign goods, a

limiting case where the law of one price holds, on the other hand, renders

government spending powerless to affect output.22 As the private sector is

willing to exchange foreign for domestic goods at unchanged prices, government

spending on domestic (or foreign) goods can have no effect on prices or

output. (In this polar case, the CC schedule becomes a vertical line and

shifts only in response to a change in the exchange rate or price of foreign

                                                -
output.)

     Sterilization   modifies the effects of fiscal policy, but output and the

interest rate still increase. If there is complete sterilization, then the

new equilibrium is found on an unchanged LL schedule at point b. The increase

in the money supply associated with the influx of foreign exchange reserves is

neutralized by the sale of bonds to the public. The bond supplies available

to the public become endogenous, with HR shifting to the new equilibrium.

     There is a serious problem with sterilization, however, when domestic and




     22For a description of the law of one price, see Katseli—Papaefstratiou

(1979). She distinguishes between the law of one price, which is a commodity

arbitrage relationship linking the prices of identical goods in different

countries, and a more general form of purchasing power parity (PPP) reflecting

a reduced form relationship between prices and exchange rates. For empirical

evidence on PPP, see Isard (1977), Kravis and Lipsey (1978), and Frenkel

(1981).


                                        25
foreign bonds are highly substitutable. The more substitutable are the bonds,

the greater is the change in foreign exchange reserves associated with the

fiscal policy.23 This can be seen by expressing the change in foreign

exchange reserves given in table 1 In terms of the changes in output and the

interest rate:

            X dF =
                     (H +   H/Q) dY + H dr.                                 (3.11)

Since the changes in Y and r (to point b in figure 1) are the same whatever

the degree of substitutability between bonds, the change in foreign exchange

reserves must increase with higher substitutability (a larger Hr). In the

limiting case of perfect substitution between assets, the problem of foreign

exchange flows becomes overwhelming, as Mundell (1963) emphasized. In that

case, sterilization implies an infinite gain of foreign exchange reserves.

     During the 1950's, analyses of macroeconomic policy almost invariably

assumed full sterilization of reserve flows, with monetary policy being

characterized by a constant money supply or interest rate. In the early

1970's, the monetary approach to the balance of payments largely ignored

sterilization or argued that sterilization was infeasible because of perfect

substitution between assets. Since that time empirical evidence has

accumulated showing that sterilization was indeed practiced widely under the




          the case of an increase in government spending, foreign exchange

reserves rise rather than fall, so the country   is   in no danger of running out

of reserves as it might be In the case of a decline in government spending or

an increase in the money supply. This is one aspect of a fundamental

asymmetry between surplus and deficit countries under fixed exchange rates.


                                      26
Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates.24 But many of the same studies

have also shown the empirical importance of the offset effect, a phenomenon

which was central to the monetary approach to the balance of payments. It is

to the offset effect that we now turn.

     The subject of monetary policy under fixed rates has generated intense

controversy, with many economists contending that monetary policy is powerless

to affect the domestic interest rate or output. That is because any

expansionary open market operation by the central bank may be completely

offset by a loss of foreign exchange reserves. (This offset controversy is

distinct from the controversy associated with monetary policy under rational

expectations to be discu8sed below.)

     The monetary policy to be analyzed here is a simple open market purchase

of domestic bonds by the central bank, which increases the supply of money and

reduces the supply of bonds by dH. Figure 2 illustrates the effects of this

operation: output rises while the domestic interest rate falls as HH shifts

to the right to point a. Figure 2 also can be used to illustrate the offset

to the monetary policy. In the absence of changes in foreign exchange

reserves, the LL curve would shift to the right to L'L' as a result of the

open market purchase. This is the shift shown in the figure. with changes in

reserves, however, the money supply is endogenous, and LL shifts back to point

a in response to a loss in foreign exchange reserves. In figure 2, the offset

is negative, but it is smaller (in absolute value) than the open market




     24For studies of sterilization in the 1960's, see Argy and Kouri (1974)

and Herring and Marston (1977, ch. 5). Black (1982) and Obstfeld (1982)

present evidence of sterilization in the more recent period of managed

floating.


                                       27
r
                                       L       I'
                                                /
    G                                          /
                                               I.
                                                    H




                                           /
         0                         I
                                   /
                                       .1
                                       /
    H'                            /
                              F                     G
                              /
                             /
             L        L'i'
                                                        Y

         Figure 2. Open Market Operation




                      27 a
purchase. Hence monetary policy still retains some effectiveness.

       To determine under what conditions the offset is complete, we express the

change in foreign exchange reserves as follows:25

               XdFm            {L(Gy + G/Q) — Gr(Ly + L/Q)]
                      —1   —                                  .            (3.12)
                               [Hr(Gy + G/Q) — C(H
                                                    +
               dH
It is clear from this expression that if there is perfect substitutability

between assets (}L infinite), the offset coefficient is equal to —1. In that

case, monetary policy is powerless to affect output or the interest rate. In

figure 2, HH becomes horizontal and is unaffected by changes in bond supplies,

éo point a coincides with point o. Short of perfect substitutability,

however, the offset is less than complete (XdFm/dH > —1). Note that the

offset could be positive rather than negative -in the perhaps unlikely case

where the increase in output (and price) causes a net shift out of foreign

bonds to satisfy the demand for transactions balances.26

      The empirical evidence on offset behavior suggests that the offset

coefficient is negative and large, but significantly different from minus

one. Kouri and Porter (1974), for example, estimated that the offset




       25Th1s expression is obtained by éolving the equations of table 1 for the

case of no sterilization.

       26See Branson (1974) for a discussion of this case. Using (3.12), it

can   be   shown that high substitutibility between domestic and foreign bonds or

low sensitivity of expenditure to real interest rates is sufficient to rule

Out a positive offset. Geometrically, a positive offset occurs when L'L' and

H'II' intersect below the CC line.


                                           28
 coefficient for Germany was —.77 based on evidence from the 1960?s.27 There

 are two ways of looking at such evidence. One is to say that the offset is

 less than complete, so the central bank retains control over the money

 supply. But there is another side to this good news. An offset as large as

—.77 implies a sizable change in foreign exchange reserves for any given (net)

change in the money supply. The higher the degree of asset substitutability,

in effect, the greater the change in foreign exchange reserves associated with

any active monetary policy. For this very reason, countries such as Germany

became increasingly disenchanted with fixed exchange rates during the late

1960's. Germany's   attempts   to pursue a tight monetary policy led to large

surpluses in its overall balance of payments which in turn generated pressure

from its trading partners for changes in its policies. Exchange rate

flexibility seemed to provide a solution; the German money supply could then

be under the full control of its authorities. Controlling one's money supply,

however, is a necessary but not sufficient condition for an effective monetary

policy, as we shall see below.




     27For the same period, Herring and Marston (1977, ch. 6) present

estimates of a net offset coefficient which takes into account sterilization

behavior. Most estimates of the offset effect are based on financial behavior

only, whereas the general expression for the offset coefficient presented in

3.12 also takes into account behavior in the goods market (which affects the

size of the offset coefficient when Gr       0). For an estimate of the offset

effect based on an economy—wide econometric model, the RDX2 for Canada, see

Helliwell and Lester (1976).


                                        29
3.3. Stabilization policy under flexible exchange rates

     Under flexible rates, the equations of table 1 determine domestic output,

the interest rate and the exchange rate. Foreign exchange reserves are

exogenous. Figure 1 and 2 continue to describe the determination of output

and the interest rate for any given exchange rate.28 But changes in the

exchange rate generally shift all three schedules.

     The effect of exchange rate flexibility on an expansionary stabilization

policy depends first of all upon whether the domestic currency appreciates or

depreciates. An expansionary fiscal policy invariably leads to an

appreciation in the model outlined, just as it unambiguously leads to an

Increase in foreign exchange reserves under fixed exchange rates. (In the

Fleming analysis, by contrast, the exchange rate could appreciate or

depreciate depending upon the relative effect of the policy on the capital and

current accounts of the balance of payments.) The effect of the rise in

government spending and of the ensuing appreciation of the domestic currency

are illustrated in figure i.29




     28We adopt the usual assumption that behavioral parameters are

insensitive to the change in regimes, an assumption which has been criticized

by Lucas (1972, 1973) and others in a closed economy context. Cooper (1976)

suggests that in comparing exchange rate regimes, we should take into account

likely changes in both trade and financial behavior, but to do so would

require the explicit modelling of the microeconoinic behavior of trading firms

and investors. In section 5, we discuss the influence of policy rules on

private behavior, and address more directly the Lucas critique.

     29For a similar diagramatic analysis of private sector disturbances see

Henderson (1979).


                                      30
         The rise in the demand for the domestic good shifts the GC curve upward,

but the appreciation dampens this movement. The appreciation also induces

shifts in the asset schedules (not shown). As X falls, the demands for money

and bonds both fall. (Recall that Lx and Hx are both positive because of the

combined influence of price level changes, expectations and wealth effects on

the demand for these assets.) As a result the IL curve shifts to the right

and HH to the left. The economy ends up somewhere in the triangular area

bounded by abo, with output and the domestic interest rate rising.

         Under certain conditions, output remains fixed despite the government's

increased demand for domestic goods; this is Mundell's well—known result that

fiscal policy is powerless to change output under flexible rates. To show
this, -       follow   Mundell in assuming that domestic and foreign bonds are

perfect substitutes (H.. is infinite, so that HH is flat). But we also need to

assume that the exchange rate has no net effect on the demand for money (Lx

0, so that the LL schedule does not shift). The following are sufficient

conditions for the demand for money to be independent of the exchange rate:

(a) static expectations, (b) a zero wealth elasticity of the demand for money

or an insensitivity of real wealth to exchange rate changes, and Cc) a unitary

income elasticity of the demand for money, which ensures that the fall in the

general price level raises the transactions demand for money and real money

balances by the same amount.30 If money demand is independent of the exchange



         30For a similar set of conditions, see Henderson (1981).    Argy and    Porter
(1972) previously emphasized the importance of static expectations for

Mundell's result. This assumption also implies that HR remains stationary as

X changes. In the case of perfect substitutability between bonds, the

position of HR is determined by the uncovered parity condition, r —       r   +
whic[i   is   unchanged if       0.



                                            31
rate and if the domestic interest rate is tied to the foreign interest rate

through perfect substitution, then only a constant output (and domestic price)

are consistent with a constant money supply. Thus output remains at point o

in figure 1. Notice, however, how many assumptions are needed for this

result. Under more general conditions, domestic output must rise.

     The effect of monetary policy under flexible rates is showu in figure 2,

where we illustrate the normal case in which an open market purchase of

domestic bonds leads to a depreciation of the domestic currency. The shifts

of the asset market schedules illustrate the direct effect on asset supplies:

the increase in the money supply shifts LL to the right to L'L', while the

reduction of the bond supply shifts HR to the right as well to H'H'. The

depreciation itself then leads to an equilibrium somewhere in the triangle

abc, with output increasing and the interest rate declining.3' Under those

conditions that produce a positive offset under fixed rates, an open market

purchase can lead to an appreciation rather than a depreciation under flexible

rates, but an appreciation is unlikely for the same reasons cited in

connnection with a positive offset.32

     In the limiting case of perfect substitution between bonds, monetary

policy is still effective in changing output, since there are no changes in

foreign exchange reserves to offset the open market operation. Output and the

domestic price still increase; the interest rate remains constant if

expectations are static, and   it falls if expectations are regressive (because

     31The depreciation shifts L'L' to the left, H'H' and GG to the right, so

the final equilibrium must be in the triangle bounded by L'L', H'H' and GG.

     321f an appreciation occurs, the triangle is below the CG schedule, but

output   still increases and the interest rate declines.


                                        32
HH shifts down by the change in the foreign interest return,   dlix =      dx).
In   this limiting case, an open market operation and foreign exchange interven-

tion are equivalent in effects, if the latter is defined as an exchange of

foreign bonds for domestic money, since it cannot matter whether domestic or

foreign bonds are exchanged for money. But sterilized foreign exchange

intervention, involving an exchange of foreign for domestic bonds with no

change in the money supply, must be totally ineffective in changing output,

price or the interest rate.33

3.4. The relative effectiveness of policies and other issues

      Raving discussed fiscal and monetary policy in detail, we can briefly

review the relative effectiveness of each policy In changing output under

fixed and flexible rates. Fiscal policy is always less effective under

flexible rates than under fixed rates, because an expansionary policy leads to

an appreciation of the domestic currency, thereby dampening the rise in

aggregate demand. Figure 1 illustrates this result clearly: With fixed

exchange rates (and no sterilization) the economy reaches point a; with

flexible rates, the economy ends up somewhere in the triangular area oab.

Thus there Is no ambiguity about the relative effectiveness of fiscal policy,

a result which differs from Fleming's. The difference, of course, is that the

movement of the exchange rate is governed by asset market behavior (the

relative slopes of HH and LL) rather than by the trade and capital accounts of

the balance of payments as in Fleming's study.

      Fleming's conclusion with respect to the relative effectiveness of

monetary policy Is also modified in this model. Monetary policy is not




      33GIrton and Henderson (1977) discuss both types of intervention. See

also Kenen (1982) and ch. 15 by Branson and Henderson in this volume.


                                      33
necessarily more effective under flexible rates. But under the normal

conditions in which the offset effect is negative, Fleming's conclusion is

upheld. Figure 2 illustrates this result: under fixed exchange rates, an

open market expansion of the money supply leaves the economy at point a, while

under flexible rates the economy expands further to some point in the triangle

abc. Only if the offset is positive is monetary policy less effective under

flexible rates.

     This type of analysis has often been used as a basis for comparing fixed

and flexible rates. One regime is preferable to another if it makes a given

policy instrument more effective in changing output. But the analysis has

frequently been turned on its head. Instead of analyzing the effects of

policy—induced changes in the money supply, some studies have analyzed the

effects of monetary disturbances, unwanted changes in money demand or

supply.34 Similarly, aggregate demand disturbances originating in private

behavior (e.g., shifts in demand from domestic to foreign goods) have often

been analyzed in place of changes in government spending. The choice between

exchange rate regimes then hinges on which regime minimizes the effects of the

disturbances on output. This different perspective is commonly found in

the new stochastic literature to be discussed in sections 5 and 6. When it

comes to analyzing foreign disturbances, however, it does not usually matter

whether they are policy—induced or private in origin; in both cases we would

normally choose the regime that best insulates the economy from those




     34There could be unwanted changes in the money supply in any economy with

a banking system if the authorities control bank reserves but not the money

supply. Bryant (1980) analyzes several important issues involved in the

conduct of monetary policy in such an economy.


                                      34
disturbances.35 We shall discuss the insulating properties of exchange rate

regimes in detail below.

     Another important issue concerns the role of country size in determining

the effectiveness of monetary and fiscal policies. The size of a country does

make a difference, most particularly with respect to the strong conclusions

reached by Mundell (1963) about monetary policy under fixed exchange rates and

fiscal policy under flexible rates. We shall briefly review the modifications

made to his analysis by drawing on his follow—up study, Mundell (1964).

     If the domestic country is large enough to affect economic conditions in

the rest of the world, monetary policy under fixed exchange rates regains its

effectiveness. But with perfect substitutability between domestic and foreign

bonds, the money supplies of different countries are fully linked through

capital movements, and the domestic country can change its own money supply

only by changing the money supply of the world as a whole. For the same

reason, an open market operation abroad has as much effect on domestic output

as an open market operation at home of equal magnitude.

     As far as fiscal policy under flexible rates is concerned, this policy

also regains its effectiveness, even under Mundell's assumptions, if the

domestic country Is large enough to influence foreign conditions. An increase

in government spending in the domestic country leads to an appreciation of the




     35A specific policy initiative by a foreign government could very well be

welcomed by the domestic country if it happened to have beneficial effects on

the domestic economy, but in general countries prefer to be insulated from

policy initiatives abroad. Domestic and foreign initiatives, however, might

be coordinated by the governments concerned. Cooper (1969) and Bryant (1980)

discuss problems of policy coordination.


                                      35
domestic currency and a deterioration of the trade balance, as it did in the

small country case. But the foreign country thereby experiences a boom, so

that outputs and interest rates rise in both countries. Mundell considers an

interesting special case where the two countries have identical income

elasticities of the demand for money. In this case, the rise in government

spending at home raises output at home relative to output abroad in proportion

to the ratio of domestic to foreign output. Two countries of equal size, for

example, would share equally in the expansion even though the increase in

government spending fell solely on domestic goods. It is only when this ratio

approaches zero that fiscal policy becomes ineffective in changing output.

For further discussion of these and other results from two country models, the

reader is referred to the excellent survey of macroeconomic interdependence by

Mussa (1979).

     Until this point we have evaluated fiscal and monetary policies

separately and have judged each according to its effects on domestic output.

We might also be concerned with the balance of payments or other external

effects of the policies, however, and might therefore ask if it is possible to

achieve both internal and external balance using fiscal and monetary policies

together.36 According to Tinbergen's (1952) famous rule, to achieve a given

number of independent targets we imist have as many independent instruments.

Here we have two instruments, monetary and fiscal policy, and they can be

varied to achieve two independent targets, since the policies generally differ

in their relative impacts on output and external balance (defined in this




     36We confine our discussion to fixed exchange rates, although similar

issues arise under flexible rates.


                                      36
model as a desired value of foreign exchange reserves).37

     To the requirement that the number of instruments be as large as the

number of targets, Mundell (1962) added another condition: that each policy

instrument be directed toward that target for which it has relatively greater

impact; he termed this the "principle of effective market classification."38

In the flow models of the 1960's, monetary policy had a comparative advantage

over fiscal policy in achieving balance of payments equilibrium under fixed

exchange rates. In the model specified here, however, that comparative

advantage no longer holds in all cases. If the substitutability between

domestic and foreign bonds is low enough, for example, monetary policy may

have no net effect on foreign exchange reserves (the razor's edge case between

a negative and positive offset). With perfect substitutability between bonds,

on the other hand, the only effect of monetary policy is on foreign exchange

reserves, as discussed before. So the degree of asset substitutability is

also crucial in determining the comparative advantage of the two policies.

     Today, concern over the balance of payments (or the exchange rate under

flexible rates) uld probably be replaced by concern over the price level or

inflation rate. And assumptions about decentralized decisionmaking that lay




     371n the asset model specified here, it is more natural to define

external balance in terms of a desired level of foreign exchange reserves

rather than a desired value for their time derivative (the balance of

payments).

     38Th1s condition was necessary for dynamic stability in Mundell's model,

when t different authorities controlled monetary and fiscal policy. Note

that in this study, unlike the other cited earlier, Mundell assumed imperfect

substitutability between domestic and foreign bonds.


                                      37
behind Mundell's analysis would probably be replaced with assumptions about

information asymmetries between the government and private agents. We discuss

price behavior in the next section and those following, while information

asymmetries are discussed in section 5.

4. Flexible wages and the monetary approach

     The macroeconomic model introduced so far displays the rigid nominal

wages characteristic of Keynesian models of the 1960's and earlier, even while

it incorporates asset behavior reflecting portfolio theory as it has developed

in the 1970's. With the rise in inflation in the late 1960's, the assumption

of rigid wages became increasingly untenable. As a result, some form of wage

flexibility has become a feature of many open economy models. In the next

section we will discuss contract models of wage determination which fix wages

only temporarily. But before doing so we will introduce a simple classical

model with perfectly flexible wages. This model will help to clarify the role

of wealth effects in the economy's adjustment to long run equilibrium. In the

monetary approach to the balance of payments, these wealth effects constitute

the main channel through which a devaluation affects the real sector of the

economy. In addition, the model will describe a full information equilibrium

which will serve as a benchmark for the new classical models to be described

in the next section.

4.1. A model with flexible wages

     The behavior of the model introduced in earlier sections changes markedly

when wages become flexible. In an open economy, however, output does not

become exogenous under this classical assumption; instead, aggregate supply

becomes a function of the terms of trade,        To see why this is true,

first consider labor supply behavior in an open economy. If labor consumes

both domestic and foreign goods, the supply of labor should be responsive to



                                      38
the nominal wage relative to the general price level, I, rather than the price

of domestic goods, P:

               N8      N8(W/I).                                                                      (4.1)

The domestic producer, on the other hand, measures wages relative to the price

of the good which he produces, so the demand for labor should be of the form:

               Nd      Nd(W/P).                                                                      (4.2)

W/I is often called labor's real wage, while W/P is called the producer's real

wage.39 If the supply and demand equations are solved for an equilibrium wage

and quantity of labor, and if the production function (3.4) is used to

determine output, the result is a new supply equation of the form:

                 Y Q(P/PX), Q; > 0 .                                                                 (4.3)
Any   disturbance       that changes the terms of trade also changes output.

        With   the   new aggregate supply equation replacing (3.4) in the original

model, we still have a four equation system determining Y, P, r, and X or

XF'5. This system is more difficult to describe, however, since the domestic

price can no longer be easily eliminated from the system. To make the system

more manageable, we replace the bond equation with an uncovered parity

condition, r —          rL +        ,   by assuming that domestic and foreign bonds are
perfect substitutes. This assumption, in fact, is almost always adopted in

the monetary approach and in the stochastic models to be discussed shortly.

In addition, we assume            that    all   expectations          are static, i.e.,      is zero and

so the domestic interest rate is equal                    to   the exogenous foreign rate. We




       39Cliapter 16 by Bruce and Purvis                discusses       labor market behavior in

more detail. For a similar description of the labor market, see Salop (1974),

Purvis    (1979),     Branson and Rotemberg (1980) and                  Sachs (1980).     Later we

discuss models where labor's real wage is kept rigid by Indexation.


                                                        39
briefly discuss the more general case below.

       The parity condition allows us to eliminate the domestic interest rate

from the aggregate demand and aggregate supply equations and from the

equilibrium conditions for the money market. We can write the aggregate

demand and supply equations in differential form, solving for the change in

the domestic price in order to show the adjustment of this price more clearly:

            dP — dX   ÷ dY/Q      ,                                         (4.4)
                    C         C          dG
            dP——-dX—dY+---                                                  (4.5)
                    Sp        'Jp


These two equations can be illustrated in Y—P space as in figure 3. Under

fixed exchange rates, the two schedules alone determine domestic output and

price. The money market equation determines the change in foreign exchange

reserves recursively. The system of equations under fixed exchange rates is

thus qualitatively similar to the Keynesian system outlined above, at least as

long as the foreign price is constant. If the exchange rate changes, however,

both schedules in figure 3 are affected. (For a similar diagramatic analysis

in a stochastic model, see Marston, 1982b).

'.z.   rrects   or a aeva.Luatlon W1Efl       riexioie   wages

       Row mich difference the new aggregate supply equation makes to the

behavior of the model can be seen by examining the effects of a devaluation.

As in the Keynesian model, a devaluation leads to an increase in aggregate

demand, which in figure 3 is represented by an upward shift of the dd

schedule. Whether this movement is proportional to the change in the exchange

rate is crucial In determining the net effect of the devaluation, so we use

equation (4.5) and the definitions of table 1 to express the (vertical) shift

of the dd curve as follows:

            d           (1+Bz)ZA(A_F")
                                          .                                 (4.6)

                                               40
The upward shift of the aggregate demand schedule is less than proportional if

ZA > 0, where ZA is the derivative of expenditure with respect to real

wealth. With money and domestic bonds fixed in nominal value at any point in

time, the devaluation reduces the real value of domestic wealth (in proportion

to A — Fd   M + Hd); the sensitivity of aggregate demand to real wealth then

holds down the increase in aggregate demand. Aggregate supply also adjusts

upward because of the increase in nominal wages induced by the higher domestic

price for the foreign good. In the case of the supply schedule, the upward

shift Is proportional because equal increases in X and P would raise wages

proportionally and would leave output unchanged.

     From figure 3 it is evident that output actually declines and the

domestic price rises less than proportionately in response to the

devaluation. (See point a). With changes in exchange rates affecting real

wealth because some assets are fixed in nominal value, the devaluation has

real effects despite the flexibility of wages. This is a familiar result in

classical models,4° The fall in output and the terms of trade generates a

trade surplus for the devaluing country. As a result, the immediate Impact of

the devaluation on domestic prices and output is different from its long run

impact. That is because the trade surplus leads to a (flow) increase in

wealth,

            A—PB>O,                                                         (4.7)

which moves the short run   asset market   equilibrium continuously toward a long

rim steady state. In that steady state, the trade account reaches equilibrium

with total nominal assets Increasing proportionally to the change in the

exchange rate: dA/A — dX/X.    Wages and prices also increase proportionally in




    405ee Metzler's (1951) treatment of monetary policy in a closed economy.


                                       41
the long run, so output returns to its initial level.

     This process of wealth accumulation is an essential feature of the

monetary approach to the balance of payments.4' In many versions of this

approach, money is the only asset so that real money balances rather than real

wealth drive the accumulation process. As long as the domestic credit

component of the monetary base is kept constant, moreover, foreign exchange

reserves grow along with money balances so that the equation describing wealth

accumulation explains the balance of payments.

     Consider a simple version of this approach taken from Dornbusch's (1973)

well—known study of devaluation


           Md=kPV                                                          (4.8)


                     X                                                     (4.9)


           i_y(kP!_M),whereM.Hm+XFm.                                      (4.10)


The first equation is a quantity theory formulation for the demand for money.

The second equation states the law of one price reflecting the assumption that

domestic and foreign goods are perfect substitutes. The third equation

specifies a wealth accumulation process that relates the rate of hoarding

(income less expenditure) to the difference between money demand and




     41Frenlcel and Johnson (1976) trace the origins of this approach back to

the writings of Mill, Hume and other classical economists. Johnson (1972)

provides one of the earliest formal descriptions of it. For references to the

extensive literature that has emerged since, see Whitman (1975) and ch. 14 by

Frenkel and Mussa.


                                      42
        P

                                                                    , 'S
                     p1"
                     '4
                                                                /
                                                            ,
                    UN    .4..
                                        .4'
                                                    ,   ,
                                 4.4.




                                        a..
                                        / N
                                         4.'

                                                    N
            d                                                                             S
                                               '4       N
                                                N
                                                    N4.'

            '1
                /                                           N
                                                                N
                                                                     N
                                                                          4.'
                                                                                '4
            S                                                       N                '4
                                                                                          'UNp1"
                                                                        .4'
                                                                              N

                                                                                          d'

                S
                                                                                d

                                                                                                   ly


Figure 3. Devaluation or Depreciation in the Classical Model




                                               42a
supply.42 According to this model, a devaluation has oiiy temporary effects

on the trade balance with the rate of asset accumulation being in proportion

to the difference between the stock demand and supply of money. Through the

accumulation of foreign exchange reserves the money supply in time reaches a

new equilibrium with the money supply having risen in proportion to the

exchange rate, dM/M dX/X.

     Results similar to Dornbusch's can be derived using the model with

internationally mobile capital developed in this chapter. If we follow

Dornbusch by assuming that the law of one price holds, then output is

unaffected by the devaluation. (In the aggregate supply function (4.3),

output is fixed by the constant terms of trade.) The price level rises in

response to the devaluation, however, so the demand for money immediately

rises. With bonds as well as money included in the menu of assets, there is

no longer short run disequilibrium between the stock demand and supply of

money as in equation (4.10). Instead, asset holders can instantaneously

adjust their money holdings to the desired level by buying or selling bonds.

If money balances are a positive function of wealth as in equation (3.5), then

money balances rise immediately following the devaluation, but less than

proportionally to the exchange rate (and the price level):

           dM       mA       ddX                                          (4.11)




          the same paper, Dornbusch extended his model to include non—traded

goods and showed that a devaluation could have effects on the allocation of

resources between sectors during the period when money balances are

adjusting. In ch. 14, Frenkel and issa discuss a wider class of models

showing how the monetary adjustment mechanism is affected by relaxing these

assumptions.


                                     43
The trade balance also ries as can be seen by solving the income—expenditure

relationship (3.1):

             dB = dY — dZ =           — Fd) dX > 0
                                                                            (4.12)
                               ZA(A
The improvement in the trade account is directly proportional to the change in

real wealth rather than to the change in real money balances as in Dornbusch's

model.43 The trade account surplus, in turn, generates a flow increase in

wealth as in (4.7). How that increase in wealth is divided between assets

depends upon the sensitivity of money demand to real wealth (as reflected in

mA):
             M/P —                                                          (4.13)
                     mA(A/P)
The wealth accumulation process ends when money balances as well as other

assets have increased in proportion to the devaluation just as in the simpler

Dornbusch model.

       This description of how an economy responds to a devaluation differs

markedly from the earlier elasticity and absorption approaches.44 In the

elasticities approach, a devaluation improves the trade balance by changing



       431f domestic bonds dId not represent net wealth, the wealth effect would

be proportional to money balances only, A — Fd       N, just as in Dornbusch's

model.

       44For a discussion of these approaches, see section 2.3 above. Earlier

studies of devaluation did not necessatily ignore monetary factors. In his

paper on the absorption approach, Alexander (1952) included a real balance

effect, while in his synthesis of the elasticity and absorption approaches

Tsiang (1961) emphasized the importance of monetary policy in determining the

effects of a devaluation. In both studies, however, the authors were more

concerned with the impact effects of a devaluation than with the dynamic

adjustment process which is central to the monetary approach.


                                            44
the relative prices of imports and exports, but in the present model there is

only one traded good. In the absorption approach, a devaluation works at

least in part by increasing output relative to spending, but here output is

fixed at full employment. The law of one price combined with flexible wages

shuts off both of these traditional channels so'that the devaluation must work

through wealth effects alone.

     If there are no real wealth effects in the aggregate demand function

(ZA'O), then this dynamic   accumulation   process is eliminated. The devaluation

then leads immediately to a proportionate rise in the domestic price even when

domestic and foreign goods are imperfect substitutes. (Aggregate demand rises

to point b in figure 3.) The terms of trade are constant, and there is no

change in output or employment. Furthermore, there is no change in the

balance of trade, since it is a function of real expenditure and the terms of

trade, both of which are constant under these conditions.

     Regardless of the presence or absence of wealth effects, we must not lose

sight of the vital role played by wage and price flexibility in obtaining

these results. The contrast between the results obtained in this section

(with or without wealth effects) and the results obtained with the Keynesian

model could not be sharper. The Keynesian model predicts that a devaluation

will raise output and improve the balance of trade, while the classical model

predicts that its main if not exclusive effect will be on domestic prices.

When the trade balance improves because of wealth effects, moreover, the

classical model predicts a decline in output rather than the expansion

associated with Keynesian models.

     In choosing between the two alternative models, the time frame becomes

very important. If we believe that wages are sticky in the short run, then we

should expect output to expand and the trade balance to improve following a



                                           45
devaluation, as the Keynesian model predicts. But once wages adjust, the

classical model becomes relevant, with an improvement in the trade balance

occuring only to the extent that there are wealth effects on expenditure. If

we believe that wages adjust rapidly, whether through recontracting or

indexation, we should expect the classical model to hold in the short run too

so that the immediate effects of a devaluation may be primarily on nominal

rather than real variables. The timing of wage and price adjustments is

evidently crucial, and that timing is likely to vary across countries

depending upon the extent of indexation and other factors.

4.3 Effects of monetary and fiscal policy with flexible wages

     In both Keynesian and classical models, the effects of monetary policy

depend upon the exchange rate regime. In section 3 we showed that in the

Keynesian model monetary policy under fixed exchange rates is powerless to

affect output as long as domestic and foreign bonds are perfect substitutes.

That must also be the case in the classical model, since the offset effect is

independent of wage conditions in this limiting case. Monetary policy can

affect output, however, even in the classical model if there is imperfect

substitutability in the asset markets.

     The effects of monetary policy under flexible rates, by contrast, depend

upon the specification of supply and demand behavior in the model. In

general, the open market purchase of bonds causes the domestic currency to

depreciate. The effects of this depreciation on the domestic price and output

can be illustrated by figure 3, the same figure used to illustrate the effects

of a devaluation. As in the case of a devaluation, a monetary expansion leads

to a rise in the domestic price but a fall in output (to point a), because the

higher price of domestic output and the depreciation reduce real wealth. The

trade account goes into surplus thereby generating a flow increase in wealth



                                         46
just like in the case of a devaluation. The long run equilibrium similarly

involves a return of real wealth to its original level.

        If domestic and foreign goods are perfect substitutes, so that the law of

one price links domestic and foreign prices at purchasing power parity,

however, then output is unaffected even in the short run. The primary effect

of the monetary expansion is to drive up prices in proportion to the

depreciating exchange rate. This is a common result in many versions of the

monetary approach to the exchange rate. Consider one version consisting of

three so—called "building blocks' of the approach: a quantity theory equation

for the demand for money (with real balances a function of the interest rate),

the law of one price, and uncovered interest parity:45

             Md    k(r) pV ,                                                 (4.14)
             P       X ,                                                     (4.15)
             r =     +     ,                                                 (4.16)
where      — 0 if expectations are static. According to this model, an increase

in the money supply has no effect on output, but raises the domestic price and

exchange rate in proportion to the increase in the money supply: dP/P —

dX/X     dN/M.46 Even in this model, however, the monetary expansion causes a




        45Frenkel (1976) applies these three building blocks to explain the

exchange rate during the German hyperinflation. For a more detailed

discussion of the monetary approach to the exchange rate, see ch. 14 by

Frenkel and Mussa.

        46Note that the depreciation of the domestic currency is less than

proportional to the increase in the money supply if expectations are

regressive rather than static.


                                        47
temporary trade imbalance if expenditure (not shown) is a function of real

wealth.

     In order for there to be no real effects of the monetary expansion, we

need to assume that expenditure is unaffected by changes in real wealth. In

that case the economy is driven to point b in figure 3 just as in the case of

a devaluation. Both output and the trade balance are unaffected by the

monetary expansion as prices rise In proportion to the exchange rate.

     Leaving aside the issue of wealth effects, we can ask how much difference

flexible wages make to the effectiveness of monetary policy. The introduction

of flexible wages into the Mundell model undermines his conclusions and those

of similar studies about the relative effectiveness of monetary policy.

Monetary policy is not more effective in raising output under flexible

exchange rates. On the contrary, it loses all of its effectiveness when wages

are flexible, and may even reduce output if expenditure is a function of real

wealth. Its principal effect, in fact, is to raise domestic prices. Monetary

policy under fixed rates, in contrast, leaves the economy at point o, where

price and output are constant, just as in the Keynesian model.

     Increases In government spending have very different effects than

monetary policy If, as is traditionally assumed, the government spending falls

entirely on domestic goods. Whether exchange rates are fixed or flexible, the

rise in government spending causes a rise in the terms of trade between

domestic and foreign goods. To the extent that labor supply is sensitive to

real wages, this rise in the terms of trade increases domestic output. Thus

fiscal policy has real effects even though wages are perfectly flexible.

     Consider first the case of fixed exchange rates, using figure 4. The

Increase in government spending leads to an upward shift in the aggregate

demand schedule to d'd', raising domestic output and price to point a. With



                                      48
 P
                d'
                N-
                'S.
                                                                       S
                      N
                          N
                              N
          d"                      5'

     d                                       N
                                                                   ,
                                                                      1
                                                                     'S
                                                 N             /
                                                     5'
                                                          N'
                                                     ,6        N
                                                                   N

                                       ,             N
     S
                                  ,,

                 ,
                      //      ,                                N
                                                                   N
           /,
         ,_ -
         5,,
                                                                       d



Figure 4. Government Spending in the Classical Model




                                           48a
the exchange rate constant, the necessary rise in the terms of trade is

accomplished solely through a rise in the price of the domestic good.

     Under flexible rates, by contrast, the exchange rate does most of the

adjusting. As in the Keynesian model, an increase in government spending

leads to an appreciation because of the increase in the demand for money. The

appreciation causes both the aggregate demand and supply curves to shift down

(relative to the fixed exchange rate equilibrium at point a).

     Consider the case where there are no wealth effects on aggregate demand

or on the demand for money. The appreciation then shifts the aggregate demand

and supply schedules down proportionately from point a to point b).47 The

appreciation has no net effect on output, so point b must be directly below

point a. Thus, with perfect wage flexibility, perfect capital mobility and

the absence of wealth effects, fiscal policy has identical effects on output

in the two exchange rate systems. Output does change in both systems, but by

the same amount. The price of domestic output, however, increases less under

flexible rates; in fact, the appreciation of the domestic currency may be

large enough to induce a fall in the domestic price (as illustrated by

point b). Because of the appreciation, the general price level unambiguously

falls under flexible rates. As to the absolute variation in prices in the two

regimes, it isn't possible to determine whether the price of domestic output

varies more under fixed or flexible rates without further restrictions on the

parameters. The same is true of the variation in the general price level.




     47The d"d" schedule can even shift down below its original position at dd

depending upon the relative importance of income and price effects on

expenditure, as well as other factors.


                                     49
      This analysis changes somewhat when real wealth effects are present. An

appreciation of the domestic currency raises real wealth because the general

price level falls, so output rises further under flexible rates than under

fixed rates. The analysis changes more substantially, however, if domestic

and foreign goods are perfect substitutes. Government spending raises output

by changing the terms of trade between domestic and foreign goods; if those

terms of trade are fixed by perfect substitutability, then government spending

can   have   no effect on output.

      To summarize the effects of monetary and fiscal policies, both are

modified substantially by the flexibility of wages. In the Mundell—Fleming

model monetary policy is more powerful in raising output under flexible rates

and fiscal policy less powerful. In the classical model, any differences

between output behavior in the two regimes depend upon wealth effects which

are of secondary importance in the Mundell—Fleming model. If there are no

wealth effects in the classical model, then monetary policy is equally

powerless in each regime, while fiscal policy is as effective In a flexible

regime as in a fixed regime.

       Some of the new classical models bridge the gap between the wage

assumptions of the monetary approach and Keynesian models by explicitly

modeling the wage contracting process. In this new literature the distinction

between the short and long runs becomes blurred because of the central role

played by expectations. It is to this literature that we now turn.




                                        50
 5. The role of policy in the new classical macroeconomics

      With many questions about stabilization policy still unresolved because

 of continuing controversies about asset substitutability, wage and price

 flexibility and other issues, economists were confronted in the 1970's with a

 new challenge associated with rational expectations and the new classical

 macroeconomics. A range of new propositions were put forward that redefine

 and severely limit the scope for an effective stabilization policy. Many of

 the basic insights of the earlier literature survive intact when rational

 expectations are introduced, but specific results about stabilization policy

continue to hold only when disturbances in the economy, information flows and

expectations take specific forms which were never adequately spelled out

before.

     The new classical macroeconomics has been developed mostly in the context

of a closed economy in studies such as those of Lucas (1972, 1973), Sargent

and Wallace (1975), and Barro (1976). The key propositions about

stabilization policy can be summarized as follows: (1) Anticipated changes in

the money supply have no real effects.     Unanticipated changes do affect

output, but random variations of the money supply merely raise the
                                                                     variability
of output. (2) Monetary policy rules are ineffective in stabilizing output.

McCallum and Whltaker (1979) have extended these propositions to include

changes in government spending. For surveys of this literature, which is too

broad to be fully treated here, the reader is referred to Shiller (1978),

Buiter (1980), and MeCallum (1980).

     This section will review some of the basic propositions of the new

classical macroeconomics within the context of an open economy model. The

same model will be used in the following section to investigate the choice

between exchange rate regimes and insulation. Open economy versions of the



                                      51
new classical macroeconomics have been derived from their closed economy

counterparts, but there are some important differences in the open economy

versions which we will describe later.48

        Before introducing a specific model, it is useful to point out several

common characteristics found in many of the open economy models:

(1) Expectations are rational in the specific sense that the public knows the

underlying economic model and forms expectations on the basis of that model.49

The open economy studies concerned with stabilization policy, however, differ

from their closed economy counterparts in their assumptions about what

information is available when expectations are formed.

(2) In the stabilization literature of the 196Os and earlier, economic policy

was commonly modeled in terms of discrete policy initiatives formulated on an

ad hoc basis. In the new classical literature, policy usually takes the form

of rules tying current policy instruments to past or current economic

disturbances. These rules form part of the model, and the private sector is

usually assumed to know them or at least be able to make inferences about

them.




        48Among studies dealing directly with open economy stabilization policy

under rational expectations are Eaton and Turnovsky (1982), Henderson (1982),

Marion (1982), and Turnovsky (1980b, 1981). Other studies such as Flood

(1979) and Flood and Marion (1981) use similar models to examine the choice

between exchange rate regimes. Further references are given below.

        49Black (1973) was one of the first to employ rational expectations in an

open economy context. Later influential studies include Mussa (1976),

Dorribusch (1976), Kouri (1976), the latter two employing non—stochastic models

with perfect foresight.


                                        52
(3) Supply is responsive to unanticipated changes in prices, which drive the

economy away from its "natural rate of unemployment' or its full information

classical equilibrium. In the closed economy literature, the supply function

is often explained in terms of a confusion between relative and absolute

prices, as in the "island model" of Lucas (1973). As Flood (1979) has pointed

out, however, this rationale is not appropriate for an open economy where

contemporaneous international trading and intranational trading are permitted.

Instead most studies base the supply function on a contract lag of the type

specified by Gray (1976) and Fischer (1977c) for a closed economy.50 In the

open economy models, supply can also respond to anticipated changes in prices,

as we will see below.

(4) Apart from the contract lag, almost all versions of the model exhibit

classical neutrality. There are no wealth effects in the aggregate demand

function, for example, and the supply function is homogeneous of degree zero

in all prices. An anticipated monetary disturbance, therefore, has no real

effects, and an unanticipated disturbance has real effects only during the




     50Recently Lucas (1981) has suggested that the two rationales for the

supply function may turn out to be similar:

      "(n)one of these (contracting) models offers an explanation as to
      why people should choose to bind themselves to contracts which
      seem to be in no one's self—interest, and my conjecture Is that
      when reasons for this are found they will reduce to the kind of
      Informational difficulties already stressed in my 1972 article,
      for example."

This passage is quoted in Canzoneri, Henderson and Rogoff (1981). Flood and

Hodrick (1982) provide an alternative to the wage contract model which

explains inventory as well as production behavior in an open economy.


                                      53
contract period.51

(5) Most of these models assume perfect substitutability between domestic and

foreign securities. Notable exceptions are Eaton and Turnovsky (1982) and

Henderson (1982). Many models also assume perfect substitutability between

domestic and foreign goods, although this assumption is not necessary for most

of the results.

5.1. A model of an open economy under rational expectations

     In order to illustrate some of these characteristics and to discuss some

of the more important results, we now introduce a model of a small open

economy under flexible rates. The model, which is a simplified, stochastic

version of the model used above, consists of three equations: aggregate

demand and supply equations for the domestic good and an equation describing

money market equilibrium.52 All variables (except interest rates) are

expressed in logarithms using small letters as follows: j =     log   J, where J is




     511f expenditure were a function of wealth, monetary policy would be

nonneutral in the short run   if   it changed the real value of wealth, as in the

money—bond model introduced earlier. See Canzoneri (1980) for a discussion of

wealth effects in stochastic models. Another source of nonneutrality is the

Tobin effect of anticipated inflation which changes the real return on money

balances. Fischer (1979) discusses thfs and other sources of nonneutrality.

All statements about the effects of anticipated money below must be qualified

if such nonneutralities are present.

     52The main simplification is that wealth effects have been suppressed (as

noted above). The new aggregate supply function with its contract specifica-

tion, of course, is more complicated than the supply function used above. The

model is written in logarithmic form as is most of the stochastic literature.


                                          54
the corresponding level variable:


               =         —                                                    +
                   c(p       _iEpt)       + (11) _1E(Pt —                         c0 ,             (5.1)

               = (1—c')      1 = _c(w          —         + c mCi—c') ,                             (5.2)

              =
                   n(w
                         —
                             i)   + n0 ,                                                           (5.3)

              —    _iE(p      + nc'
                                               +
                                                   in (1—c') —
                                                                       n0c'
                         1   + nc'                        1 +    nc'          '                    C   .




                                                                                                   (5.5)

    where c = (l—c')/c'


           c0 =    (1—c')[n    ln(1—c') + n0]/(1 + nc')


           c1 = (1—c') n (1—a)/(1 + nc')


              =
                   g(p +      x —          — g[r         —
                                                             (Eit+i       —
                                                                              it)]   + gy + g0 ,   (5.6)

              —                       —
                         (p   +                    — k1r     '                                     (5.7)

                   r +            —
                                      x    .
                                                                                                   (5.8)

     Equation (5.1) describes supply behavior, which is based on a contract

lag of one period. As explained in the last section, the supply equation

takes a more complicated form than in a closed economy because there are two

prices involved in supply decisions, the price of domestic output                              and the

general price level (it), the latter a weighted average of domestic and

foreign prices,


           i = a Pt + (1—a) (p + x) ,                                                              (5.9)

where p is the price of the foreign good while Xt is the domestic currency



                                                    55
price of foreign currency. Output is responsive to the nominal wage relative

to the price of domestic output, but the nominal wage is fixed in period t—1

in the light of expectations prevailing at that time.53

       The supply equation (5.1) is derived from a Cobb—Douglas production

function (5.2), from a labor demand equation based on the production function

which is sensitive to the producer's real wage, w —         and from a labor

supply equation (5.3) which is sensitive to labor's real wage, w —             The

contract wage, w, is based on expectations of labor demand and supply formed

at t—1, as in equation (5.4). If there is no wage indexation, the actual wage

is equal to this contract wage, as in (5.5). With wages based on last

period's expectations, output is a function of unexpected changes in the

domestic price. In an open economy, however, output is also responsive to

anticipated changes in the terms of trade, t_1E(pt —        =

(1 —   a)1E(p    —
                     p — x),   for the same reason that output is a function of

the terms of trade in the classical economy without contract lags described in

the previous section.

       This contracting approach to the aggregate supply function has been

criticized by Barro (1977) who offers an alternative description of labor

market behavior which gives Pareto optimal outcomes. Barro develops a model

where wages are set in contracts but employment is made contingent upon shocks

perceived after wages are set. Such contracts dominate the simple ones

considered here, but bear little resemblance to actual contracts, as Fischer

(1977a) observed in his comment on Barro's paper. The indexation of wages to

prices is a common feature of labor contracts in some countries, but such




       53t_1EJt denotes the expectation of t formed on the basis of information

available at time t—1.


                                         56
 schemes correct only imperfectly for the contract lags. We discuss indexation

 in detail in the next section.

     Equation (5.6) describes aggregate demand for the domestic good as a

function of the relative prices of foreign and domestic goods, the real

interest rate, and foreign output (y). A rise in the foreign price relative

to the domestic price (a fall in the terms of trade) Increases aggregate

demand, as does a rise in foreign output, while a rise in the real interest

rate reduces aggregate demand. In the case of perfect substitution between

domestic and foreign goods, g becomes Infinite in size, and this aggregate

demand equation reduces to the familiar purchasing power parity relationship.

     There are three financial assets in the model as before, but domestic and

foreign bonds are perfect substitutes in equation (5.8). The demand for money

(5.7) is expressed as a function of real income and the interest rate, but not

real wealth; to further simplify the model, moreover, the Income elasticity is

set equal to one.54

     In equations (5.6) and (5.8) expectations of changes in the general price

level and the exchange rate are based on information available in period t,

including knowledge of the current exchange rate and price levels at home and

abroad. This expectations assumption is different from that in most of the

closed economy literature, where expectations are based on knowledge of last

period's price level. This difference is particularly Important in

determining the effectiveness of policy rules, so we will discuss it in detail

below.




     541f this elasticity is not equal to one, a change in the general price

level, and therefore the exchange rate, has an effect on the net demand for

money proportional to one minus this elasticity.


                                      57
     We begin by examining simple changes in the money supply which are

alternatively unanticipated and anticipated by the general public. This will

allow us to illustrate the crucial role played by expectations in determining

the effectiveness of policy. The analysis draws most directly on a study by

Turnovsky (1981), although other studies cited above are also relevant.

Thereafter, we consider the role of policy rules which tie current policy to

private sector disturbances.

5.2. Changes in the money supply

     To examine several different types of changes in the money supply, we

describe the money supply below as the sum of deterministic and stochastic

terms:



              m=m0+v, vt=avi+u.
The stochastic term has an autoregressive component, av1, in addition to the

innovation in period t, u. If the innovation is temporary,          =   0; if it is
permanent, cz        1. Substituting this expression for the money supply into

equation (5.7), we can solve the three equation system for current values of

Xt, p, t as functions of the money supply process.55


                    xv1 A1(1+k1)u
                     —
              xxm0+ A 2
                        + AA20
                                                                               (5.10)



              Pt —
                     —
                         m0
                              +   v1
                                   A
                                     + (g +ga)(1+k1) um ,
                                             A A                               (5.11)
                                    2            20


     55The system can be solved by recursive substitution or by the method of

undetermined coefficients (see Lucas, 1972). To obtain a stable solution, we

must assume the absence of speculative bubbles. Shiller (1978) discusses this

assumption.


                                            58
                   —       c(g + ga)(l+k1) m
               —       =
                                A A        u .                                        (5.12)
                                  20
where A1 = c   + g +       ga   > 0, A2 =   1   + k1(1—c&) > 0, and

A0 = ck1 + (g + ga)(1 +             + c) > 0, while x, j, and         are constants which

are functions of the non—stocha8tic terms in equations (5.1 —             5.8).
These expressions are used to interpret three different types of changes in

the money supply as follows:

(1) Unanticipated, temporary increase in the money supply (u > 0, a =                0).
     The immediate response to this type of change in the money supply is very

similar to that discussed in the non—stochastic models with fixed nominal

wages. The temporary expansion of the money supply induces a depreciation of

the domestic currency. The depreciation is large enough to cause a fall in

the terms of trade even though the price of domestic output rises.                Therefore,

the demand for the domestic good increases. With wages fixed during the

contract period, the rise in the domestic price lowers the producer's real

wage, so aggregate supply and output also rise. Thus during the contract

period at least, the change in the money supply has an expansionary effect on

the economy. A temporary disturbance, however, has no effect on the economy

beyond the current period; in the absence of further disturbances, the

exchange rate, the domestic price and output return to their stationary

values. For this reason, the rational expectation at t of any future value of

a variable is the stationary value of that variable. The solution of the

model is simple, a feature that is especially attractive if several countries

are to be analyzed at once. If there were no contract lag, or if information

were complete at the time of the contract, then the monetary disturbance would

have no effect on output even in the current period.




                                                59
(2) Unanticipated, permanent increase in the money supply (u > 0, c& =    1).
     If the innovation is expected to be permanent, its effects in the current

period differ markedly from its subsequent effects. In the current period,

the economy responds much as it would to a temporary innovation. The domestic

currency depreciates, while both domestic output and price rise.56 (It can be

shown that output rises somewhat more in the current period if the change in

the money supply is permanent rather than temporary.) Since the information

lag associated with the contracting process persists for only one period, the

system reaches equilibrium in period t+1. The effects of the innovation in

that period are identical to those of any (other) anticipated change in the

money supply. They are discussed immediately below.

(3) Anticipated increase in the money supply

     Fully anticipated changes in the money supply leave output unchanged

while increasing the domestic price and the exchange rate proportionately.

Without further complicating the model introduced above, we can illustrate the

effects of an anticipated increase in the money supply by focusing on v_1 in

equations (5.10—5.12); it represents the continuing effect of an earlier money

supply innovation (which we assume to be permanent by setting n =   1).   Both Xt

and Pt rise in proportion to vt_i, demonstrating the homogeneity of the system

in the absence of contract lags. Because the change in the money supply was




     56Turnovsky (1981) has an interesting discussion of exchange rate

overshooting in response to this disturbance. Overshooting is by no means

necessary in this model, since output is endogenous. Whether overshooting

occurs depends upon a condition involving price elasticities very similar to

that presented by Dornbusch (1976), even though the nominal rigidities

responsible for the overshooting are quite different in the two models.


                                      60
 anticipated at t—1, it affects current wages, which are based on last period's

 expectations, so the only source of nominal rigidity in this system is

 removed. As a result, there are no effects on output in period t or beyond.57

 This result can also be interpreted in terms of
                                                       the supply function (5.1)
 alone. Because the change in the money supply is anticipated, there is no

 unanticipated change in the domestic price to affect output, and the first

 term in (5.1) is zero. In addition, the second term in (5.1), which can be

 rewritten C1 t_1E(Pt —   x   —
                                  p),   is unaffected by the disturbance, because any

 anticipated monetary expansion leaves the anticipated terms of trade

 unaffected. Thus we obtain the same result as in a closed economy despite a

more complicated supply function. If there were real disturbances, however,

supply would be affected through anticipated changes in the terms of trade.58

     The preceding analysis has illustrated the significant differences

between the effects of anticipated and unanticipated changes in the money

supply. When changes in the money supply are anticipated, we are essentially

back in the classical world of section 4 where changes in the money supply

have no real effects. (Recall that the particular classical world described

in this model is one where there are no real wealth effects on aggregate

demand.) Unanticipated changes, however, do have real effects, although only




     57The announcement of an increase in the money supply does have an effect

on output in the period of the announcement, although not in future periods.

See Turnovsky (1981).

     58Government spending, therefore, can have real effects even if it is

anticipated since (as shown in section 4) it changes the anticipated terms of

trade between domestic and foreign goods. See Marion (1982) and Turnovsky

(1980b). The effectiveness of government spending rules is discussed below.


                                           61
during the contract period. But notice that such changes have no

stabilization role thus far, since they are unrelated to those exogenous

disturbances that stabilization policy is designed to control. In fact, as

Sargent and Wallace (1975) have pointed out, these unanticipated changes in

the money supply introduce unwanted noise into the system, raising the

variance of output.

5.3. Policy rules

     Stabilization policy is normally aimed at countering the effects of

disturbances originating elsewhere in the economy or abroad. The question

addressed in this section is whether known rules by which policy reacts to

these disturbances can in fact counter them.

     In the illustrative model introduced above, which is typical of most such

studies of the open economy, policy rules do have an impact. To show how, we

first modify the three equation model introduced above by adding disturbances

to the aggregate demand and money demand expressions as follows:


    y =    g(p ÷ x    —           — g[r     —
                                                (Ei÷1
                                                         —   +
                                                                 yY + g0 + u   (5.13)


       —
           1   Pt +
                          —
                              i   —
                                      k1r   +
                                                u    .                         (5.14)

These disturbances represent random elements in private behavior, with a rise

in u (up) reflecting a rise in demand for the domestic good (money).59

     What policy rule would be appropriate in this economy? Policy could

respond currently to current disturbances, since the disturbances are part of



     59The disturbances have a mean of zero, are serially uncorrelated and

uncorrelated with each other. We also could have considered a supply

disturbance, but these two disturbances are sufficient to illustrate the

effects of a policy rule.


                                                    62
the information set used in determining expectations. In that case, the

disturbances could be perfectly offset. But suppose that only lagged

responses are feasible. Then it is still possible, as Turnovsky (1980a) has

shown in the context of a closed economy, for a policy rule to modify the

effects of curret disturbances.6°

     Suppose that the rule is of the form:


        =           n             d
                    1t-1              +                                                   (5.15)
            i'.].          + '2 Uti       m0

that is, the current money supply responds to lagged disturbances. In that

case, output can be written as a function of the disturbances:

                    —c(g + g ra)             k n              ck       (g + g a)n
        —                                                 +        +
                           A0
                                      [i —
                                             1+k1'
                                                     t                    1+k1
                                                                                 2] u .   (5.16)

Notice that the parameters of the policy rule, n1 and n2, appear in the

coefficients of both disturbances.

     Consider the response to money demand disturbances as reflected in
                                                                                          n1.
If the authorities choose n1 — (1 + k1)/k1, then output is stabilized

completely. The reason has to do with private expectations of future policy

actions. The public is assumed to know the policy rule and to know all

current information including the disturbances. So the public correctly

anticipates the future movement of the money supply induced by today's

disturbance: m+1 —                + n1u. It knows that the domestic currency will
                             m0

depreciate tomorrow, and the expectation of that depreciation raises the

current interest rate, thus restoring equilibrium to the money market without

any change in output.

     In a similar way, we can compute the value of n2 which will keep output




     60For a similar point, see Weiss (1980).


                                                     63
constant in the presence of the aggregate demand disturbance, u. Keeping

output constant, however, might be inappropriate. Barro (1976) has argued

that policy rules should be aimed at stabilizing output relative to its value

in a full information classical economy (i.e., one without contract lags)

rather than stabilizing it absolutely.6' And an aggregate demand disturbance

does change output in a full information economy. If the supply function

(5.1) for an economy with contract lags is replaced with a classical supply

function of the form:
                    *           *
                                x — Ptf*
       *
            =           —                      + c0 ,
                 c1(p                      )                                                    (5.17)
                                                                   *
then output in the full information economy                            can be expressed as a

function of the disturbance:62

        *                           c1           d
             —      =
                        c       ÷g + g a u .                                                    (5.18)
                            1     P   r

According to Barro, an appropriate rule for monetary policy would use the

value of n2 which minimizes                      —   y).     (This calculation is left to the

reader.) Stabilizing output completely is appropriate only when the full

information Output is COn8tant, which would be the case If c1 were zero (i.e.,

labor supply were inelastic) or g were infinite (the terms of trade were

constant).

     Consider again why the monetary policy rule is effective in this open



     611f the only Inefficiencies in the model are those associated with labor

being off its (ex ante) supply curve because of the contract lag, then our

norm for assessing policy should be the output which would occur if labor were

on Its supply curve as In a full information economy.

     62Note that output is not responsive to the monetary disturbance in this

full information economy, for the reasons outlined in section 4.


                                                        64
 economy model. What would happen if we adopted the lagged dating of

 expectations commonly found in the closed economy (as opposed to the open

 economy) literature? The expected change in the exchange rate, for example,

 would be written t_iEx÷i —           63 The answer is that the policy rule
                              _iEx
 would become ineffective in modifying the impact of the disturbances. If the

 private sector cannot revise its expectations in response to current

 information, there is no lever by which such a policy rule can modify the

output effect of a current disturbance. This is Sargent and Wallace's (1975)

basic result showing the ineffectiveness of monetary policy. With lagged

dating of expectations, a policy rule can be effective only if the government

itself has an Information advantage, and thus can respond to current

disturbances even while the private, sector cannot.64

     The reason why policy is effective in one case and not in the other has

to do with the relative amounts of information available to different agents

in the economy. In the typical open economy model, wage earners' expectations

are formed at t'-l based on information available then, while the
                                                                    private
sector forms all other expectations based on information at period t.     (The



     63Both assumptions about dating are subject to objections. Agents surely

know the current interest rate and the current exchange rate, so expectations

should be based at least partially on current information.   But agents are

unlikely to know other variables currently, such as the money supply and the

price index for domestically produced goods. We discuss the use of partial

information below.

     64Sargent and Wallace (1975) and Barro (1976) both consider this case.

Barro suggests that instead of pursuing stabilization policy in this case the

government should make available any additional information it has.


                                      65
government may or may not act on the basis of information at t.) If there

were no contract lags, wage earners could set their wages based on current

information, and a feedback rule would obviously be ineffective.65 (We would

be back in the classical world of section 4.) In the typical closed economy

model, by contrast, all expectations are formed at t—1, so there is no lever

for policy, whether acting through expectations or not. Asymmetries in

information provide the leverage for policy rules.66 And those asymmetries do

not have to include superior knowledge on the part of the government as long

as some private agents who have superior information know the government's

policy rule.

     Two other strands in the literature illustrate these points further.

Contracts in the labor market which extend for more than one period provide a

basis for effective policy rules. Fischer (1977b) shows that with two period




     65Contract lags, however, are not the only source of such information

asymmetries. In the model specified by Bilson (1978b), there is a difference

between the information sets of asset—market and labor—market participants not

because of contract lags but because asset—market participants have a greater

incentive to acquire (costly) information.

     66Turnovsky (1980b) studies government spending rules in an open economy

with lagged dating (so that there are no asymmetries in information). A

government spending rule based on past disturbances can affect output by

changing the terms of trade as in a classical economy, an effect which is

absent from a closed economy. But the rule cannot change output relative to

its full information value (which changes by the same amount); according to

Barro's criterion, then, government spending is ineffective even in an open

economy. See Turnovsky (1980b).


                                      66
 contracts, for example, a policy rule tying the money supply to disturbances

 in period t—1 can affect output in period t. In this case the authorities

 exploit an information asymmetry by setting the money supply in response to

 disturbances which, because of contract lags, are not simultaneously reflected

 in wages (or at least in some of the wages, since there are staggered

 contracts).67 As in the earlier case, the information asymmetry is due to a

 contract lag, but neither the government nor the private sector need have

information beyond that available in period t—1.

      Canzoneri, Henderson, and Rogoff (1981) have a one period contract lag,

but adopt assumptions about information different from either the open or

closed economy models. (Their model is of a closed economy, but the same

point can be made in an open economy model.) They assume that some agents

know the current interest rate in addition to lagged values of the price level

and output.68 Knowledge of the current interest rate allows agents to predict

the current price level more accurately than would be possible with lagged

information only. The study shows very clearly that the scope for policy

rules depends on the existence of an asymmetry in information between wage—

earners, who set their wages in contracts based on information available in




     67Variations on this same theme are found in Phelps and Taylor (1977) and

Taylor (1980).

     68This is the same information assumption adopted by Poole (1970) in his

well—known study of interest rate and money supply rules. The Canzoneri,

Henderson and Rogoff study shows that many of Poole's results continue to hold

when expectations are rational. Henderson (1982) extends Poole's analysis to

an open economy where the government knows the current value of the interest

rate and exchange rate.


                                      67
period t—1, and other agents, who know the current interest rate. These other

agents might consist of the government alone, the private sector alone (in its

non—wage decisions) or both.

     It is quite plausible to assume that most agents in the economy make use

of current information on financial variables, probably more plausible than to

assume that they use all current information or only lagged information. What

is more controversial in this and other studies are the assumptions about

labor market behavior—that wage earners set their wages based on expectations

at t—1 (or at t—J in Fischer's model of multi—period contracts) with firms

free to determine output on the basis of those wages. Until more research is

done about labor contracts, these assumptions are likely to remain

controversial. But so also are the assumptions underlying other versions of

the supply function in models where policy is ineffective.

     It is not surprising that assumptions about information are central to

the discussion of policy ineffectiveness. In all versions of the new

classical economics, supply functions are based on some form of imperfect

information about prices. But with the effectiveness of policy rules

depending so crucially on specific assumptions about information flows, it is

difficult to draw any firm conclusions about stabilization policy until we are

confident about the validity of those specific assumptions.

     Apart from details about information flows, we need to know more about

the ways that agents use information to form expectations. There is a large

middle ground between the omniscience built into many versions of rational

expectations, where agents have perfect knowledge of the economy, and the

ignorance reflected in earlier expectations hypotheses. That middle ground

needs to be more fully explored. It would be particularly useful to know how

agents revise their expectations during the transition period following the



                                      68
adoption of a new policy. Indeed, McCallum (1980, p. 7.24) has described the

new classical propositions as being relevant only to "stochastic steady

states."

     Further research clearly remains to be done in defining the scope for an

effective stabilizaton policy——research on labor contracting and the behavior

of firms, the gathering and efficient use of information, and the formation of

expectations. Whatever the limitations of the current literature, however, it

has had a profound effect on economists' views of macroeconomic policy. It

has shown how crucial it is to distinguish between anticipated and

unanticipated policies. The effectiveness of monetary policy, for example, is

very much dependent upon whether or not the particular initiative is foreseen

by the private sector. No description of a policy is complete without precise

statements about what the private sector knows and when it knows it.

6. Exchange—rate regimes

     In this section we shift focus to another topic of central interest to

stabilization policy. Instead of asking whether monetary or fiscal policy can

help to stabilize output, we ask if fixed or flexible exchange rates can help

to achieve this objective. We have already addressed this question briefly in

discussing non—stochastic models but have reserved most of the discussion for

this section where expectations can be treated more formally. In most of the

models discussed in this section expectations are rational and supply is

determined by a stochastic supply function of the same general form as (5.1).

    As in the discussion of policy rules, the economy Is assumed to be

buffetted by real and financial disturbances, but now we include some

disturbances that originate abroad. Flexible exchange rates are thought by

some to insulate the economy from foreign disturbances, particularly if the

disturbances are monetary in nature. We show that insulation is achieved only



                                     69
in special cases, although exchange rate flexibility does generally dampen the

effects of foreign monetary disturbances.

     One prominent feature of modern economies, especially those in Europe, Is

the indexation of wages to prices. Indexation helps to adjust wages to

unforeseen shocks, but the adjustment takes a rigid form that can keep real

wages constant even in the case of shocks that normally require adjustments In

real wages. We show how Indexation prevents the exchange rate from altering

output and how It thus affects the relative advantages of fixed and flexible

rates.

     The section concludes with a brief discussion of intervention rules for

managed floating and of exchange rate arrangements in a multi—country setting.

6.].. Domestic disturbances

    Mundell's propositions about the relative effectiveness of stabilization

policies under fixed and flexible rates can be readily transformed into

statements about the effects of domestic monetary and aggregate demand

disturbances. In the Mundell—Fleming model, fixed rates are preferable to

flexible rates if domestic monetary disturbances are important, since such

disturbances have no effect on output under fixed rates, but merely result In

a change in foreign exchange reserves. This ranking of regimes Is reversed

when domestic aggregate demand disturbances are Important. The present

section shows that in rational expectations models of the type discussed

above, with wages temporarily fixed due to contract lags, both propositions

continue to hold as long as the disturbances are unanticipated. If wage

indexation is introduced, however, then the exchange rate ceases to have any

effect on real variables. For that reason, there is no difference In the

response of output to these disturbances under fixed and flexible rates.

    To illustrate each of these points, we employ the stochastic model of the



                                      70
last section but with two changes to the supply function. First, we now allow

wages to be indexed to the general price level:


      w =        + b(i —         .                                      (6.1)
             w
The actual wage, wt, may differ from the contract wage, w, if the indexation

parameter, b, is different from zero; this indexation parameter is assumed to

vary between zero (no indexation) and one (full indexation).69 Second, to

simplify the analysis we assume that the (ex ante) labor supply function is

inelastic, so that the supply of output is insensitive to anticipated changes

in the terms of trade (C1 = 0 in equation 5.1).70 We make this assumption so

that full information output will be unaffected by the disturbances considered

below; we are then left with a simple criterion for judging exchange rate

regimes involving the variance of output alone. The aggregate supply equation

takes the following form:


         =                             —        + c0 .                   (6.2)
             c(Pt   _iEpt) —   cb(it
In the absence of indexation, only errors ifl predct1ng domestic prices affect

aggregate supply, while with indexation errors in predicting the general price




     69For studies of behavior with wage indexation, see Gray (1976), Fischer

(1977c), and Modigliani and Padoa—Schioppa (1978). This analysis of domestic

disturbances follows Marston (1982b), although Sachs (1980) and Flood and

Marion (1982) present similar results in other models. Some features of the

study by Flood and Marion are discussed below.

     70The ex ante labor supply function is inelastic (n   0), but once the

labor contract is signed the amount of labor supplied is determined by the

demand for labor.


                                           71
level also matter. With full wage indexatlon, an unanticipated change in the

general price level can lead to a proportional adjustment of the domestic

price with no change in output.

       The equations of the model, now consisting of (5.13), (5.14), and (6.2),

determine three variables: domestic output, the price of that output, and

either the exchange rate or the money supply, depending on the exchange rate

regime. If we assume that all foreign variables are constant, then we can

express the three variables as functions of the domestic disturbances only.

To facilitate comparison between the two exchange rate regimes, the aggregate

demand and supply equations are first solved for                      and Pt as functions of Xt

and of the demand disturbance, u. The resulting expressions, equations (6.3)

and (6.4) below, describe aggregate demand and supply behavior under both

exchange rate regimes.71

                —       c(1—ab)      d (g +     ga) c(1—b)            —
            —
                             D      U; +         D             (x — x)    ,                   (6.3)
                             1                    1



            —
                        u (g +p g a r+ cb(1—a))
                          +
                                                     —
       Pt
                    —
                                                (x — x)           ,                           (6.4)
                                           D1


       xt —
                —
                x       —   (i +    c(1—ab)) d D1
                                    D       u — -— u       ,                                  (6.5)

            where D1 —
                                 g+     ga + c(1—ab) > 0,


                         D         (1 + k1)D1 + c(1—6)(g + ga — 1) > 0



                expectations in the model are assumed to be formed rationally, and

the disturbances are unanticipated and serially uncorrelated. As was shown

in   the last section, the rational expectation at t of                       or xt+l 1.

therefore the stationary value of that variable (here denoted by                      and ,

respectively).

                                                      72
 Under fixed rates, Xt is kept equal to x, with the money supply being

 determined recursively by (5.14). Under flexible rates, xt can be expressed

 as in equation (6.5) as a function of both domestic disturbances, u and u,

 by solving all three equations (5.13), (5.14) and (6.2) for the reduced form.

      We begin by examining the effects of the disturbances in the case where

 there is no wage indexation in the domestic economy, then we consider the

 effects of indexation. When there is no wage indexation, the effects of both

disturbances correspond closely to those reported by Mundell (1963). A

monetary disturbance, representing an increase in the money supply or decrease

in money demand (u < 0), has no effect on output under fixed exchange rates;

it results simply in an offsetting capital flow. With a flexible rate, in

contrast, a monetary expansion leads to a depreciation of the domestic

currency and to an increase in output as well as in the domestic price.72

Similarly, as in Mundell's study an aggregate demand disturbance leads to a

greater change in output under fixed rates. An increase in aggregate demand

raises both domestic output and the domestic price.. Under flexible rates, the

increase in the transactions demand for money leads to an apprecIatIon of the

domestic currency which dampens the overall increase in aggregate demand.73



     72The monetary disturbance affects output and the domestic price only

through the exchange rate, as equationà (6.3) and (6.4) indicate.

     73Under flexible exchange rates, the direct (positive) impact of u on

in equation (6.3) is dampened by the fall in x (which reduces        In contrast

to Mundell's study, however, output nonetheless increases even under flexible

rates, because the appreciation leads to a rise in the domestic interest rate,

thus allowing output to increase despite a constant money supply. (In the

notation of section 3, the coefficient Lx is not equal to zero since the

exchange rate affects the demand for money through expectations.)
Thus there is less output variation as well as less price variation under

flexible rates. The similarity with Mundell's results should not be

surprising since the labor contract fixes wages even if only temporarily.

     En   economies   where wage indexation is important, however, these familiar

results can break down. To understand why, notice that the effect of the

exchange rate on domestic output is dependent on the degree of indexation in

the domestic economy. As equation (6.3) indicates, the effect is proportional

to c(1—b), so that full indexation (b       1) prevents the exchange rate from

affecting domestic output at all. It allows the domestic wage and price to

adjust currently to changes in the exchange rate. Therefore, the difference

in output variation between the two regimes must be proportional to c(1—b).

And with full indexation, each disturbance must have an identical effect on

output in the two regimes.

     In the case of a monetary disturbance under flexible rates, full

indexation restores the classical result that changes in the money supply

affect prices but not output; thus there is no output variation in either

regime. In the case of an aggregate demand disturbance under flexible rates,

the classical (full information) equilibrium is not generally restored since

indexation cannot substitute for full wage flexibility.74 But full indexation

still results in output varying to the same extent under flexible rates and

fixed rates. With such indexation, therefore, the choice between regimes must




     74W1th   c = 0,    the aggregate demand disturbance has no effect on full

information output, but raises current output as indicated by (6.3). Even in

the general case where c1       0, there is no particular reason for the two

measures of output to coincide.


                                          74
 be made not on the basis of output behavior but on other grounds such as price

 behavior.

      For a non—indexed or partially indexed economy, the original Mundell

 results can be generalized in several respects, as a recent study by Henderson

 (1982) shows. Other types of disturbances can be considered, namely aggregate

 supply disturbances and financial disturbances involving shifts between

domestic and foreign securities (at least if these securities are imperfect

substitutes), Secondly, we can compare a "rates constant" policy, where the

interest rate and exchange rate are held fixed, with an "aggregates constant"

policy, where the domestic money and bond supplies are held fixed. The

results cited above generalize as follows: When disturbances originate in the

goods market, whether in the aggregate demand or supply equations, then an

aggregates constant policy is preferable, because it permits adjustments in

the interest rate and exchange rate that tend to dampen the output effects of

the disturbances. When disturbances originate in the financial markets, a

rates constant policy is preferable, because this policy confines the

disturbances to the financial markets. The Henderson study will be discussed

at greater length below in connection with optimal foreign exchange

intervention.

     One study which departs significantly from the Mundeliframework is that

of FIscher (1976); there is no capital mobility and output is independent of

prices (and hence the exchange rate regime), being affected only by supply

disturbances. To choose between regimes, Fischer adopts a criterion based on

real consumption, where consumption is defined as          —         nominal
                                                               Bt,
output less the trade balance (in levels). The ranking of regimes established

above is reversed, with flexible rates being preferred when there are monetary




                                      75
disturbances and fixed rates when there are goods market disturbances.75

Monetary disturbances affect real consumption under fixed rates, but not under

flexible rates sitice the exchange rate adjusts to ensure that Bt =   0.   Supply

disturbances affect real consumption in both regimes (since Y changes) but by

less under fixed rates, because the balance of payments plays a shock absorber

role in that regime. As Fischer shows, however, these results may be

overturned if output responds to price innovations, even if capital remains

immobile.

6.2. Foreign disturbances and insulation

     We turn now to foreign disturbances. Flexible rates are widely thought

to insulate an economy from foreign disturbances, probably because of the

insulation achieved in models without capital mobility. The analysis below

shows that insulation applies only in special cases, and that in general

flexible rates do not even insulate the economy from foreign monetary

disturbances. This is the first of two central points that will emerge from

the analysis. The second concerns the tendency in the literature to define

foreign disturbances in terms of individual foreign variables such as foreign

prices or interest rates. As Flood (1979) has emphasized, this can be highly

misleading. Foreign disturbances almost always affect the domestic economy

through a variety of channels. A foreign monetary disturbance, in particular,

may raise the foreign price, lower the foreign interest rate and raise foreign

output, with the combined effects of all these changes being very different

from their individual effects. To analyze foreign disturbances, therefore, it

is necessary to trace these disturbances through the foreign economy.




     75Frenkel and Aizenman (1981) use a similar model to analyze managed

floating.


                                      76
     These points can be illustrated with a simple model of a foreign economy

 subject to monetary disturbances. The model consists of three equations

paralleling those of the domestic model.76


                         —    b)     (p —      _1EP) + c ,                                           (6.6)
       f =
              —g
                    f(f          —
                                     (Ep+i
                                          f        —   f +fg0                                        (6.7)

       f    f   ff   af
      In=p+y_k1r+k0+u   .                                                                            (6.8)

The main difference is that only one good is involved, so there are no

relative prices entering the foreign model. Aggregate supply, therefore, is a

function of the price of the foreign good alone; output responds to unexpected

changes in that price as long as there is less than complete indexation (b is

less than one). Note that the monetary disturbance is defined as a money

demand innovation but could be interpreted equally well as a (negative) money

supply innovation.
                                                                f   f         f
     The three equations can be solved for                              and r as functions of the
                                                                p, '
foreIgn monetary dIsturbance,

       f     ---f          nf
      Pt — p             —us /F1 ,                                                                  (6.9)

       f ——f         —       f        f       af
             y           —c      (1—b )
                                          u        /F1 ,                                            (6.10)

      r —            — (1 + c(1—b)/g) u/F1 ,                                                        (6.11)




     76The model is described more fully In Marston (1982b). This is an

example of what Flood (1979) terms an extended small country analysis; the two

country model is recursive, so foreign disturbances can be studied first in the

foreign model, then their effects can be traced through the domestic model.


                                                           77
               + k1 + (1—b) ÷
                                k1 c(1—b)/g > 0
where F1 = 1


All three variables are affected by both foreign disturbances, although

foreign output remains constant If there is full indexation abroad (b =     1).
     Even with this simple model there are three channels through which a

foreign monetary disturbance affects the domestic country: (a) the price

channel, with the foreign price directly affecting domestic aggregate demand

(and domestic aggregate supply as well If wages are indexed); (b) the output

or income channel, also directly affecting aggregate demand; (c) the interest

rate channel, affecting the real interest rate in the aggregate demand

function and the nominal interest rate in the money equation.

     Without formally solving the domestic model, we can summarize the main

effects of a foreign monetary disturbance under flexible rates, where the

disturbance represents a decrease in money demand or increase in money supply

(u < 0). Although It originates as a monetary disturbance, it becomes both a

real and nominal disturbance from the point of view of the domestic country.

The real disturbance is represented by the change in foreign output and

affects the domestic economy much as would a domestic aggregate demand

disturbance. It raises demand for the domestic good, the Increase being

proportional to g in the domestic aggregate demand equation (5.13). The

nominal disturbance is represented by the combined effect of a higher foreign

price and an appreciating exchange rate (which is in turn influenced by the

foreign Interest rate as well as the foreign price and output). It reduces

demand for the domestic good, because the appreciation is always large enough

to ensure that the domestic currency price of the foreign good falls. The net

result of a higher foreign output and an appreciating exchange rate can be

either a rise or fall in domestic output.

     With disturbances affecting the economy in so many ways, insulation is


                                      78
achieved only in special cases. Even if there is full wage indexation in the

domestic country, for example, a flexible exchange rate does not generally

insulate that country from a foreign monetary disturbance. Wage indexation

can shield domestic output from an appreciating exchange rate, but it cannot

prevent foreign income from directly raising aggregate demand, much as would a

domestic aggregate demand disturbance.

     Similarly, if there is perfect substitutability between domestic and

foreign goods, a flexible rate does not insulate the economy from a foreign

monetary disturbance. When the law of one price holds, the aggregate supply

equation is modified as follows:


      y c(i — b)(p      —
                            iE     + c0 ,                                 (6.2)'

where Pt =
             p + x. As is evident from this equation, unexpected changes in
the foreign price level lead to changes in domestic output and insulation is

again not achieved.

     In order for output to be insulated from this disturbance, the law of one

price must be combined with full wage indexation in the domestic economy.

tndexation shuts off the one remaining channel for foreign influence,

unexpected changes in the foreign price. As these examples suggest,

insulation is by no means a general feature of flexible rates.77

     A study by Flood and Marion (1982) raises two further points about




     77Marston (19821) shows that insulation can also be achieved if the

foreign country is fully indexed. For another example of insulation, see

Saidi (1980), who employs an aggregate supply function based on an

intertemporal substitution effect rather than a contract lag to analyze the

effects of foreign disturbances.


                                       79
insulation and the choice between regimes. Exchange rate regimes have

traditionally been compared under the assumption that behavioral parameters

remain the same even when the regime changes. Flood and Marion argue,

however, that the extent of wage Indexation should adjust endogenously to the

exchange rate regime. The appropriate comparison between exchange rate

regimes, therefore, is one where the indexation parameter is at its optimal

level (according to an output criterion) in each regime. The same point can

be raised about other behavioral parameters such as the degree of asset

substitutability. The second point they make is equally interesting:

insulation may be an undesirable objective of exchange rate policy; it may be

preferable to allow foreign disturbances to enter an economy if this helps to

minimize the effects of other disturbances. The law of one price prevails in

their model, so that full wage indexation provides insulation from foreign

disturbances. They show, however, that under flexible rates it is better to

have partial than full wage indexation, even though it prevents insulation

from a foreign monetary disturbance, because partial indexation allows the

exchange rate to dampen the output effects of a domestic supply disturbance.

6.3. Optimal foreign exchange intervention

     Since neither fixed nor flexible rates stabilize output except in special

cases, it is natural to ask if some limited form of exchange intervention,

"managed floating," might be best. Intervention might follow a rule such as

   —;    k(x — ), whereby   the money supply is varied in response to current

changes in the exchange rate. The polar cases of fixed and flexible rates

correspond to infinite and zero values, respectively, of the intervention

parameter, k.

     Managed floating appears to be an attractive alternative to either fixed

or flexible rates. This is the message of Boyer (1978), who examines optimal



                                      80
intervention in a small open economy. He shows that in the presence of

domestic monetary and aggregate demand disturbances, a limited form of foreign

exchange intervention is called for, with the degree of intervention

determined by the relative importance of the two disturbances. Only in

extreme cases are fixed or flexible rates warranted. If monetary disturbances

alone affect the economy, then fixed rates are optimal. If aggregate demand

disturbances alone affect the economy, then flexible rates are optimal, at

least when money demand is independent of the exchange rate. If money demand

is positively related to the exchange rate, as with regressive expectations,

then the authorities should "lean with the wind," exaggerating exchange rate

movements to neutralize the aggregate demand disturbances. The results are

analagous to those of Poole (1970) for optimal monetary policy in a closed

economy.

     The Boyer paper does not analyze the case where expectations are

rational. Nor does it explain why private agents fall to utilize the same

information that the authorities use in their managed intervention——the

information provided by exchange rate movements. Yet we know from the earlier

discussion how important information asymmetries are in determining the

effectiveness of policy rules. Henderson (1982) analyzes intervention in a

model with rational expectations, where assumptions about information are

carefully set out.78 Foreign exchange intervention is based on the



     78Roper and Turnovsky (1980) also analyze managed floating rules under ra—

tional expectations (as well as other expectations hypotheses). They have an

interesting discussion of how "leaning with the wind' may put a country at odds

with its neighbors to the extent that there are implicit international rules

limiting intervention operations to dampen exchange rate movements. For a dis-

cussion of guidelines for managed floating, see Ethier and Bloomfield (1975).


                                     81
authorities knowledge of the current exchange rate and other financial

variables, but private agents base wages on information available in period

t—1. Henderson justifies this asymmetry by citing the relatively greater

costs associated with renegotiating the nominal wage compared with adopting

policy responses. His results are similar to those of Boyer and other

studies, except that a wider range of disturbances is considered. He finds

that fixed rates are called for if all disturbances are financial and that

"leaning with the wind" is called for if there are either aggregate demand or

aggregate supply disturbances. He also points out that a more complex

financial policy, involving two policy instruments, would be necessary if the

authorities had more than one objective or if the coefficients of the model

were not known with certainty (as in Brainard, 1967).

     Other recent studies have investigated exchange market intervention in a

three—country or multiple—country setting. In such a setting, an analog of

fixed exchange rates is an exchange—rate union which fixes exchange rates

between two or more countries that float relative to the rest of the world.

(European experiments with such unions, beginning with the Snake in 1972 and

following with the European Monetary System in 1979, have heightened interest

in the subject.) Corden (1972) discusses the different forms such a union can

take, including the simplest "pseudo—exchange—rate union" involving no

explicit integration of national economic policies beyond the commitment to

fix bilateral exchange rates. A number of studies have investigated the

desirability of such unions, including the classic studies of Mundell (1961)

and McKinnon (1963). Recently, Aoki. (1982), Bhandari (1982) and Marston

(1982a) have applied stochastic models similar to that outlined above to the




     79Tower and Willett (1975) provide a survey of this literature.


                                      82
union question. Marston, for example, shows how wage indexation, trade

patterns, and the sources of economic disturbances influence the case for a

union.

     One   alternative   to an exchange rate union in the multiple—country setting

is a basket rule tying a currency to a weighted average of exchange rates.

Branson and Katseli—Papaefstratiou (1980), Flanders and Helpman (1979), and

Lipschitz and Sundararajan (1980) have investigated alternative weighting

schemes for the baskets. Branson and Katseli—papaefstratiou, for example,

show how weights based on market power in import and export markets can

minimize the effects of exchange rate fluctuations on the terms of trade.

Canzoneri (1982) analyzes basket rules within a macroeconomic model similar to

that outlined above, showing that basket pegging is generally superior to

exchange—rate unions between subsets of countries. These studies point toward

a fruitful area for future research which will go beyond the two country

setting which previously dominated research on exchange market intervention.




                                         83
Allen, P.R. and P.B. Kenen, 1980, Asset Markets, Exchange Rates and Economic
     Integration (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).

Alexander, S.S., 1952, Effects of a devaluation on a trade balance,
     International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 2, 263—78.

Aoki, M., 1982, On existence of an exchange rate union in a three—country
     world model under flexible exchange rate regimes, unpublished.

Argy, V., and P. Kouri, 1974, Sterilization policies and the volatility in
     international reserves, in: R.Z. Aliber, ed., National Monetary Policies
     and the International Financial System (University of Chicago Press,
     Chicago).

Argy, V., and M.G. Porter, 1972, The forward exchange market and the effects
     of domestic and external disturbances under alternative exchange rate
     systems, International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 19, 503—32.

Barro, R.J., 1974, Are government bonds net wealth?, Journal of Political
     Economy 82, 1095—1117.

Barro, R.J., 1976, Rational expectations and the role of monetary policy,
     Journal of Monetary Economics 2, 1—32.

Barro, R.J., 1977, Long—term contracting, sticky prices, and monetary policy,
     Journal of Monetary Economics 3, 305—16.

Bhandari, J.S., 1982, Determining the optimal currency composite, unpublished.

Bilson, J.F.O., 1978, The monetary approach to the exchange rate: some
     empirical evidence, International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 25, 48—75.

Bilson, J.F.O., 1978, Rational expectations and the exchange rate, in: Jacob
     A. Frenkel and Harry G.Johnson, eds., The Economics of Exchange Rates
     (Addison—Wesley, Reading, Mass.) 75—96.

Black, S.W., 1973, International Money Markets and Flexible Exchange Rates,
     Studies in International Finance No. 32 (International Finance Section,
     Princeton).

Black, S.W., 1982, The use of monetary policy for internal and external
     balance in ten industrial countries, in: J. Frenkel, ed., Exchange Rates
     and International Macroeconomics (N.B.E.R., Cambridge), forthcoming.

Blinder, A.S., and R.M. Solow, 1973, Does fiscal policy matter?, Journal of
     Public Economics 2, 319—37.

Boyer, R.S., 1975, Commodity markets and bond markets in a small, fixed—
     exchange rate economy, Canadian Journal of Economics 8, 1—23.

Bayer, R.S., 1978, Financial policies in an open economy, Economica 45, 39—57.

Bayer, R.S., 1978, Optimal foreign exchange intervention, Journal of Political
     Economy 86, 1045—55.


                                     84
 Brainard, W.C., 1967, Uncertainty and the effectiveness of policy, American
      Economic Review 57, 411—25.

 Branson, W.H., 1968, Financial Capital Flows in the U.S. Balance of Payments
      (North—Holland, Amsterdam).

 Branson, W.H., 1974, Stocks and flows in international monetary analysis,
      in: A. Ando, R.J. Herring, and R.C. Marston, eds., International Aspects
      of Stabilization Policies (Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston).

Branson, W.H., and L.T. Katseli—Papaefstratiou, 1980, Income instability,
     terms of trade, and the choice of exchange rate regime, Journal of
     Development Economics 7, 49—69.

Branson, W.H., and J.J. Rotemberg, 1980, International adjustment with wage
     rigidity, European Economic Review 13, 309—41.

Bryant, R.C., 1980, Money and Monetary Policy in Interdependent Nations
     (Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.).

Buiter, W.H., 1980, The macroeconomics of Dr. Pangloss: a critical survey of
     the new classical macroeconomics, Economic Journal 90, 34—50.

Buiter, W.H., and J. Tobin, 1979, Debt neutrality: a brief review of doctrine
     and evidence, in: G.M. v.Furstenberg, ed., Social Security versus
     Private Savings (Cambridge, Mass.) 39—63.

Canzoneri, M.B., 1980, Wealth effects in the new neoclassical models,
     International Finance Discussion Papers No. 158 (Federal Reserve Board,
     Washington).

Canzoneri, M.B., 1981, Exchange Intervention Policy in a Multiple Country
     World, International Finance Discussion Paper No 174 (Board of Governors
     of the Federal Reserve System, Washington).

Canzoneri, M.B., D.W. Henderson, and K.S. Rogoff, 1981, The information
     content of the interest rate and optimal monetary policy, International
     Finance Discussion Papers no. 192 (Federal Reserve Board, Washington).

Cooper, R.N., 1969, Macro—economic policy adjustment in interdependent
     economies, ciarterly Journal of Economics 83, 1—24.

Cooper, N.,, 1976, Monetary theory and policy in an open economy, Scandinavian
     Journal of Economics 78, 146—63.

Corden, W.M., 1972, Monetary Integration, Essays in International Finance No.
     93 (International Finance Section, Princeton).

Corden, W.M., 1960, The geometric representation of policies to attain
     internal and external balance, Review of Economic Studies 28, 1—22.

Dornbusch, R., 1973, Devaluation, money, and nontraded goods, American
     Economic Review 58, 871—880.



                                     85
 Dornbusch, R., 1976, Expectations and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of
      Political Economy 84, 1161—76.

Dornbusch, R., 1980, Open Economy Macroeconomics (Basic Books, New York).

Dornbusch, R., 1982, Exchange risk and the macroeconomics of exchange rate
     determination, in: R. Hawkins, R. Levich, and C. Wihlborg, eds.,
     Internationalizaton of Financial Markets and National Economic Policy,
     forthcoming.

Eaton, J., and S.J. Turnovsky, 1982, Effects of monetary disturbances on
     exchange rates with risk averse speculation, Journal of International
     Money and Finance, 1.

Ethier, W., and A.I. Bloomfield, 1975, Managing the Managed Float, Essays in
     International Finance No. 112 (International Finance Section, Princeton).

Fischer, S., 1976, Stability and exchange rate systems in a monetarist model
     of the balance of payments, in: R.Z. Aliber, ed., The Political Economy
     of Monetary Reform (Allanheld, Osmun and Co., Montclair, N.J.), 59—73.

Fischer, S., 1977, 'Long—term contracting, sticky prices, and monetary
     policy': a comment, Journal of Monetary Economics 3, 317—23.

Fischer, 5., 1977, Long—term contracts, rational expectations, and the optimal
     money supply rule, Journal of Political Economy 85, 191—205.

Fischer, S., 1977, Wage indexation and macroeconomic stability, in: K.
     Brunner and A.H. Meltzer, eds., Stabilization of the Domestic and
     International Economy (North—Holland, Amsterdam) 107—47.

Fischer, S., 1979, Anticipations and the noaneutrality of money, Journal of
     PolItIcal Economy 87, 225—52.

Flanders, M.J., and E. Helpman, 1979, An optimal exchange rate peg In a world
     of general floating, Review of Economic Studies 46, 533—42.

Fleming, J.M., 1962, Domestic financial policies under fixed and under
     floating exchange rates, International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 9,
     369—79.

Flood, R.P., 1979, Capital mobility and the choice of exchange rate system,
     International Economic Review 20, 405—16.

Flood, R.P., and R.J. Hodrick, 1982, Optimal price and inventory adjustment in
     an open—economy model of the business cycle, unpublished.

Flood, R.P,, and N.P. Marion, 1982, The transmission of disturbances under
     alternative exchange—rate regimes with optimal indexing, c.iarterly
     Journal of Economics 97, 43—66.

Frenkel, J.A., 1976, A monetary approach to the exchange rate: doctrinal
     aspects and empirical evidence, Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78,
     200—24.


                                     86
Frenkel, J.A., 1981, The collapse of purchasing power parities during the
     1970's, European Economic Review 7, 145—65.

Frenkel, J.A., and J.Aizenman, 1981, Aspects of the Optimal Management of
     Exchange Rates, NBER Working Paper No. 748 (National Bureau of Economic
     Research, Cambridge).

Frenkel, J.A. and H.G. Johnson, eds., 1976, The Monetary Approach to the
     Balance of 1ayments (George Allen and Unwin, London) 21—45.

Girton, L., and D.W. Henderson, 1976, Financial capital movements and central
     bank behavior in a two—country, short—run portfolio balance model,
     Journal of Monetary Economics 2, 33—61.

Girton, L., and D.W. Henderson, 1977, Central bank operations in foreign and
     domestic assets under fixed and flexible exchange rates, in: P.B. Clark,
     D.E. Logue, and R.J. Sweeney, eds., The Effects of Exchange Rate
     Adjustments (Department of the Treasury, Washington, D.C.), 151—179.

Gray, J.A., 1976, Wage indexation: a macroeconomic approach, Journal of
     Monetary Economics 2, 221—35.

Harberger, A., 1950, Currency depreciation, income and the balance of trade,
     Journal of Political Economy 1, 47—60.

Helliwell, J.F. and J.M. Lester, 1976, External linkages of the Canadian
     monetary system, Canadian Journal of Economics 9, 646—67.

Henderson, D.W,, 1977, Modelling the interdependence of national money and
     capita]. markets, American Economic Review 67, 190—99.

Henderson, D.W., 1979, Financial policies in open economies, American Economic
     Review 69, 232—39.

Henderson, D.W., 1981, Balance of payments analysis, fiscal policy and the
     Bayer paper: a comment, forthcoming.

Henderson, D.W., 1982, Exchange market intervention operations: their effects
     and their role in financial policy, in: J.F.0. Bilson and R.C. Marston,
     eds., Exchange Rate Theory and Practice (N.B.E.R., Cambridge),
     forthcoming.

Herring, R.J., and R.C. Marston, 1977, National Monetary Policies and
     International Financial Markets (North—Holland, Amsterdam).

Isard, P., 1977, How far can we push the 'law of one price'?, American
     Economic Review 67, 942—48.

Johnson, H.G., 1972, The monetary approach to balance of payments theory,
     in: Further Essays in Monetary Theory (George Allen and Unwin, London).

Katseli—Papaefstratiou, L.K., 1979, The Reemergence of the Purchasing Power
     Parity Doctrine in the 1970's, Special Papers in International Economics
     No. 13 (International Finance Section, Princeton).


                                      87
Kenen, P.B., 1982, Effects of intervention and sterilization in the short run
     and the long run, in: R.C. Cooper et al., eds., The International
     Monetary System under Flexible Exchange Rates (Ballinger, Cambridge).

Kouri, P.J.K., 1976, The exchange rate and the balance of payments in the
     short run and in the long run: a monetary approach, Scandinavian Journal
     of Economics 78, 280—304.

Kouri, P.J.K., and M. Porter, 1974, International capital flows and portfolio
     equilibrium, Journal of Political Economy 82, 443—67.

Kravis, I.B., and R.E. Lipsey, 1978, Price behavior in the light of balance of
     payments theories, Journal of International Economics 8, 193—246.-

Laursen, S., and L. Metzler, 1950, Flexible exchange rates and the theory of
     employment, Review of Economics and Statistics 32, 281—99.

Lipschitz, L., and V. Sundararajan, 1980, The optimal basket in a world of
     generalized floating, INF Staff Papers 27, 80—100.

Lucas, R..E., Jr., 1972, Expectations and the neutrality of money, Journal of
     Economic Theory 4, 103—24.

Lucas, R.E., Jr., 1973, Some international evidence on output—inflation
     tradeoffs, American Economic Review 63, 326—34.

Lucas, R.E., Jr., 1981, Tobin and monetarism: a review article, Journal of
     Economic Literature 19, 558—67.

Marion, N.?., 1982, The exchange—rate effects of real disturbances with
     rational expectations and variable terms of trade, Canadian Journal of
     Economics 15, 104—18.

Marston, R..C., 1982, Exchange rate unions as an alternative to flexible
     exchange rates, in: J.F.0. Bilson and R.C. Marston, eds., Exchange Rate
     Theory and Practice (N.B.E.R., Cambridge), forthcoming.

Marston, R.C., 1982, Wages, relative prices and the choice between fixed and
     flexible exchange rates, Canadian Journal of Economics 15, 87—103.

McCallum, B.T, 1980, Rational expectations and macroeconomic stabilization
     policy, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 12, 716—46.

McCallum, B.T. and J.K. Whitaker, 1979, The effectiveness of fiscal feedback
     rules and automatic stabilizers under rational expectations, Journal of
     Monetary economics 5, 171—86.

MeKinnon, R.I., 1963, Optimum currency areas, American Economic Review 53,
     7 17—25.

McKinnon, R.I., 1981, The exchange rate and macroeconomic policy: changing
     postwar perceptions, Journal of Economic Literature 19, 531—57.




                                      88
 McKinnon R.I., and W. Oates, 1966, The Implications of International Economic
      Integration for Monetary, Fiscal and Exchange Rate' Policy, Studies in
      International Finance No. 16 (International Finance Section, Princeton).

Meade, J.E., 1951, The Balance of Payments (Oxford University Press, London).

Metzler, L.A., 1951, Wealth, saving and the rate of interest, Journal of
     Political Economy 59, 93—116.

Mundell, R.A,, 1961, A theory of optimum currency areas, American Economic
     Review 51, 657—65.

Mundell, LA., 1962, The appropriate use of monetary and fiscal policy for
     internal and external stability, International Monetary Fund Staff Papers
     9, 70—79.

Mundefl, R.A., 1963, Capital mobility and stabilization policy under fixed and
     flexible exchange rates, Canadian Journal of Economics and Political
     Science 29, 475—85.

Mundell, R.A., 1964, A reply: capital mobility and size, Canadian Journal of
     Economics and Political Science 30, 421—31.

Mundell, R.A., 1968, International Economics (MacMillan, New York),

Mussa, H., 1976, The exchange rate, the balance of payments and monetary and
     fiscal policy under a regime of controlled floating, Scandinavian Journal
     of Economics 78, 229—48.

Mussa, H., 1979, Macroeconomic interdependence and the exchange rate regime,
     in:  R. Dornbusch and J.A. Frenkel, eds., International Economic Policy
     (Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore), 160—204.

Mod1glan1, F., and T. Padoa—Schioppa, 1978, The Management of an Open Economy
     with '100% Plus' Wage Indexation, Essays in International Finance No. 130
     (International Finance Section, Princeton).

Obstfeld, M., 1981, Macroeconomic policy, exchange—rate dynamics, and optimal
     asset accumulation, Journal of Political Economy 89, 1142—61.

Obetfeld, M., 1982, Exchange rates, inflation, and the sterilization problem:
     Germany, 1975—81, Eurpoean Economic Review, forthcoming.

Phelps, E.S. and J.B. Taylor, 1977, Stabilizing powers of monetary policy
     under rational expectations, Journal of Political Economy 85, 163—90.

Poole, W., 1970, Optimal Choice of monetary policy instruments in a simple
     stochastic macro model, ciarterly Journal of Economics 84, 197—216.

Purvis, D.D., 1979, Wage responsiveness and the insulation properties of a
     flexible exchange rate, in A. Lindbeck, ed., Inflation and Employment in.
     Open Economies (North—Holland, Amsterdam) pp. 225—45.




                                      89
Robinson, J.,, 1937, The foreign exchanges, Essays in the Theory of Employment
     (MacMillan, New York).

Roper, D.E., and S.J. Turnovsky, 1980, Optimal exchange market intervention in
     a simple stochastic macro model, Canadian Journal of Economics 13,
     296—309.

Sachs, J., 1980, Wage indexation, flexible exchange rates and macroeconomic
     policy, Quarterly Journal of Economics 94, 731—47.

Saidi, N.H., 1980, Fluctuating exchange rates and the international
     transmission of economic disturbances, Journal of Money Credit and
     Banking 12, 575—91.

Salop, J., 1974, Devaluation and the balance of trade under flexible wages,
     in: C. Horwich and P Samuelson, eds., Trade, Stability and
     Macroeconomics (Academic Press, New York).

Sargent, T.J. and N. Wallace, 1975, 'Rational' expectations, the optimal
     monetary instrument and the optimal money supply rule, Journal of
     Political Economy 83, 241—54.

Shiller, R.J., 1978, Rational expectations and the dynamic structure of
     macroeconomic models: a critical review, Journal of Monetary Economics
     4, 1—44.

Taylor, J.B., 1980, Aggregate dynamics and staggered contracts, Journal of
     Political Economy 88, 1—23.

Tinbergen, J., 1952, On the Theory of Economic Policy (North—Holland,
     Amsterdam).

Tobin, J., and J.B. de Macedo, 1980, The short—run macroeconomics of floating
     exchange rates: an exposition, in: J. chipman and C.P. Kindleberger,
     eds., Flexible Exchange Rates and the Balance of Payments: Essays in
     Memory of Egon Sobnien (North—Holland, Amsterdam), 5—28.

Tower, E., and T.D. Willett, 1976, The Theory of Optimum Currency Areas and
     Exchange Rate Flexibility, Special Papers in International Economics No.
     11 (International Finance Section, Princeton).

Tsiang, S.C., 1961, The role of money in trade balance stability: synthesis
     of the elasticity and absorption approaches, American Economic Review 51,
     9 12—36.


Turnovsky, S.J., 1976, The dynamics of fiscal policy In an open economy,
     Journal of International Economics 6, 115—42.

Turnovsky, S.J., 1980, The choice of monetary instrument under alternative
     forms of price expectations, Manchester School 48, 39—62.

Turnovsky, S.J., 1980, The effectiveness of monetary and fiscal policy rules
     in an open economy under rational expectations, unpublished.



                                      90
Turnovsky, S.J., 1981, Monetary policy and foreign price disturbances under
     flexible exchange rates, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 13, 156—76.

Weiss, L., 1980, The role of active monetary policy in a rational expectations
     model, Journal of Political Economy 88, 221—33.

Whitman, M.vN., 1970, Policies for Internal and External Balance, Special
     Papers in International Economics No. 9 (International Finance Section,
     Princeton).

Whitman, N.v.N., 1975, Global monetarism and the monetary approach to the
     balance of payments, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3, 491—536.

Willett, T.D., and F. Forte, 1969, Interest rate policy and   external   balance,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 83, 242—62.




                                     91
