                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              COST-EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO REDUCE VEHICLE EMISSIONS

                                              Don Fullerton
                                                Li Gan

                                          Working Paper 11174
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11174


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




This paper was presented at the meetings of the American Economic Association in January 2005. We are
grateful for comments from Clifford Winston and for financial support from Japan's Economic and Social
Research Institute (ESRI). This paper is part of the NBER’s research program in Public Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of ESRI or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

 © 2005 by Don Fullerton and Li Gan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Cost-Effective Policies to Reduce Vehicle Emissions
Don Fullerton and Li Gan
NBER Working Paper No. 11174
March 2005
JEL No. H2, Q5

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper uses an estimated demand system that accounts for heterogeneity to calculate and

compare the lost consumer surplus from a higher tax on gasoline, a tax on distance, or a subsidy for

buying a newer car. We introduce a view of cost-effectiveness that compares policies instead of

technologies. Each tax might induce some consumers to drive less, some to switch from two vehicles

to one, and some to buy a car instead of an SUV. Our model captures these behaviors. For each rate

of tax, we simulate the changes in all such choices and how the new choices affect emissions. We

also calculate the equivalent variation and subtract tax revenue to get deadweight loss. Finally, we

take the added deadweight loss over the additional abatement as the social marginal cost of

abatement, and we plot this curve for several different tax policies.

Don Fullerton
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
and NBER
dfullert@eco.utexas.edu

Li Gan
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
gan@eco.utexas.edu
                                               1

                    Cost Effective Policies to Reduce Vehicle Emissions

    To compare "cost-effectiveness" of different abatement methods, many studies

estimate production or cost functions and plot the marginal cost curve for using each

method to achieve more abatement. Normally the cost is additional outlay by the firm

(e.g. added equipment, process changes, or fuel switching). Each method may have

diminishing returns, however, so the marginal cost of abatement (MCA) may start at

different points and rise at different rates. 1 Then efficiency requires the planner to

pursue each method to the point where all have the same MCA. Or, as pointed out by

Arthur C. Pigou (1920), an emissions tax gives incentive for firms to pursue each

method until its MCA equals the tax rate, which achieves the same efficiency.

    For vehicle emissions, the list of usual suspects similarly includes the purchase of

pollution control equipment, process changes such as driving at low and uniform speeds,

and fuel switching from leaded to unleaded gasoline and to cleaner fuels. Perhaps the

MCA curves for those techniques could all be plotted to undertake the same sort of

analysis.   Yet this analysis for vehicle emissions faces four problems.             First, the

abatement decisions are made by many different agents: manufacturers can include

equipment to achieve required rates for emissions per mile (EPM), but consumers get to

choose whether to buy a car or sports utility vehicle (SUV), whether to drive at low or

uniform speeds, and how many miles to drive. Second, heterogeneity means that the

efficient mix differs across drivers: some can switch from an SUV to a car, others can

buy a new vehicle with low emission rate, others may change driving style, and still

others could change driving amounts. The planning solution is not feasible, and so

1
  For the example of greenhouse gas (GHG) abatement, see Figures 20-21 of U.S. EPA (2001, p.23),
where the highest MCA curve is for US CO2 emission reduction, followed by US other GHG
reduction, US sequestration, and then other countries' CO2, other GHG, and sequestration.
                                                  2

policy must rely on incentives. Third, however, the tax on emissions is not feasible

either, since the measurement technology is not yet available.2 Fourth, while some of

the costs of abatement are extra outlays for equipment included by manufacturers, or for

the higher cost of cleaner fuel, many costs would instead come in the form of lost

consumer surplus from driving fewer miles and from driving in the "wrong" vehicle: a

car instead of an SUV, or a newer car instead of an old car.

    This paper deals with all four of these issues: we use an estimated demand system

that accounts for heterogeneity to calculate the lost consumer surplus from feasible

policies such as a higher tax on gasoline, a tax on distance, or a subsidy for buying a

newer car. 3 To do this, we introduce a somewhat new view of cost-effectiveness,

comparing policies instead of technologies. A policy such as the gasoline tax, for

example, might induce some consumers to drive less, some to switch from two vehicles

to one, some to buy a car instead of an SUV, and some to do "all of the above". Our

model captures these behaviors. For each rate of tax, we simulate the changes in all

such choices and how the new choices affect emissions. We also calculate the lost

consumer surplus, or equivalent variation (EV), and subtract tax revenue to get

deadweight loss (DWL).            Finally, we take the added DWL over the additional

abatement as the social marginal cost of abatement (MCA), and we plot this curve for

several different tax policies.

    Current policies state maximum emission rates for new vehicles.                      These have
2
  On-board diagnostic equipment is too costly because millions of vehicles would need to be
retrofitted (Winston Harrington et al., 1994). Remote sensing is less expensive and can measure
average emissions, but cannot distinguish emissions clearly enough to tax each car separately (Sierra
Research, 1994). And any tailpipe device would entirely miss evaporative emissions.
3
 Fullerton and Sarah West (2000) consider combinations of gas taxes and car taxes that maximize
welfare when an emissions tax is not available, but they assume substitution elasticities and calibrate
other parameters. Here we use estimated parameters.
                                                          3

become more stringent over time, and they are more stringent for cars than for SUVs.4

We do not simulate changes in these mandates; indeed they are reflected in our data

showing how newer cars have lower EPM than older cars or SUVs. Instead, we

simulate additional policies that would use incentives to get consumers to buy those

newer cars or to reduce their miles.

I. The Model

       Each consumer has a discrete choice about the number and types of vehicles and

continuous choices about vehicle miles traveled (VMT). To capture all such choices

simultaneously, and the way all such choices affect emissions, we use estimated

parameters from Ye Feng, et al. (FFG, 2005). In their model, each household first

chooses the number of vehicles (0,1, or 2) and then for each vehicle chooses a car or

SUV. The result is six "bundles" (no vehicle, one car, two cars, one SUV, two SUVs,

one of each). We have no need to model the choice among hundreds of vehicle types,

as in prior studies of manufacturer product differentiation. All cars in a given year are

made to meet a single emission rate standard, so the only important choices for

emissions are between car and SUV and the age of the vehicle. We model age as a

continuous choice and estimate the emission rates for cars of different age. After the

discrete choice among bundles, then, a two-vehicle household makes four continuous

choices (the age of each vehicle and the miles to drive each vehicle). The marginal

price per mile is:

                           pg + t g
(1)                 pi =              + t e EPM i + t d
                           MPGi

where i indexes the vehicle bundle, pg is the price of gasoline, tg is the gas tax in

4
    For an overview of vehicle pollution policy, see Harrington and Virginia McConnell (2003).
                                                    4

dollars per gallon, MPGi is miles per gallon, and EPMi is grams of emissions per mile.

The imposition of a distance tax td in dollars per mile would add directly to the cost

per mile. If an emissions tax were feasible, at rate te in dollars per gram, then teEPMi

would be the extra cost per mile.

      Estimation requires a price for each good that is independent of the amount chosen,

just as the price per mile above is independent of miles chosen. We also have a choice

of vehicle age, but the "price" of holding a new car for one year is higher than the price

of holding an old car for one year. We therefore make a nonlinear transformation of

age to define a quantity with a linear price. If depreciation is exponential at rate           per

year, then (1– )age is the fraction left, and we can define Wear ≡ 1–(1– )age as the

fraction depreciated.    Consumers holding a new or used car effectively make a

continuous choice about the amount of                   Wear,      and they receive a constant

"reimbursement price" qi per unit Wear accepted. And since this choice is separate

from the discrete choice, we define the annualized price of bundle ri as the cost of a

brand new vehicle.

      The household’s direct utility is a positive function of                   VMT   and another

consumption good ci , and it is a negative function of Wear. Given income y, the

budget constraint is:

(2)              piVMTi − qiWeari + ci = y − ri .

where the price of ci is normalized to one. The indirect utility for bundle i is a

function of household income and prices, denoted as V(y–ri, pi, qi,). We use a standard

log-linear demand for VMT as a function of prices, income, and observed demographic

variables x:

(3)             ln(VMTi ) =   i
                              V   +   i
                                      p   pi − α q qi − y + β 1 k i + x' γ + η
                                                             5

where the coefficient on the price per mile is bundle-specific,                             is an agent-specific

error term, and ki is the capital cost of the bundle (related to annual cost by                          1ki=    ri).

Then the implied indirect utility function is:

                            exp(−                                      ) − α1
                        1
(4)             Vi =                    i
                                        0   + β y − β 1 k i − x' γ −            exp(α ip pi − α q qi ) + ε i .
                        β                                                   i
                                                                            p



Using Roy's Identity, this form for indirect utility further implies that the demand for

Wear is:

(5)             ln(Weari ) =        i
                                    W          (         )
                                        + ln α q / α ip + α ip pi − α q qi − y + β 1 k i + x ' γ + η .

Finally, for two-vehicle households, direct utility is U(VMTi1, VMTi2, Weari1, Weari2,

ci). The budget constraint contains all those quantities (with prices pi1, pi2, qi1, and

qi2). Indirect utility and all four continuous demands have more terms but are analogous

to equations (3)-(5).

      Following McFadden’s random utility hypothesis, vehicle bundle i is chosen if and

only if: Vi   Vj for all j      i. We let the random variable εi have a generalized extreme

value distribution, so that the discrete choice part becomes the familiar nested logit

model. Prior literature estimates discrete and continuous demands sequentially, using

the predicted shares from the discrete part to correct for endogeneity of vehicle choice

in VMT demands.5 As pointed out by FFG, however, the same                                    and       parameters

enter both the indirect utility for estimation of discrete choices and in the continuous

demands. In the sequential procedure, estimated parameters of continuous demands are

not constrained to match the same parameters in the estimated discrete choice model.

5
  Jeffrey A. Dubin and Daniel L. McFadden (1984) introduce the sequential procedure for a logit
model with two appliances (and continuous usage hours). It is used for vehicle choice and miles by
Fred Mannering and Clifford Winston (1985), Kenneth Train (1986), Pinelopi K. Goldberg (1998)
and West (2004).      W. Michael Hanemann (1984) estimates discrete and continuous choices
simultaneously, but without unobserved heterogeneity.
                                           6

Often they are quite different.

    FFG introduce a procedure to estimate both parts simultaneously, and they obtain a

single set of   and     parameters. They also use the estimated parameters to calculate

various elasticities, for interpretation, but they do not undertake any simulations or

welfare analysis. Here, we use the estimated parameters from FFG in the indirect utility

function to measure the dollar value of utility changes from simulated changes in tax

rates.

    Data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX, 1996-2001) for 9027

households include demographic characteristics, total expenditures, gas expenditure,

vehicle type, make, and year. Fuel prices for each year and region are taken from the

ACCRA cost-of-living indices.      Assuming 20% depreciation per year,         Wear    is

calculated by the formula above, and current market value of each vehicle (ki) is

calculated from original purchase price and year. Hedonic regressions are used to

impute missing values, and to calculate qi (the price of Wear). Data from the

California Air Resources Board (CARB) on 672 vehicles of various types and ages are

used to estimate MPGi and EPMi as functions of vehicle type, age, and number of

cylinders. Estimated parameters are used to impute MPGi and EPMi for each vehicle

in the CEX. Then for each vehicle, VMT is calculated by MPG times gallons (gas

expenditure over price pg).

II. Results

    The estimates for price and income coefficients in FGG all have the expected signs,

though they differ in magnitude and significance. Because the coefficients themselves

are difficult to interpret, we turn to elasticities. A 1% increase in the price per mile

affects all discrete vehicle shares, but the largest shifts are 0.8% less of the car-and-
                                             7

SUV bundle and 0.7% more of the two-car bundle. For any given bundle, this 1%

higher price per mile also reduces miles, but to small extents ranging only from 0.02%

to 0.07%. A 1% higher reimbursement price for Wear changes bundle shares slightly;

given a bundle, desired VMT rises by 0.12 to 0.14%. Higher income raises the fraction

of households with both a car and an SUV.         Some capital cost elasticities seem too

large. For example, a 1% increase in the cost of an SUV leads to a 7% reduction in the

one-SUV share and 14% reduction in the two-SUV share (which means that this share

falls from 14.5% to 12.5% of all households).

       Here, we calculate implications for emissions. For simplicity, calculations are

based on the average household with average income and demographic characteristics,

but this consumer holds the predicted shares of all six bundles. We first calculate total

emissions in the baseline as the sum over all vehicles of EPM×VMT. We then calculate

the changes in behavior from successive increases the gas tax tg, from the introduction

of a distance tax td, or from an emissions tax te. This last tax is not realistic, but useful

for comparison. Equation (1) shows how those taxes affect the price per mile. We also

simulate a Wear tax tq (which might shift consumers into new vehicles with low

EPM). We calculate the dollar value of changes in utility.

       To understand these results, first note that the calculated          EPM      is 1.89

grams/mile for the average car and 3.56 for the average SUV. It also increases to 6.94

grams/mile for a very old vehicle (with Wear =1). Thus, any shift from SUV to car or

to a newer car will affect emissions, even with no change in miles. Second, note that

the estimated elasticities for discrete choices are larger than for continuous choices. A

higher gas tax raises the price per mile more in an SUV than in a car (because a car has

higher MPG). It has small effect on miles but induces many consumers to switch from
                                                                                8

an SUV to a car (with lower EPM). Thus we expect that a gas tax can reduce

emissions by more than a tax purely on distance.



         Figure 1: The Marginal Cost of Abatement (MCA) for Each Policy

                                                  0.18
            Marginal Cost of Abatement ($/gram)




                                                  0.14



                                                                                    tq
                                                                                    td
                                                  0.10                              tg
                                                                                    te


                                                  0.06




                                                  0.02



                                                         5,000         15,000            25,000


                                                             Abated Emissions (grams)



    For any tax, deadweight loss (DWL) generally starts at zero and rises with the

square of the tax rate. The marginal cost of abatement (MCA) is defined as the change

in DWL over the change in emissions, so one might expect the MCA to start at zero and

to rise at an increasing rate. Figure 1 shows the MCA curve for each tax, and all curves

are increasing as expected.6 Perhaps surprisingly, the MCA curves do not start near

zero. The explanation is that the baseline in our model starts with a gasoline tax of


6
 Observed emissions are 52,228 grams per household per year, using weights from Fullerton and
West (2000) to average over hydrocarbons, NOX, and carbon monoxide. To get comparable
abatement, one curve increases te from zero to $25 per 1000 grams (collecting $483 per house-hold
per year); one increases tg from $.374 to $1.50 per gallon ($725); another raises td from zero to
$0.10 per mile ($970); and one raises tq from zero to $5000 per unit Wear ($2565).
                                                     9

$.374/gallon, so consumers already have DWL from reduced VMT and altered vehicle

choices. Any additional tax that further changes those choices starts with positive costs.

In Figure 1, the marginal cost of raising the existing gas tax is almost $.02 for the first

additional gram of abatement, and it rises as choices become further distorted.

       Moreover, the cost of the existing gas tax is the consumer surplus lost from reduced

driving, and that cost is exacerbated by any tax that further affects distance – such as the

tax on distance (td) or on emissions (te). The MCA is lowest for the tax on emissions, as

predicted by theory. Compared to the distance tax, the gas tax has lower MCA because

it raises the price per mile more for any vehicle with low MPG (shifting consumers out

of SUVs with high EPM).

       Older cars have higher emissions rates, and the tax on Wear (tq) discourages

holding older cars.7 Also, FFG estimate that the elasticity of VMT with respect to the

reimbursement price is 0.12 to 0.14, so the lower reimbursement price means driving

fewer miles. Both those changes should reduce emissions. This tax has the highest

MCA in Figure 1, however, so it is not very effective in reducing emissions. Overall, if

a tax on emissions is not feasible, Figure 1 indicates that the gas tax is more cost-

effective than these other taxes.

       Figure 1 does not compare these taxes to other policies, however. Further research

would be necessary to calculate costs of other taxes or even of further mandates like

those already in place. For example, future requirements reduce emission rates for

SUVs. Given the currently higher SUV emission rates, this model could be used to

simulate the effects of an annual tax just on older sports utility vehicles (or subsidy for

their retirement). More generally, a tax could be collected annually on any vehicle at a


7
    It is equivalent to a subsidy for newer vehicles in our model, because it changes relative prices.
                                           10

rate that is proportional to its emission rate. Finally, if the ideal emissions tax is not

feasible, a cost-effective policy might combine this vehicle-EPM tax to change discrete

choices of vehicles and a gas tax to change continuous choice of miles driven.



References

Dubin, Jeffrey A. and McFadden, Daniel L. "An Econometric Analysis of Residential

    Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption." Econometrica, March 1984, 52(2),

    pp. 345-62.

Feng, Ye; Fullerton, Don and Gan, Li. "Vehicle Choices, Miles Driven, and Pollution

    Policies." Working paper, University of Texas at Austin, 2005.

Fullerton, Don and West, Sarah. "Tax and Subsidy Combinations for the Control of

    Vehicle Pollution." National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA)

    Working Paper No. 7774, July 2000.

Goldberg, Pinelopi K. "The Regulation of Fuel Economy and the Demand for 'Light

    Trucks'." Journal of Industrial Economics, March 1998, 46(1), pp. 1-33.

Hanemann, W. Michael. "Discrete/Continuous Models of Consumer Demand,"

    Econometrica, May 1984, 52(3), pp. 541-62.

Harrington, Winston and McConnell, Virginia. "Motor Vehicles and the Environment,"

    in H. Folmer and T. Tietenberg, eds., The international yearbook of environmental

    and resource economics 2002/2003, Northampton UK: Edward Elgar, 2003, pp.

    190-268.

Harrington, Winston; Walls, Margaret and McConnell, Virginia. "Shifting Gears: New

    Directions for Vehicles and Clean Air." Resources for the Future (Washington, DC)

    Discussion Paper 94-26-REV, June 1994.
                                          11

Mannering, Fred and Winston, Clifford. "A Dynamic Empirical Analysis of Household

    Vehicle Ownership and Utilization." Rand Journal of Economics, Summer 1985,

    16(2), pp. 215-36.

Pigou, Arthur C. The economics of welfare. London: MacMillan, 1920.

Sierra Research. "Analysis of the Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness of Remote

    Sensing Devices." Report SR94-05-05, prepared for the U.S. Environmental

    Protection Agency Sacramento, CA: Sierra Research, 1994.

Train, Kenneth. Qualitative choice analysis: Theory, econometrics, and an application

    to automobile demand. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1986.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Analysis of multi-emissions proposals for the

    U.S. electricity sector, 2001, http://www.epa.gov/oar/meproposalsanalysis.pdf

West, Sarah. “Distributional Effects of Alternative Vehicle Pollution Control Policies.”

    Journal of Public Economics, March 2004, 88(3-4), pp. 735-57.
