                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    GLOBALIZATION AND COMPLEMENTARY POLICIES:
                         POVERTY IMPACTS IN RURAL ZAMBIA

                                              Jorge F. Balat
                                              Guido G. Porto

                                          Working Paper 11175
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11175


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




We are indebted to A. Harrison for her support. The discussion among participants at the NBER conference
on Globalization and Poverty was very useful. We wish to specially thank our discussant, M. Slaughter, for
his very useful comments and suggestions. Conversation with W. Easterly helped us clarify our
understanding of some important issues; we thank him for his insights. Support from F. Yagci and R. Kirk
at the Zambia DTIS is greatly appreciated. All errors are our responsibility. This paper is part of the NBER’s
research program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
ESRI or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Jorge F. Balat and Guido Porto. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Globalization and Complementary Policies: Poverty Impacts in Rural Zambia
Jorge F. Balat and Guido Porto
NBER Working Paper No. 11175
March 2005
JEL No. I32, Q12, Q17, Q18

                                            ABSTRACT

In this paper, we have two main objectives: to investigate the links between globalization and

poverty observed in Zambia during the 1990s, and to explore the poverty impacts of non-traditional

export growth. We look at consumption and income effects separately. On the consumption side, we

study the maize marketing reforms and the elimination of maize subsidies. We find that

complementary policies matter: the introduction of competition policies at the milling industry acted

as a cushion that benefited consumers but the restriction on maize imports by small-scale mills hurt

them. On the income side, we study agricultural export growth to estimate income gains from

international trade. The gains are associated with market agriculture activities (such as growing

cotton, tobacco, hybrid maize) and rural labor markets and wages. We find that by expanding trade

opportunities Zambian households would earn significantly higher income. Securing these higher

levels of well-being requires complementary policies, like the provision of infrastructure, credit, and

extension services.

Jorge F. Balat
Mail Stop MC3-303
World Bank
1818 H Street
Washington, DC 20433
jbalat@worldbank.org

Guido Porto
Mail Stop MC3-303
World Bank
1818 H Street
Washington, DC 20433
gporto@worldbank.org
1     Introduction
During the last decade, Zambia adopted several economic reforms, including macroeconomic
stabilization measures, trade liberalization, export promotion, and the elimination of
marketing boards in maize and cotton. These reforms were expected to be beneficial in
terms of national welfare, diversity in consumption, and productivity growth. The eﬀects
on the distribution of income and poverty were more uncertain, and positive impacts at
the household level were harder to secure. In fact, poverty in Zambia increased during
the 1990s. In this paper, we have two main objectives: to investigate the links between
trade, complementary policies and poverty observed in Zambia during the last decade, and
to explore how new trade alternatives may bring about poverty alleviation in the future.
    International trade introduces new opportunities and new hazards.         Households are
aﬀected both as consumers and as producers or income earners. As consumers, households
are aﬀected when there are changes in the prices of goods consumed by the family. As income
earners, households are aﬀected when there are responses in wages and in agricultural income.
In this paper, we examine the two sides of the globalization-poverty link. Since rural poverty
is widespread in Zambia, we focus our analysis on rural households.
    We carry out a series of separate poverty exercises related to the consumption and income
impacts. On the income side, we are interested in exploring some of the dynamics eﬀects
of international trade on rural areas and agricultural activities. By facilitating access to
larger international markets and by boosting non-traditional export sectors, trade provides
incentives for rural households to move from subsistence to market-oriented agriculture. To
capture these eﬀects, we identify relevant agricultural activities, by providing a detailed
description of household productive activities, and we estimate the income diﬀerential
generated by market agriculture over subsistence agriculture using matching methods. These
estimates provide a quantification of the income gains that may arise due to access to
international markets and to the expansion of non-traditional exports.
    On the consumption side, we look at the eﬀects of the removal of maize subsidies. There
are two critical observations that support our somewhat narrow focus. On the one hand,
Zambian households devote a very large fraction of total expenditure to food and, within food

                                              1
items, to maize; on the other, one of the major agricultural reforms comprised the elimination
of the maize marketing board. In addition, we can use this experiment to look at the role
of complementary policies. Concretely, the increase in the price of maize was expected to
cause large welfare eﬀects. But it triggered substitution eﬀects towards cheaper varieties
of maize that was only possible when the government facilitated entry into the small-scale
mill industry. This is an instance in which complementary policies allowed households to
smooth some of the welfare impacts of the increase in maize prices. However, the government
restricted maize imports by small mills, or gave preference over publicly imported maize to
industrial mills, and this hurt consumers in times of production shortages.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the trends in poverty observed
in Zambia during the 1990s, we review the major reforms adopted during this period, and
we characterize trends in traditional (mining) and non-traditional (agriculture) exports. In
Section 3, we look at sources of income and we estimate income diﬀerential gains in market
agriculture. In section 4, we study the expenditure patterns of Zambian households and we
explore the welfare costs of the elimination of consumption subsidies on maize. Section 5
concludes.



2     Trade and Poverty in Zambia
Zambia is a landlocked country located in southern central Africa. Clockwise, neighbors are
Congo, Tanzania, Malawi, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Namibia, and Angola. In
2000, the total population was 10.7 million inhabitants. With a per capita GDP of only 302
US dollars, Zambia is one of the poorest countries in the world and is considered a least
developed country. The goal of this section is to provide a brief characterization of trade
and poverty in Zambia.


2.1    Poverty

Zambia faces two poverty ordeals: it is one of the poorest countries in the world, and it
suﬀered from increasing poverty rates during the 1990s. The analysis of the trends in poverty


                                               2
rates can be done using several household surveys. There are four of them in Zambia, two
Priority Surveys, collected in 1991 and 1993, and two Living Conditions Monitoring Surveys,
in 1996 and 1998. All the surveys have been conducted by the Central Statistical Oﬃce
(CSO) using the sampling frame from the 1990 Census of Population and Housing.
      The Priority Survey of 1991 is a Social Dimension of Adjustment (SDA) survey. It was
conducted between October and November. The survey is representative at the national
level and covers all provinces, rural and urban areas. A total of 9,886 households was
interviewed. Questions on household income, agricultural production, non-farm activities,
economic activities, and expenditures were asked. Own-consumption values were imputed
after the raw data were collected. Other questions referred to household assets, household
characteristics (demographics), health, education, economic activities, housing amenities,
access to facilities (schools, hospitals, markets), migration, remittances and anthropometry.1
      The 1996 and 1998 Living Conditions Monitoring Surveys expanded the sample to around
11,750 and 16,800 households respectively. The surveys included all the questions covered
in the Priority Survey of 1991, expanded the questionnaires to issues of home consumption
and coping strategies, and gathered more comprehensive data on consumption and income
sources.
      Table 1 provides some information on poverty dynamics. In 1991, the poverty rate at the
national level was 69.6 percent. Poverty increased in 1996, when the head count reached 80
percent, and then declined towards 1998, with a head count of 71.5 percent. In rural areas,
poverty is widespread; the head count was 88.3 percent in 1991, 90.5 percent in 1996 and
82.1 percent in 1998. Urban areas fared better, with a poverty rate of 47.2 percent in 1991,
62.1 percent in 1996 and 53.4 percent in 1998.
      In Table 2, a more comprehensive description of the poverty profile, by provinces, is
provided for 1998. Zambia is a geographically large country, and provinces diﬀer in the
quality of land, weather, access to water, and access to infrastructure. The capital Lusaka
and the Copperbelt area absorbed most of the economic activity particularly when mining
and copper powered the growth of the economy. The Central and Eastern provinces are
  1
   The 1993 Priority Survey was conducted during a diﬀerent agricultural season and is therefore not
comparable.


                                                 3
cotton production areas. The Southern Province houses the Victoria Falls and benefits from
tourism. The remaining provinces are less developed.
   There were significant diﬀerences in the poverty rates across regions. All provinces
showed aggregate poverty counts higher than 60 percent, except for Lusaka, the capital
(48.4 percent). Poverty in Copperbelt was 63.2 percent and in Southern, 68.2 percent. The
highest head count was observed in the Western province, where 88.1 percent of the total
population lived in poverty. The other provinces showed head counts in the range of 70 to
80 percent. Poverty was much higher in rural areas than in urban areas. Even in Lusaka, a
mostly urban location, rural poverty reached over 75 percent. In the Western province, 90.3
percent of the rural population lived in poverty in 1998. Urban poverty was lower, never
exceeding 70 percent of the population (including the Western province).


2.2    Major Reforms

The Republic of Zambia achieved Independence in 1964. A key characteristic of the country is
its abundance in natural resources, particularly mineral deposits (like copper) and land. Due
to high copper prices, the new Republic did quite well in the initial stages of development.
Poverty and inequality, however, were widespread and this raised concerns among the people
and the policymakers. Soon, the government began to adopt interventionist policies, with a
much larger participation of the state in national development. Interventions included import
substitution, price controls of all major agricultural products (like maize), nationalization of
manufacturing, agricultural marketing and mining.
   In the 1970s and 1980s, the decline in copper prices and the negative external conditions
led to stagnation and high levels of external debt.       A crisis emerged and a structural
adjustment program was implemented between 1983 and 1985. Riots in 1986 forced the
government to later abandon the reforms in 1987. A second IMF programme failed in 1989,
when the removal of controls in maize led to significant price increases.
   In 1991, the Movement for Multi-Party Democracy (MMD) was elected. Faced with
a sustained, severe recession and with a meager future, the new government began
economy-wide reforms including macroeconomic stabilization, exchange rate liberalization,


                                               4
fiscal restructuring, removal of maize subsidies, decontrol of agricultural prices, privatization
of agricultural marketing, and trade and industrial policy.            Table 3, reproduced from
McCulloch et al. (2001), describes the major reforms adopted during the 1990s.
      A major component of the reforms of the 1990s was the elimination of the marketing
boards in maize and cotton. Before 1994, intervention in cotton markets was widespread and
involved setting prices for sales of certified cotton seeds, pesticides, and sprayers, providing
subsidized inputs to producers, facilitating access to credit, etc.2 From 1977 to 1994, the
Lint Company of Zambia (Lintco) acted as a nexus between local Zambian producers and
international markets. Lintco had a monopsony in seed cotton markets, and a monopoly in
inputs sales and credit loans to farmers.
      These interventions were eliminated in 1994, when markets were liberalized. Early after
liberalization, Lintco was sold to Lonrho Cotton and a domestic monopsony was formed.
Subsequent entry led to geographical monopsonies rather than national oligopsonies since
firms segmented the market geographically. By 1997, the expansion of the cotton production
base attracted new entrants. Instead of the localized monopsonies, competition ensued.
      At present, most cotton production in Zambia is carried out under outgrower schemes.
There are two systems utilized by diﬀerent firms: the Farmer Group System and the Farmer
Distributor System. In the latter, firms designate one individual or farmer as the distributor
and provide inputs. The distributor prepares individual contracts with the farmers. He is
also in charge of assessing reasons for loan defaults, being able, in principle, of condoning
default in special cases. He is in charge of renegotiating contracts in incoming seasons. In
the Farmer Group System, small scale producers deal with the ginneries directly, purchasing
inputs on loan and repaying at the time of harvest. Both systems seem to work well.
      Fueled by high copper prices and exports, Zambia maintained, during the 1970s
and 1980s, large systems of maize production and consumption subsidies.                 They were
administered by marketing boards. External shocks (the collapse of copper prices) and
inappropriate domestic policies made marketing boards unsustainable and led to their
elimination in the reforms of the 1990s. The removal of the distortions was supposed to
  2
   For more details on cotton reforms in Zambia, see Food Security Research Project (2000) and Cotton
News (2002).


                                                 5
bring about aggregate welfare gains. In practice, the eﬀects on household welfare critically
depended on complementary policies like the provision of infrastructure and the introduction
of competition policies.3
      In 1993, the government began reforming the maize pricing and marketing system,
eliminating subsidies, and removing international trade restrictions. The most important
reforms consisted of the removal of all price controls (including pan-territorial and
pan-seasonal pricing), and the decentralization of maize marketing and processing. At
present, the marketing board has been fully eliminated. However, as of 2001, the government
implemented a floor price for production of maize.


2.3       Trade Trends

Zambia’s major trading partners are the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
(COMESA), particularly Zimbabwe, Malawi and Congo, South Africa, the EU and Japan.
The main imports comprise petroleum, which account for 13.2 percent of total imports in
1999, metals (iron, steel), for 16.9 percent, and fertilizers, for 13 percent. Other important
import lines include chemicals, machinery, and manufactures.
      Zambian exports have been dominated by copper. In fact, since Independence and up to
1990, exports consisted almost entirely of copper, which accounted for more that 90 percent of
total export earnings. Only recently has diversification into non-traditional exports become
important. The details are in Table 4, which reports the evolution and composition of exports
from 1990 to 1999. In 1990, metal exports accounted for 93 percent of total commodity
exports. Non-traditional exports, such as primary products, agro-processing, and textiles,
accounted for the remaining 7 percent. From 1990 to 1999, the decline in metal exports and
the increase in non-traditional exports are evident. In 1999, for example, 61 percent of total
exports comprised metal products, while 39 percent were non-traditional exports. Within
non-traditional exports, the main components are primary products, floricultural products,
textiles, processed foods, horticulture, textiles, and animal products.
      The last column of Table 4 reports some informal export growth projections for some of
  3
      For a description of the early reforms in maize marketing and pricing, see World Bank (1994).


                                                      6
the non-traditional categories. Notice that agriculture is expected to grow at a high rate
over the decade, contributing to nearly 20 percent of total exports, up from less than 2
percent in 1990. For COMESA and SADC (Southern Africa Development Community),
cotton, tobacco, meat, poultry, dairy products, soya beans, sunflower, sorghum, groundnuts,
paprika, maize, and cassava are promising markets. For markets in developed countries (the
EU, the US), coﬀee, paprika, sugar, cotton, tobacco, floriculture, horticulture, vegetables,
groundnuts, and honey comprise the best prospects for export growth.
    Exports are largely liberalized. There are no oﬃcial export taxes, charges or levies.
Further, export controls and regulations are minimal. Maize exports, however, are sometimes
subject to bans for national food security reasons. In 2002, for instance, the export ban on
maize was in place. There are some export incentives, from tax exemptions to concessions
to duty drawback. For example, an income tax of 15 percent (instead of the standard 35
percent rate) is granted to exporters of non-traditional goods who hold an investment license.
Also, investments in tourism are sometimes exempted from duties.



3     Income
We are most interested in exploring the eﬀects of trade on the income of Zambian households.
By aﬀecting wages and cash agricultural income, trade opportunities are likely to have large
impacts on household resources and on poverty. As argued by Deaton (1997) and others,
the short-run eﬀects of price changes can be assessed by looking at income shares. In Table
5, we report the average income shares for diﬀerent sources of income. At the national level,
the main sources of income are income from home consumption (28.3 percent), income from
non-farm businesses (22.3 percent) and wages (20.8 percent). Regarding agricultural income,
the sale of Food crops accounts for 6.3 percent of total income, while the sale of Cash crops,
for only 2.5 percent. Livestock & Poultry and Remittances account for 5.5 and 4.9 percent
of household income, respectively.
    There are important diﬀerences in income sources between poor and non-poor households.
While the share of own-production is 33.3 percent in the average poor household, it is 19.1


                                              7
percent in non-poor families. In contrast, while wages account for 32.9 percent of the total
income of the non-poor, they account for only 14.1 percent of the income of the poor. The
shares of the income generated in non-farm businesses are 20.8 and 25 percent in poor and
non-poor households respectively. The poor earn a larger share of income from the sales of
both food and cash crop, and lower shares from livestock and poultry.
      It is interesting to compare the diﬀerent sources of income across rural and urban areas.
In rural areas, for instance, 42.5 percent of total income is accounted for by own-production;
the share in urban areas is only 3.3 percent. The share of non-farm income in rural areas
is 16.7 percent, which should be compared with a 32.1 percent in urban areas. In rural
areas, the shares from food crops, livestock, wages and cash crops are 9.1, 8.1, 6.9 and 3.8
respectively. In urban areas, in contrast, wages account for 45.3 percent of household income,
and the contribution of agricultural activities is much smaller.
      The description of income shares is also useful because it highlights the main channels
through which trade opportunities can have an impact on household income. We can
conclude that, in rural areas, households derive most of their income from subsistence
agricultural and non-tradable services (non farm income).                Cash crop activities and
agricultural wages comprise a smaller fraction of total household income. In our analysis of
the diﬀerential impacts of trade on household income, we focus on these last farm activities
for they are more likely to be directly aﬀected by international markets.4
      We explore the poverty alleviation eﬀects of growth in non-traditional exports. If trade
leads to higher prices for agricultural goods or higher wages, then there is a first order
impact on income given by the income shares described in Table 5. But changes in the
extensive margin should be expected, too. In rural areas, this involves farmers switching from
subsistence to market-oriented agriculture. For instance, small-scale producers of own-food
are expected to benefit from access to markets by producing higher-return cash crops, such
as cotton, tobacco, groundnuts or non-traditional exports such as vegetables.
      It is this attempt to identify and estimate second round eﬀects of increased market
opportunities in rural areas that distinguishes this paper from most of the current literature.
  4
    Notice that there may be spillover eﬀects if trade causes growth in income and this leads to higher
expenditures on non-tradable good and services. We are unable to capture these eﬀects in the data.


                                                  8
Starting with the pioneering work of Deaton (1989) and (1997), estimation of first order
eﬀects in consumption and income has become widespread.                     Techniques to estimate
substitution in consumption are also available (Deaton, 1990). But estimation of supply
responses has proved much more diﬃcult. The survey in Winters, McCulloch and McKay
(2004) highlights these issues and reports some of the available methods and results. In this
paper, we capture supply responses using matching methods: by matching households in
subsistence agriculture with household in market agriculture, we are able to estimate the
average income diﬀerential generated by market oriented activities. We do this for diﬀerent
crops as follows.
      In rural areas, there are two main channels through which new trade opportunities can
aﬀect household income.5 On the one hand, households produce agricultural goods that are
sold to agro-processing firms. This involves what we call cash crop activities. On the other
hand, household members may earn a wage in a large scale agricultural farm. This means
that workers, instead of working in home plots for home production or cash crops, earn a
wage in rural (local) labor markets. In this paper, we focus on these two types of activities.
      We begin by identifying meaningful agricultural activities for the poverty analysis. Due
to regional variation in soil, climate, and infrastructure, the relevant sources of income may
be diﬀerent for households residing in diﬀerent provinces. To see this, we report in Table
6 the main sources of household income in the rural areas of the nine Zambian provinces.
For each agricultural activity, the table shows the average share of total income accounted
for by a given activity, the mean household income conditional on having positive income
in a given activity, and the sample size, the number of households that are active in that
particular agricultural activity.
      Looking at income shares first, we observe that in the Central, Eastern and Southern
provinces, the most relevant cash crop activity is cotton.              Poultry and Livestock are
also important sources of income, particularly in the Southern Province. Tobacco is a
promising activity in the Eastern Province, and hybrid maize in the Central province. In the
Copperbelt, the most relevant activities are vegetables and hybrid maize; in Luapula, they
  5
    See Porto (2004) for a descriptive household production model with these features. This model builds
on previous work by Singh, Squire and Strauss (1986), Barnum and Squire (1979) and Benjamin (1992).


                                                   9
are groundnuts and cassava; in Northern, cassava and beans; and in North-Western, cassava.
In all the provinces, Livestock and Poultry are two good sources of agricultural income.
       A key aspect of international trade is that it opens up markets for new products. This
implies that some relatively minor sources of income may become quantitatively more
important as non-traditional exports grow.               Notice, however, that in order to extract
meaningful information from the LCMS household survey, we face the practical constraint
of sample sizes in our analysis. The data on the number of households reporting positive
income and the average value of income for diﬀerent agricultural activities reported in Table
6 give a sense of the potential relevance of those activities. Based on this information, we
identify the following meaningful agricultural activities: cotton, vegetables (including beans),
tobacco (in the eastern province only), groundnuts, hybrid maize, cassava, sunflower, and
livestock and poultry.
       We turn now to a description of the methods that we use. Our aim is to estimate
the diﬀerential income generated by market agricultural activities vis-a-vis subsistence
agriculture, and to explore the poverty alleviation eﬀects of allowing for an expansion of
cash market activities among Zambian farmers. We use matching methods based on the
propensity score. There is a large literature on matching methods. Original pieces include
Rubin (1977) and Rosembaun and Rubin (1983). More recently, Heckman, Ichimura and
Todd (1997) and (1998), and Heckman, Ichimura, Smith and Todd (1996) extended and
assessed these methods. Dehejia and Wahba (2002) provided a practical examination of
propensity score matching methods using the data in Lalonde (1986).
       We perform separate matching exercises, one for each of the cash agricultural activities
previously identified in Table 6 (i.e. cotton, tobacco, hybrid maize, groundnuts, vegetables,
cassava, sunflower, and rural labor markets).6 We estimate a probit model of participation
into market agricultural, which defines the propensity score p(x), for a given vector of
observables x. Subsistence farmers are matched with market farmers based on this propensity
score, and the income diﬀerential is estimated using kernel methods. Details follow.
   6
     We do not consider the case of Livestock and Poultry because, first, it seems reasonable to assume that
this activity requires larger initial investments and, second, because Zambia has not dealt with the problem
of animal disease yet.



                                                    10
   Let yhm be the income per hectare in market agriculture (e.g. cotton) of household h.
Let yhs be the home produced own consumption per hectare. Define an indicator variable
M, where M = 1 if the household derives most of their income from cash agriculture. In
practice, most Zambian households in rural areas produce something for own consumption.
As a consequence, we assign M = 1 to households that derive more than 50 percent of their
income from a given cash agricultural activity. Households that derive most of their income
from home production are assigned M = 0. The propensity score p(x) is defined as the
conditional probability of participating in market agriculture


     p(x) = P (M = 1|x).


We are interested in estimating the average income diﬀerential of those involved in cash
market agriculture. This can be defined as


     τ = E[yhm − yhs |M = 1].


The main assumption of matching methods is that the participation into market agriculture
can be based on observables. This is the ignorability of treatment assignment. More formally,
we require that yhm , yhs ⊥ M | x. When the propensity score is balanced, we know that M ⊥ x
| p(x). This means that, conditional on p(x), the participation in market agriculture M and
the observables x are independent. In other words, observations with a given propensity score
have the same distribution of observables x for households involved in market agriculture
as in subsistence. The importance of the balancing property, which can be tested, is that it
implies that


     yhm , yhs ⊥ M|p(x).


This means that, conditionally on p(x), the returns in market agriculture and in subsistence
are independent of market participation, which implies that households in subsistence and
in cash agriculture are comparable.


                                             11
       In general, the assumption that participation depends on observables can be quite strong.
In Zambia, the decision to be involved in market agriculture seems to depend on three main
variables: access to markets, food security, and tradition in subsistence agriculture. Farmers
need market access to sell their agricultural products. In Zambia, many farmers reveal
strong preferences to secure food needs before engaging in market agriculture. This behavior
is probably aﬀected by issues of risk aversion and lack of insurance. Tradition in agriculture
may be the consequence of risk aversion, but may be related to know-how and social capital in
food agriculture. We capture these eﬀects by including in the propensity function several key
control variables like regional (district) dummies, the size of the household, the demographic
structure of the family, the age and the education of the household head, and the availability
of agricultural tools. We believe these variables x comprise a comprehensive set of observables
to explain the selection mechanism.7 Table 7 reports the results of the estimation of the
probit model for the most important cash agriculture crops.
       In all our exercises, the balancing condition is tested following the procedure suggested by
Dehejia and Whaba (2002). In all the cases, except for paprika and sunflower, the balancing
property is satisfied. This is a minor requirement that we impose in our procedure (we
cannot test the ignorability requirement). In addition, as suggested by Dehejia and Whaba
(2002) and Heckman et al. (1997, 1998), we graph histograms of the propensity score for
those in market and those in subsistence. For the case of cotton, for example, such a plot is
reported in Figure 1. These graphs are important because they reveal the usefulness of the
estimated propensity score as a predictor of the selection process. Since we are matching
farmers on the basis of these propensity scores, we would like to find that the predicted
probability for those farmers in subsistence is similar to the predicted probabilities for those
farmers actually doing cash agriculture. In other words, these graphs shows the number of
subsistence farmers that can be meaningfully matched with cotton farmers. In Figure 1, for
instance, we find suﬃcient overlaps in the propensity scores.8 This means that, at least in
the region of common support of the propensity score, there are enough comparison units to
   7
      The role of other important variables, such as rainfall or temperature which are not directly available,
is captured by the district dummies.
    8
      Similar results are found in most of the other agricultural activities considered in this paper.



                                                     12
match each cotton producer.9
      There are two models that we want to explore, the constrained household model and
the unconstrained household model. In the latter, households are assumed not to face
significant constraints in terms of land, family labor supply, or inputs. This means that it
would be possible for the household to plant an additional hectare of, say, cotton or cassava.
In this case, the relevant quantity to estimate is the income that could be earned in cash
activities. There would be no forgone income by expanding cash crop activities. In contrast,
in the constrained household model, land or labor impose a limitation to farming activities.
If a family were to plant an additional acre of cotton, then an acre of land devoted to
own-consumption (and other relevant resources) should be released.
      It is unclear which model better explains the situation in Zambia. In some regions, land
availability seems not to be a real constraint and farmers could in principle use additional
hectares at no cost. In some places, labor supply and labor discipline seem to be a more
important limitation. Access to seeds and inputs is relatively widespread in the case of
cotton due to the outgrower scheme (section 2). Other crops, such as hybrid maize, may
require purchases of seeds in advance, something that may be diﬃcult for many farmers.
Fertilizers may also be expensive, but governmental subsidy programs in place may help
ease the constraints. In any case, it is our belief that important lessons can be learnt from
the comparison of the results in the two models. The constrained model would give a
sense of the short run benefits of moving away from subsistence to market agriculture. The
unconstrained model would reveal the additional benefits to Zambian farmers of helping
release major agricultural constraints.
      Results are reported in Table 8. The first vertical panel corresponds to the gains per
hectare in the constrained model. In the second panel, the constrained household is assumed
to expand cash agricultural activities by the average size of the plots devoted to each of
these activities. The third panel reports the gains per hectare in the unconstrained model;
this model is directly comparable to that in the first panel. The last panel reports the gains
in the unconstrained model in the hypothetical situation in which the farmer moves from
  9
     It is recommended that farmers in the region of non-common support be excluded from the sample. We
followed this suggestion in the estimation of the average eﬀects.


                                                  13
subsistence to market, but devoting the average area to the market crop.
       We begin by describing the case of cotton, the major market crop in some provinces.
In the constrained model, farmers growing cotton are expected to gain 18,232 kwachas, on
average, more than similar farmers engaged in subsistence agriculture. The gain is equivalent
to 19.9 percent of the average expenditure of a representative poor farmer. To get a better
sense of what these numbers mean, notice that the food poverty line in 1998 was estimated
at Kw 32,233 per month and the poverty line, at 46,287 per month (per equivalent adult).
Further, since the exchange rate in December 1998 was around 2,200 Kw, the gains are
equivalent to just over 8 US dollars (at 1998 prices).
       So far, we have assumed that farmers give up one hectare of own-consumption to produce
an additional hectare of cotton. But the actual gains will depend on the area of cotton
planted. One alternative exercise is to allow farmers to plant the average size of a typical
cotton plot, which is estimated at 1.2 hectares. In this case, the constrained model generates
a gain of Kw 21,878. This is equivalent to 23.9 percent of the income of the poor. This model
is perhaps more meaningful than the one-hectare exercise. It is important to notice that the
average size of the land plots allocated to home production ranges from 1.5 to 5 hectares,
with an unconditional average of around 2 hectares. This means that, on average, households
would be able to substitute away of own-consumption activities and towards cotton growing
activities.
       Our findings highlight important gains from switching to cotton.                       However, the
magnitudes do not look too high, particularly given the relevance of cotton as an export
commodity. One explanation for this result is that we have been working with the constrained
model, thereby a farmer must forgo income to earn cotton income.                          If some of these
constraints were eliminated, so that households could earn extra income from cotton without
giving up subsistence income, gains would be much higher. We estimate these gains with the
mean cotton income, conditional on positive income and on being matched with a subsistence
farmer.10 The expected gain from planting an additional hectare of cotton would be 51,516
  10
    This matching implies two things. First, it means that the balancing property between cotton growers
and subsistence farmers is satisfied. Second, it means that if a cotton farmer is too diﬀerent from subsistence
farmers, so that a match does not exist, then the income of this farmer is not used in the estimation of the
average gain.


                                                      14
Kw (or approximately 10,273 Kw per equivalent adult). These are larger gains, equivalent
to around 56.4 percent of the average expenditure of poor households in rural areas. If the
farmer were to grow the average size of cotton crops in Zambia (i.e., 1.2 hectares), then
the gains in the unconstrained model would be 61,883 Kw, which is roughly equal to 67.7
percent of the average expenditure of the poor.
   Another commercial crop with great potentials in international markets is tobacco. In
the constrained model, the gain per hectare of switching from subsistence agriculture to
tobacco would be 80,661 monthly kwachas, or roughly 88.2 percent of average total household
expenditure. Since, on average, 0.8 hectares are allocated to tobacco, the household would
gain 64,529 Kwachas if this plot size were planted. In the unconstrained model, the gain
would be 119,124 Kw, around 130 percent of the total expenditure of an average poor
household. If the average of 0.8 hectares were planted (without any constrains), the income
gains would reach 95,299 Kw, approximately doubling expenditure. Growing tobacco seems
to be an important vehicle for poverty alleviation.
   Results for vegetables and groundnuts, two activities often mentioned as good prospects
for non-traditional exports, reveal that no statistically significant gains can be expected in
the constrained model. In the data, there is evidence of higher earnings in planting vegetables
and lower earnings in planting groundnuts but neither is statistically significant. Instead,
gains can be realized if the constrains are released. For vegetables, the gain per hectare
would be 89,451 Kw, or 33,991 Kw if the average plot size devoted to this crop is planted.
This is 37,2 percent of total average household expenditure. In the case of groundnuts, these
gains would be equivalent to only 20 percent of the expenditure of households in poverty.
   One key crop in Zambia is maize, which is grown by the vast majority of households.
Farmers grow local varieties and hybrid maize.           The former is mainly devoted to
own-consumption and is not considered suitable for world markets.           Hybrid maize is,
instead, potentially exportable. In Table 8, we find that a farmer that switches from purely
subsistence activities to produce (and sell) hybrid maize would make 50,933 additional
kwachas. This gain, which is statistically significant, is equivalent to 55.7 percent of the
expenditure of the poor. This is the expected gain, on average, since the average plot


                                              15
allocated to hybrid maize is estimated at precisely 1 hectare. If we assume that an additional
hectare of maize is planted in a model without household constraints, the income diﬀerential
would be 100,800 kwachas or around the average expenditure of poor households.
       These are important results. To begin with, we find support for the argument that
claims that income gains can be achieved through the production and sale of hybrid maize.
In addition, since most Zambian farmers across the whole country grow (or grew) maize,
there is a presumption that they are able to produce it eﬃciently and that some of the
constraints faced in other crops may not be present. Know-how, fertilizer use, seeds usage,
are examples. In those regions in which cotton and tobacco, major exportable crops, are not
suitable agricultural activities (due to weather or soil conditions), the production of hybrid
maize appears as a valid alternative.
       Other crops identified as potentially exportable are cassava and sunflowers. These turn
out to be irrelevant cases. The data were not good enough to allow for a meaningful
evaluation of the benefits from exports. Either sample sizes were too small or the balancing
conditions required to apply matching methods was not satisfied. This does not mean that
there will be no gains from developing these markets but rather that the data are not
suitable for our analysis. Finally, we have decided not to pursue the investigation of the
cases of livestock and poultry, mainly because they involve significant initial investments. In
addition, disease control is critical in these activities, and it is unclear whether Zambia will
manage to achieve the standards needed to compete in international markets.
       There is an additional exercise that we perform. If larger market access is achieved, rural
labor markets may expand and workers may become employed and earn a wage. We can
learn about the magnitudes of the income gains of moving from home plot agriculture to
rural wage employment in agriculture by comparing the average income obtained in these
activities. Concretely, we compare the average monthly wages of those workers employed in
rural labor markets with the own-consumption per working household member in subsistence
agriculture.11 In Table 8, we estimate a gain of 95,307 Kw per month in the constrained
model (so that individuals would have to leave farming activities at home to work at a
  11
    This is computed as the ratio of reported own-consumption and the total number of household members
that work in subsistence agriculture.


                                                  16
local large farm). In the unconstrained model (i.e., a model in which the worker becomes
employed but keeps working in subsistence during the weekends), the gains would be 117,305
Kw. These gains range from 104.2 percent to 128.3 percent of the total expenditure of the
average poor household in rural areas.
      As in the cases of cotton, tobacco, and maize, the magnitudes of these gains suggest that
rural employment in commercial farms could be good instruments for poverty alleviation.
By fostering the development of larger scale agricultural activities, there is evidence that
international trade opportunities can help rural farmers to move out of poverty through
rural labor markets, employment and wage income.
      It is important to show some evidence that the kind of switching that we are describing
can actually take place. A careful answer to this question requires a panel dataset that
would allow us to track farmers that switched from subsistence to market agriculture, and
compare their welfare before and after the switch. Unfortunately, this type of data is not
available in Zambia. However, an overview of farm dynamics can be provided by comparing
the evolution of the shares of income derived from cash agriculture at diﬀerent time periods.
Concretely, we estimate the average share of income generated by market agriculture in 1996
and 1998 at diﬀerent point of the income distribution. We use non-parametric regressions
(Fan, 1992; Pagan and Ullah, 1999). Figure 2 displays the results: the solid line represents
the average shares in 1998 while the broken line corresponds to the averages in 1996. The
graph reveals a clear switch towards market agriculture during the 1996-98 period. Among
the poorest farmers, for instance, the share of income derived from cash agriculture increased
from around 2 to 8 percent to over 20 percent. From the middle to the top of the income
distribution, the increase in shares is of roughly 10 percentage points.
      This analysis clearly indicates that the increase in market agriculture is correlated with
the observed increase in exports of non-traditional agricultural products. This implies that
the expansion of these activities is not simply due to a contraction of other traditional
sectors such as copper. Also, copper production is mainly an urban phenomenon aﬀecting
more urban employment than rural activities.12
 12
      Notice, however, that there might be spillover eﬀects through migration or remittances.



                                                     17
   Our interpretation of the results so far is as follows.        We provided evidence of
an increase in non-traditional exports that is concurrent with an increase in income
shares coming from non-traditional agricultural. This implies that, faced with new trade
opportunities, some Zambian farmers have switched from subsistence farming to cash market
agriculture. This switch is only partial since many farmers continue to produce some food
for own-consumption, but Figure 2 reveals that switching is indeed a possibility. In addition,
we showed that there are still income gains that could potentially be realized from further
switching to market agriculture. The combination of these farm dynamics with the evidence
of income gains estimated in Table 8 suggests a natural role of trade and markets as vehicles
for poverty alleviation.
   The fact that there are income gains to be realized in market agriculture means that there
are severe distortions and constraints in rural Zambia. We think of export opportunities as a
way of releasing some of these constraints by providing markets for Zambian products. Access
to international markets seems to be a basic prerequisite for successful poverty alleviation.
But this is not enough. The realization of the gains associated with export opportunities will
become feasible with complementary domestic policies. These may include extension services
to farmers (transmission of information and know-how about cropping, crop diversification,
fertilizer and pesticide use), the provision of infrastructure and irrigation, the development
of a stronger financial and credit markets, and the provision of education (both formal
education and labor discipline) and better health services.
   It is easy to see why complementary policies matter. More educated households will be
more prepared to face international markets, and will be more prepared to adopt new crops
and production techniques. If credit is made accessible to rural farmers, a larger fraction
of them will be able to cover any necessary initial investment (in seeds, fertilizer, tools)
needed to substitute subsistence production for cotton production (for instance). If better
infrastructure is provided, transaction and production costs will be lower, facilitating trade
of cash crops. And if better marketing opportunities arise, farmers will be “closer” to the
market.
   It is very hard, due to data limitation, to empirically investigate the role of these


                                             18
complementary policies.13 In rural areas in Africa, though, many of the relevant issues can
be illustrated by looking at extension services in agriculture. These are services provided
by the government (and by some agricultural intermediaries) that give farmers information
and support on a variety of topics. These include information about markets, prices, buyers,
and sellers; education on technology adoption, crop diversification, and crop husbandry;
information on fertilizer use, seeds, and machinery. And many other aspects of every day
topics that may take place in the process of agricultural production. In consequence, we
believe that a lot can be said about the role of complementary policies by looking at the
impacts of extension services on farm productivity. This is only an example of the role of
those policies, but one that, we believe, makes a clear point about what can be done to help
farmers take full advantage of new market opportunities.
       To look at extension services and farm productivity, we use data from the Zambian
Post Harvest Survey. These data are collected annually by the Central Statistical Oﬃce
(CSO) in Zambia. The survey is a farm survey: farmers are asked about production, yields,
input use, basic household characteristics and demographics, etc. One important question
for our purposes is whether the household received extension services or not. Using this
information, we estimate a simple model of cotton productivity. The dependent variable is
yield of cotton per hectare of cultivated land. We control for some important determinants
of agricultural production, such as input use, the size of the farm, the age of the household
head, year dummies and district dummies. More importantly, we include a dummy variable
for whether the household received extension services of not.
       Results are reported in Table 9.     As expected, we find that cotton yields respond
positively to the use of pesticides. The age and sex of the household head are not significant
determinants of agricultural productivity. Instead, there is some evidence that smaller
farmers are more productive. The last row of Table 8 reports the main result that we want to
highlight: we find that households that have received extension services are on average more
productive in market agriculture than households that have not received extension services.
In fact, receiving agricultural extension services increases production per hectare by 8.4
  13
    The analysis that follows was motivated by a comment from M. Slaughter to include a more detailed
study of one policy.


                                                 19
percent! This corroborates the idea that education, information, and marketing services are
key factors driving the best practice supply responses that are needed to secure gains from
international trade.14



4       Expenditures
In this section, we investigate some of the consumption eﬀects of price reforms in Zambia. We
begin by describing the structure of expenditure. Table 10 reports the average budget shares
spent by Zambian households in diﬀerent goods in 1998. As expected, most of the budget
was spent on food, with a national average share of 67.5 percent. The average was higher in
rural areas (reaching 73.6 percent) and lower in urban areas (56.6 percent). Further, the poor
spent a larger share of total expenditure on food than the non-poor. At the national level,
for instance, 71.7 percent of the total expenditure of an average poor family was devoted to
food, while for non-poor households the average was 59.2 percent.
      Other goods accounting for a significant share of total expenditure were Personal Items,
Housing, Transport, Alcohol & Tobacco and Education. However, these average shares
were always below 10 percent. The usual diﬀerences between urban and rural households,
and between the poor and the non-poor were observed. For instance, non-poor households
tended to spend a larger fraction of expenditure on Clothing, Personal Items, Housing and
Transportation. Budget shares on Education and Health were not diﬀerent across poor and
non-poor households. Comparing rural and urban households, we find that rural households
consumed more food, and urban households more Personal Items, Housing, Transportation
and Education. Shares spent on Clothing, Health, and Alcohol & Tobacco were not very
diﬀerent.
      There is one fundamental lesson that can be learnt from Table 10. In Zambia, as in many
low income developing countries, the largest fraction of household expenditure is spent on
food. In consequence, the largest impacts of trade policies and economic reforms on the
consumption side will be caused by changes in the prices of food items. Expenditures on
 14
      For a more detailed analysis of cotton reforms and farm productivity, see Brambilla and Porto (2004).



                                                     20
other non-food items are relatively less important in terms of total expenditure, the welfare
impacts being lower as a result.
   Maize is the main food item consumed in Zambia. There are four main types of maize
consumption: home produced maize, mugaiwa, roller maize and breakfast meal. Roller and
breakfast meal comprise industrial maize produced by large scale mills. Both are finely
grinded maize, but roller is a lower quality staple. Mugaiwa is the meal composed of maize
grain that is grinded by small scale hammermills. Sometimes farmers (especially women)
take the peel oﬀ the grain before taking it to the hammermill, leading to a tastier maize
meal.
   Table 11 shows that maize consumption indeed accounts for a large share of expenditure.
In 1998, 18.5 percent of the average budget went to maize outlays at the national level; the
corresponding figures in rural and urban areas were 21 percent and 14.2 percent. The total
expenditure on maize was relatively balanced between home production, industrial maize
and mugaiwa. However, it is clear that households in rural areas spent a larger share on
home produced maize and on mugaiwa than households in urban areas, which spent more
on industrial maize. There were important provincial diﬀerences in maize shares. In Lusaka,
which includes the capital city, the average household devoted a moderate share to maize,
mostly to industrial varieties. In Luapula and in Northern province, the shares spent on
maize were much lower. This is because these regions specialize in growing cassava rather
than maize (and, in Luapala, fishing is a key economic activity). In the remaining provinces,
maize was the main staple.
   Zambia adopted large reforms in the maize sector during the 1990s. Before 1993, maize
marketing was controlled by a maize marketing board, which set prices for maize grain
and maize meal. In particular, breakfast and roller meals were heavily subsidized. In
1993, the government eliminated all price controls. Given the importance of maize as a
food expenditure in Zambia, in what follows we investigate the consumption eﬀects of the
elimination of these large consumption subsidies.
   The government subsidized maize to consumers by regulating maize milling and sales.
Large-scale mills located in urban centers distributed industrial maize (breakfast and roller


                                             21
meal) throughout the country and controlled most of the market for maize meal. Small-scale
mills (hammermills) were not allowed to participate in maize marketing. Their function was
to mill own-produced grain for home consumption. Because of the subsidies to production
and industrial maize, it was often cheaper for rural consumers to sell their harvested maize
and buy cheap milled maize.
       When the marketing board was eliminated, consumer prices for breakfast and roller maize
increased significantly. However, the government liberalized the small-scale hammermill
sector, allowing mills to enter the market. This facilitated the growth of consumption of
mugaiwa, a cheaper form of maize meal where households would bring grain to the small
hammermills for grinding services. The introduction of competition in the milling industry
allowed for the availability of cheaper varieties of meal maize and consumers were able to
ameliorate the negative impacts of the elimination of the subsidies.
       There is a caveat, though. In times of production shortages, Zambia resorts to imported
maize to satisfy food needs.           Traditionally, industrial large-scale mills, as opposed to
hammermills, have been able to import maize or have been granted preferential access to
publicly imported grain (Mwiinga et al., 2002). These constraints on small-scale mills can
force households to consume larger shares of industrial maize, and lower shares of mugaiwa
meal, with consequent welfare costs in terms of food security.
       We turn next to the investigation of the consumption eﬀects of the reforms.15 When
the marketing board was eliminated, industrial maize became too expensive for many
households.16 On top of the higher cost due to the removal of the subsidy, the privatized mill
industry could have acted as a monopoly, leading to prices well above marginal costs. With
large average budget shares spent on industrial maize (Table 10), such price increases would
have significant welfare costs for Zambian consumers. For instance, a 100 percent increase
in prices with a budget share of 15 percent among poor households in urban areas would
  15
     Due to lack of data on input use and transport costs at the household level, we do not investigate the
welfare losses caused by the elimination of support prices to producers, which is therefore left as a topic for
future research.
  16
     Anecdotal evidence indicates that, in 1991, when the Zambian government first attempted to get rid of
the marketing board as recommended by the IMF, prices of industrial maize in urban areas raised by as
much as 100 percent. This led to riots and demonstrations that forced the government to reverse the initial
reform.


                                                      22
lead to a welfare loss of 15 percent of initial total household expenditure.
   To assess the impacts of these reforms on consumers, we would like to estimate a system
of demand for diﬀerent varieties of maize and use the structural parameters of demand to
carry out an evaluation of the policy changes. In the case of Zambia, data constraints make
it impossible to carry out a comprehensive examination of the dynamics of maize demand. It
is possible, however, to provide a simpler analysis of the costs of the removal of the subsidies
by looking at budget shares. As shown by Deaton (1989), the eﬀect of a price change can
be approximated by budget shares.
   For our purposes, there are three relevant budget shares: on maize own-consumption,
on breakfast and roller maize (industrial maize), and on mugaiwa maize. We are interested
in capturing the extent of substitution responses in the consumption of diﬀerent types of
maize. We can do this by estimating the average budget share, conditional on the level of
household expenditure. To estimate these averages non-parametrically, we use Fan (1992)
locally weighted regressions. We estimate a regression function for 1991 (before the maize
reforms) and another for 1998 (after the reform).
   Figure 3 plots the non-parametric averages by level of per equivalent adult expenditure for
rural Zambia in 1991. In the Priority Survey, we only have information on the share spent
on industrial maize. Expenditure on mugaiwa was negligible, since the milling industry
was not liberalized, and the expenditure on own-consumption was not disaggregated into
individual components. In any case, it is possible to observe that the share of industrial maize
expenditure declines with income (as predicted by Engel Law). For the poorest households,
the shares reach 14 percent of the budget. These large fractions are explained in part by the
prevalence of the consumer subsidies.
   Figure 4 estimates the Fan regressions after the reforms.          The Living Conditions
Monitoring Survey for 1998 includes data on many types of maize consumption. Thus,
we can describe the whole pattern of household expenditures. The solid line represents the
average budget share spent on industrial maize (breakfast and roller), the broken line, the
share spent on own consumption, and the dotted line, on mugaiwa. We observe that the
most important source of maize meal in 1998 is mugaiwa, particularly for poorer households


                                              23
(which show shares of over 15 percent of total expenditure). The share of own-consumption
increases with income at the bottom of the distribution, and then declines with it as income
grows. Instead, the share of industrial maize is relatively constant at all income levels.
      This analysis clearly shows how rural households have substituted away from industrial
maize and towards mugaiwa maize. Estimates by Mwiinga et al. (2002) indicate that the
price of mugaiwa maize (which involves grain expenses plus milling services) is only about
60 to 80 percent of the price of industrial maize. The pattern of substitution reported by
Zambian households thus reveals the benefits brought about by the possibility of having
access to this cheaper source of maize meal. For this to be possible, liberalization of the
market was critical. Moreover, it is even possible for consumers to benefit from the overall
reforms (elimination of marketing board and concurrent liberalization of mills) if, due to the
deregulation, mugaiwa prices declined (much) below the price of industrial maize before the
reform.17
      As already mentioned, there are some restrictions on small mills imposed by the
government. Since Zambia substantially relies on maize for food security, the country must
resort to imports in times of production shortages. Typically, the government would grant
special privileges to import maize to large scale mills. They were allowed to import maize, or
they were given preferential access to government-imported maize. This implies that local
maize shortages, as those observed in 2001/2002 would be accompanied by a shortage of
mugaiwa. As a result, consumers would be forced to purchase more expensive industrial
maize. The estimated averages give us a sense of the important welfare eﬀects that this type
of regulations can impose on poor rural households.



5       Conclusions
In this paper, we have investigated some of the impacts of international trade and economic
reforms on rural households in Zambia. This is a low income country, with widespread and
prevalent poverty at the national and regional levels. In rural areas, poverty is still higher.
 17
      Unfortunately, there is no data on mugaiwa prices before the reform to better assess this outcome.



                                                     24
In this context, eﬀorts devoted to find ways to alleviate poverty should be welcome. In
Zambia, the government and international institutions have long been actively searching for
programs and policies to improve the living standards of the population. Concretely, a set
of reforms were implemented during the 1990s, including liberalization, privatization, and
deregulation of marketing boards in agriculture. Further, farmers and firms were encouraged
to look more closely at international markets.
   After episodes of economic reforms, households are aﬀected both as consumers
and as income earners.      Consequently, we have looked at these two aspects of the
globalization-poverty link. On the income side, we have estimated income gains from market
agriculture vis-a-vis subsistence agriculture. On the consumption side, we have investigated
the eﬀects of the elimination of the consumer subsidies on maize that were caused by the
elimination of the maize marketing board.
   International trade and export growth would bring about an increase in the demand for
traded goods produced by Zambian farmers. This includes cotton, tobacco, hybrid maize,
vegetables, and groundnuts. Further, by raising the demand for rural labor, rural wages
would increase as well. Our results indicate that rural Zambians would gain substantially
from expanding world markets, particularly in terms of cotton, tobacco, and maize income
as well as of wages.
   For this to be feasible, Zambia needs to have access to international markets. On the
one hand, this requires the liberalization of world agricultural markets. But complementary
policies would also be essential. On the production side, these include extension services
(information), infrastructure (transport), irrigation, access to credit and finance, education,
and health services.
   The elimination of consumer subsidies on the main staple, maize, caused large welfare
losses on rural households. Here, complementary policies were shown to have important
eﬀects as well. On the one hand, the liberalization of the milling industry allowed for the
surge and development of the consumption of mugaiwa maize. This is a cheaper source
of maize meal. This allowed for a strong substitution pattern in consumption whereby
households would consume less of the expensive industrial maize varieties and more of the


                                              25
cheaper mugaiwa. On the other hand, the restrictions on imports of maize by small mills
limited the extent of substitution that was feasible in times of maize production shortages.


References
Barnum, H. and L. Squire (1979). “A model of an Agricultural Household. Theory and
Evidence,” World Bank Ocassional Papers No 27.

Benjamin, D. (1992). “Household Composition, Labor Markets, and Labor Demand: Testing
for Separation in Agricultural Household Models,” Econometrica 60, 287-322.

Brambilla, I. and G. Porto (2004). “Farm Productivity and Crop Choice. Evidence From
Cotton Marketing Reforms in Zambia,” mimeo Yale University.

Cotton News (2002). Cotton Development Trust, Zambia.

Deaton, A. (1989). “Rice Prices and Income Distribution in Thailand: a Non-Parametric
Analysis,” Economic Journal, vol. 99, pp. 1-37.

Deaton, A. (1990). “Price Elasticities from Survey Data,” Journal of Econometrics, vol. 44,
pp. 281-309.

Deaton, A. (1997). The Analysis of Household Surveys. A Microeconometric Approach to
Development Policy, John Hopkins University Press for the World Bank.

Dehejia, R., and S. Wahba (2002). “Propensity Score Matching Methods for
Non-Experimental Causal Studies,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 84, No 1, pp. 151-161.

Fan, J. (1992). “Design-adaptive Nonparametric Regression,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, vol. 87, No 420, December, pp. 998-1004.

Food Security Research Project (2000). “Improving Smallholder and Agribusiness
Opportunities in Zambia’s Cotton Sector: Key Challenges and Options,” Working Paper
No 1, Lusaka, Zambia.

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, J. Smith, and P. Todd (1996). “Sources of Selection Bias in
Evaluating Social Programs: An Interpretation of Conventional Measures and Evidence on
the Eﬀectiveness of Matching as a Program Evaluation Method,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, vol. 93 (23), pp. 13426-13420.

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, and P. Todd (1997). “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation
Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Programme,” Review of Economic
Studies, vol. 64 (4), pp. 605-654.

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, and P. Todd (1998). “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation
Estimator,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 65 (2), pp. 261-294.


                                             26
Lalonde, R. (1986). “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs,”
American Economic Review, 76(4), pp. 604-620.

Litchfield, J. and N. McCulloch (2003). “Poverty in Zambia: Assessing the Impacts of Trade
Liberalization in the 1990s,” mimeo, Poverty Research Unit, Sussex University.

McCulloch, N., B. Baulch, and M. Cherel-Robson (2001). “Poverty, Inequality and Growth
in Zambia During the 1990s,” presented at WIDER Development Conference, Helsinski, May
2001.

Mwiinga, W., J. Nijhoﬀ, T. Jayne, G. Tembo and J. Shaﬀer (2002). “The Role of Mugaiwa
in Promoting Household Food Security,” Policy Synthesis No 5, Food Security Research
Project, Zambia.

Pagan, A. and A. Ullah (1999). Nonparametric Econometrics. Cambridge University Press,
New York.

Porto, G. (2004). “Informal Export Barriers and Poverty,” forthcoming Journal of
International Economics.

Rosenbaum, P., and D. Rubin (1983). “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
Observational Studies of Causal Eﬀects,” Biometrika, 70(1), pp. 41-55.

Rubin, D. (1977). “Assignment to a Treatment Group on the Basis of a Covariate,” Journal
of Educational Statistics, 2(1) pp. 1-26.

Singh, I., L. Squire, and J. Strauss, eds. (1986). Agricultural Household Models: Extensions,
Applications and Policy, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press for the World Bank.

Winters, A., N. McCulloch, and A. McKay (2004). “Trade Liberalization and Poverty: The
Evidence So Far,” Journal of Economic Literature, XLII, pp. 72-115.

World Bank (1994). Zambia Poverty Assessment, Washington DC.




                                             27
                  Table 1
             Poverty in Zambia
               (head count)


                   1991       1996     1998
     National       69.6      80.0      71.5
     Rural          88.3      90.5      82.1
     Urban          47.2      62.1      53.4
    Note: The head count is the percentage
    of the population below the poverty line.
    Own calculations based on Priority Sur-
    vey (1991), Living Conditions Monitor-
    ing Survey (1996) and Living Conditions
    Monitoring Survey (1998).




                 Table 2
          Poverty Profile in 1998
              (head count)


                      total     rural     urban
National               71.5     82.1       53.4
Central                74.9     82.3       60.5
Copperbelt             63.2     82.1       57.5
Eastern                79.1     80.6       64.4
Luapula                80.1     84.6       52.4
Lusaka                 48.4     75.7       42.4
Northern               80.6     83.3       66.4
North-Western          74.3     77.4       54.1
Southern               68.2     73.0       51.8
Western                88.1     90.3       69.5
Note: The head count is the percentage of the pop-
ulation below the poverty line. Own calculations
based on the Living Conditions Monitoring Survey
(1998).




                       28
                                             Table 3
                             Major Economic Reforms. Zambia 1989—1998

          Stabilization Policy        Agricultural Price                                    Parastatal Reform
 Year                                                              Trade Reforms
            and Key Events             and Marketing                                        and Privatization


 1989   Decontrol of all con-       Abolition of national
        sumer prices (except        maize       marketing
        maize).                     board.

 1990   Policy Framework Pa-        Demonopolization of
        per agreed with IMF.        agricultural marketing;
                                    maize meal subsidy
                                    withdrawn.

 1991   IMF suspends dis-                                      Removal of most ex-
        bursements in June.                                    port controls; removal
        Inflation soars. Elec-                                 of ban on maize ex-
        tion of MMD in                                         ports.
        October.

 1992   Introduction of Treas-      Severe drought; re-        Simplification     and
        ury Bill Financing; de-     moval of mealie meal       compression of tariﬀ
        control of borrowing        subsidy; removal of fer-   rates; increase in the
        and lending rates; in-      tilizer subsidy.           tariﬀ preference for
        troduction of "bureau                                  goods from COMESA.
        de change" for ex-
        change rate determina-
        tion.

 1993   Introduction   of    cash   Failed attempt to re-                                 Privatization      act
        budgeting.                  form agricultural mar-                                passed; Zambia Privat-
                                    keting.                                               ization Agency formed

 1994   Capital account liber-      Launch of the Agricul-
        alization.                  tural Credit Manage-
                                    ment Programme.

 1995                               Privatization of the       Removal of 20 percent      Dissolution of the Zam-
                                    milling        industry;   uplift factor applied to   bia Industria and Min-
                                    launch of WB agricul-      import values.             ning Corportation (ZI-
                                    tural sector investment                               MCO).
                                    programme.

 1996   MMD wil        elections                                                          Acceleration of privat-
        but UNIP        boycott                                                           ization programme.
        elections.

 1997   Donors withdraw bal-
        ance of payment sup-
        port.

 1998   Copper    prices      ad-                                                         Negotiations on Zam-
        versely aﬀected        by                                                         bia Consolidated Cop-
        East Asian crisis.                                                                per Mines (ZCCM) sale
                                                                                          fall through.

Source: McCullogh, Baulch and Cherel-Robson (2001) and Litchfield and McCullogh (2003).




                                                        29
                                               Table 4
                                        Exports, 1990—1999
                                       (millions of US dollars)


                                                                                Annual Growth Rate
                                                                                 Actual   Projected
                                  1990   1995   1996    1997      1998   1999   1990-1999 1999-2010
Metal Exports                     1168   1039    754    809       630    468
Non-Traditional Exports           89      178    226    315       308    298
  Primary Agriculture             15       24     38     91        62     73      22%       13%
  Floricultural Products           1       14     18     21        33     43      52%       13%
  Textiles                         9       39     40     51        42     37      17%       13%
  Processed & Refined Foods        6       25     34     31        49     33      24%       17%
  Horticultural Products          5        4      9     16        21     24       19%       13%
  Engineering Products            20       39     37     42        32    23        2%        8%
  Semi-Precious Stones             8       8      11     15        12     14      21%       13%
  Building Materials               4       5       8     12         9     10      11%        8%
  Other Manufactures               0       1       1     3          3      7                11%
  Petroleoum Oils                 11       11      6     2          7      6      —7%        7%
  Chemical Products                3       2       3     8          7      6      8%        —4%
  Animal Products                  2        1      2      3         4      4       8%       16%
  Wood Products                    1       1       2     3         3       3      13%        8%
  Leather Products                1        2      2      2         3      2       8%        16%
  Non-Metallic Minerals            2        1      1      1         1      1                13%
  Garments                         3       0       0     0          0      0     —20%       23%
  Handicrafts                      0       0      0      0         0       0      29%       11%
  Re-exports                       0               4     4          4      3
  Scrap Metal                      0              11     6          4      6                 0%
  Mining                          0                      4        12       3
Total Commodity Exports           1257   1217    981    1123      937    766      —5%       11%
Metal Share of Total              93%    85%     77%    72%       67%    61%
Source: Bank of Zambia and IMF.




                                                 30
                                                     Table 5
                                                Sources of Income
                                                  (percentage)


                                        National                        Rural                         Urban
                                total poor non-poor            total poor non-poor           total poor non-poor
Own Production          28.3            33.3       19.1        42.5    42.9      42.0         3.3     4.4       2.4
Sales of Food Crops      6.3             7.6        3.8         9.1     9.5       7.6         1.4     1.7       1.1
Sales on non-Food Crops 2.5              3.0        1.3         3.8     4.0       2.9         0.1     0.1       0.1
Livestock & Poultry     5.5             6.8         2.9        8.1      8.7       5.9        0.8      1.0      0.7
Wages                   20.8            14.4       32.9        6.9      5.9      10.3        45.3    40.3      49.4
Income non-farm         22.3            20.9       24.9        16.8    16.3      18.3        32.0    34.7      29.7
Remittances             4.9              5.0        4.8        5.3      5.0       6.1         4.3     4.9       3.9
Other sources           9.5              9.0       10.3        7.5     7.7       6.9         12.8    13.0      12.7
                                100.0 100.0       100.0        100.0 100.0      100.0       100.0 100.0        100.0
Note: The table reports income shares. Own calculations based on Living Conditions Monitoring Survey (1998).




                                                          31
                                          Table 6
                      Income Shares, Average Income and Sample Sizes


Province               1      2        3      4       5      6       7        8       9    Total
Cotton
 -share of inc       8.4       0     9.5      0      0.8     0      0.1      2.8     0.2     3.1
 -mean of inc      50688   12808   24791      .    58447   167    10134    37016   12827   32254
 -sample size        177       1     370      0       24     1        9       91      11     684
Vegetables
 -share of inc       1.1    2.8     0.3     0.2      1.2    0.7    0.5      1.7      0.3    0.8
 -mean of inc      18774   7560    3291    3951    42630   3811   2071     4468    10872   7108
 -sample size         68     87      46      27       53    100     92      151       18    642
Tobacco
 -share of inc       0.2    0.1      2.3      0       0       0    0.1       0.2     0.1     0.5
 -mean of inc      41472   2434    58529    715     833    1001   2348    103252   38609   40590
 -sample size         10     11       67      8       1       8     21         8       5     139
Groundnuts
 -share of inc      0.9     0.7     2.4       2      0.2    1.4    1.1      0.4      0.2    1.2
 -mean of inc      6101    8605    4024    8510    16268   3941   7343     5746     2733   5316
 -sample size       107      53     290     184       22    259     97       92       31   1135
Paprika
 -share of inc         0       0     0.1      0       0      0       0        0       0        0
 -mean of inc      30579    1609   14116      .       .    250       .        .       .    13767
 -sample size          4       2       4      0       0      1       0        0       0       11
Industrial maize
  -share of inc      6.1       2     0.7     0.3     1.7    0.6     0.3      1.4     0.5     1.3
  -mean of inc     60377   24162   21075   20160   37910   9617   14924    36458    8929   33897
  -sample size       152      68      56      18      73     53      33      114      34     601
Cassava
 -share of inc      0.3     0.2      0.1    4.1       0     2.4    2.2      0.1      1.3    1.2
 -mean of inc      4148    1970    30753   7532    7910    4084   5162    12060     3760   5438
 -sample size        43      18        9    242       3     331    214       13       71    944
Maize
 -share of inc       4.4     3.1     3.2    0.5      1.1    0.9    3.8      0.9      2.6    2.2
 -mean of inc      13603   14825   10069   4575    14210   5758   7179     9463     7013   9209
 -sample size        122     114     186     56       49    108    332      103      142   1212
Rice
 -share of inc        0       0     0.3     0.1       0     0.1      0        0      1.2    0.2
 -mean of inc         .    1250    4614    6664       .    3884   1502        .     8040   5762
 -sample size         0       1      39       9       0      31      3        0       48    131
(cont.)



                                              32
                                              Table 6 (cont.)
                              Income Shares, Average Income and Sample Sizes


Province                  1         2         3         4           5         6         7         8         9    Total
Millet
 -share of inc         0.9       0.1       0.2       0.3            0      1.3         0         0       0.2       0.4
 -mean of inc         4821      1402      4253      2338            .     2727      1574      2250      3161      2965
 -sample size           26        12        29        48            0      222         7         1        33       378
Sorghum
 -share of inc         0.1       0.2          0        0           0.1     0.2       0.5          0      0.2       0.1
 -mean of inc         3409      5220        838     1209         35209    1938      4473          0     3002      3166
 -sample size           17        17          4       12             5      45        60          1       16       177
Beans
 -share of inc         0.2       0.1         0       0.5            0        2       0.8         0         0       0.5
 -mean of inc         6486      1922      6388      9668         8631    11007      3679      2679      2412      8598
 -sample size           18        17        12        49            2      219        95         8         3       423
Soya beans
 -share of inc         0.4         0       0.4       0.1             0       0         0         0          0     0.1
 -mean of inc        26102      3611      6277      6250          5427    3958       868       652          .   10989
 -sample size           19         3        30         1             2       6         2         2          0      65
Sweet potatoe
 -share of inc         0.9       2.8       0.1         1            0      0.3       1.6       0.1       0.5       0.7
 -mean of inc         5827      5547      2800      1820         1746     2082      3841      2546      5292      3658
 -sample size           57       154        26       110            9      124       159        29        29       697
Irish potatoe
  -share of inc          0       0.1         0       0.1          0          0       0.3      0.1           0      0.1
  -mean of inc        9987      8935      2494      5810     333333       2443      4321    25420           .     8135
  -sample size           5         6         7         6          1          6        31       13           0       75
Sunflower
 -share of inc         0.1         0       0.5          0            0     0.1       0.1       0.2          0      0.1
 -mean of inc        12656      4167      4834        750         7738    3424      1100      5770          .     5472
 -sample size           17         1        38          1            4      13         5        45          0      124
Livestock
  -share of inc        2.9       1.3       4.3       0.6           3.8       2      2.3         8       6.9       3.8
  -mean of inc       16126     11606     11910     11808         14285    8701    12955     44612     14936     19442
  -sample size         165        63       342        51           149     215      133       409       177      1704
Poultry
 -share of inc         6.4       2.2       4.5       2.7          5.9      3.4       2.8       4.6       6.7       4.3
 -mean of inc         3329      6530      2550      2061         5967     1940      2220      3762      1501      2778
 -sample size          476       228       766       476          291      731       510       637       365      4480
Note: Income shares are in percentage and mean of income in monthly Kwachas. Own calculations based on Living Conditions
Monitoring Survey (1998).




                                                            33
                                     Table 7
                                Probit Estimates
                       Selection into Market Agriculture

                     Cotton    Tobacco     Groundnuts     Vegetables    Maize     Wages
constant             −1.338     −4.233       −2.210         −0.331      −0.777     2.264
                     (0.796)    (1.821)      (0.709)        (0.734)     (0.988)   (0.919)
married              −0.135      0.892        0.289         −0.466      −0.250     0.470
                     (0.254)    (0.614)      (0.187)        (0.200)     (0.177)   (0.154)
male                  0.357      0.506       −0.364          0.365       0.275    −1.241
                     (0.242)    (0.485)      (0.188)        (0.223)     (0.193)   (0.152)
age                   0.009      0.094       −0.016         −0.031       0.005    −0.100
                     (0.027)    (0.070)      (0.019)        (0.024)     (0.021)   (0.049)
age sq.               0.000     −0.001        0.000          0.000       0.000     0.001
                     (0.000)    (0.001)      (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)   (0.001)
primary               0.448     −0.012        0.055          0.158       0.164     0.054
                     (0.154)    (0.306)      (0.122)        (0.150)     (0.114)   (0.160)
high school (jr.)     0.390      0.134        0.295          0.427       0.277     0.375
                     (0.203)    (0.676)      (0.149)        (0.168)     (0.133)   (0.170)
high school (sr.)     0.255     −0.591       −0.418          0.523       0.405     0.964
                     (0.361)    (0.877)      (0.387)        (0.279)     (0.226)   (0.254)
higher education      0.774      0.000       −0.318          1.006       1.450     1.127
                     (0.889)    (0.000)      (0.687)        (0.431)     (0.449)   (0.407)
hh males             −0.183      0.884        0.309         −0.005      −0.058     0.986
                     (0.342)    (0.769)      (0.246)        (0.293)     (0.237)   (0.323)
hh age 8-12          −0.151     −0.495        0.469         −0.462       0.692     0.626
                     (0.529)    (1.248)      (0.419)        (0.515)     (0.401)   (0.498)
hh age 13-18         −0.121      0.070        0.082         −0.047       0.156     0.668
                     (0.461)    (0.960)      (0.347)        (0.399)     (0.347)   (0.446)
hh age 19-45          0.092     −1.594        0.351         −0.550       0.399     1.259
                     (0.399)    (1.011)      (0.322)        (0.398)     (0.304)   (0.368)
hh age 46+           −0.025     −0.425        0.532         −0.449      −0.044     2.610
                     (0.466)    (1.025)      (0.336)        (0.434)     (0.362)   (0.544)
hh ill               −0.814      0.271       −0.526         −0.075       0.060    −0.402
                     (0.340)    (0.552)      (0.236)        (0.293)     (0.238)   (0.302)
dist. food market     0.007      0.013       −0.003         −0.003       0.004    −0.014
                     (0.004)    (0.007)      (0.002)        (0.003)     (0.002)   (0.004)
dist. mill            0.012                   0.000         −0.007       0.000    −0.038
                     (0.006)                 (0.003)        (0.005)     (0.003)   (0.015)
dist. inputs         −0.003      0.005       −0.001          0.000      −0.005     0.000
                     (0.003)    (0.007)      (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)
dist. water                      0.096       −0.104         −0.168      −0.149
                                (0.261)      (0.088)        (0.113)     (0.082)
tools                 0.603     −0.618       −0.069          0.375       0.411
                     (0.147)    (0.441)      (0.177)        (0.169)     (0.124)
owner                −0.121     −1.142        0.056         −0.104      −0.418    −1.555
                     (0.400)    (0.586)      (0.292)        (0.273)     (0.226)   (0.177)
land                  0.030      0.362        0.077          0.014       0.142     0.058
                     (0.024)    (0.094)      (0.024)        (0.026)     (0.016)   (0.018)
Number of obs          914       294          2138           1746        2053      2280
Treated                141        37           159            118         265       139
Non-treated            773       257          1979           1628        1788      2141
Pseudo R2              0.21      0.31         0.17           0.26        0.34      0.50

Note: Probit estimates of the probability of producing cash crops. Regressions also include
district dummies not shown in the table. Standard errors in parenthesis. Married, male,
age, age squared and education dummies (attend, primary, high school jr., high school
sr., and higher education) refer to household head. hh males is the share of males in the
household. hh age 8-12, hh age 13-18, hh age 19-45, hh age 46+, are the shares of household
members between ages 8 and 12, 13 and 18, 19 and 45, and over 46, respectively. hh ill is
the share of ill members in the household. dist. food market, dist. mill, dist. inputs, and
dist. water are distances (in Km.) to the nearest food market, mill, crop inputs market,
and water, respectively. Owner is a dummy that equals 1 if the household owns its farm.




                                           34
                                                  Table 8
                                     Income Gains in Market Agriculture

               Constrained Model                                    Unconstrained Model
                                          Constrained Model                                     Unconstrained Model
                    (per ha)                                             (per ha)
                            % of                      % of                        % of                        % of
                Total                      Total                     Total                       Total
                         expenditure               expenditure                 expenditure                 expenditure
Cotton         18232         19.9         21878         23.9         51569         56.4          61883         67.7
               (7456)                     (8947)                     (6731)                      (8077)
Tobacco        80661         88.2         64529         70.6        119124         130.3         95299        104.2
              (26336)                    (21069)                    (28402)                     (22722)
Groundnuts -11717            -12.8         -4452       -0.05         49165         53.8          18683         20.4
           (9120)                         (3466)                     (5606)                      (2130)
Vegetables     40852         44.7         15524         17.0         89451         97.8          33991         37.2
              (25381)                     (9645)                    (25257)                      (9597)
Maize          50933         55.7         50933         55.7         100800        110.2        100800        110.2
              (11341)                    (11341)                     (9989)                     (9989)
Cassava          **                         **                         **                          **

Sunflower        **                         **                         **                          **

Wages                                     95307        104.2                                    117305        128.3
                                         (10525)                                                (10089)
Note: Results from propensity score matching of market agriculture farmers and subsistence farmers using kernel methods.
Standard errors in parenthesis are estimated with bootstrap methods. The Constrained Model (per ha) assumes that the
household has to give up one hectare of land to produce an additional hectare of a given cash crop (such as cotton). The
Constrained Model assumes that the farmer moves from subsistence to market agriculture and allocates the average plot size
of each cash crop (e.g., 1.2 hectares in the case of cotton). The Unconstrained Models assume that the farmer can allocate
additional land to the cash crops without giving up subsistence production.




                                                           35
                                             Table 9
                     Extension Services and Market Agricultural Productivity


                             Yield per
                                                        Coef.            Std. Err.
                             hectare
                             Constant                   5.761              0.238
                             Head male                  0.077              0.052
                             Head age                -2.67E-04             0.008
                             Head age (sq)           -3.33E-06           8.05E-05
                             Small                      0.159              0.046
                             Pesticide                  2.250              0.725
                             Pesticide (sq)            -3.160              1.810
                             Extension
                                                        0.084              0.040
                             Services
                             Obs.: 2187
                             R2 : 0.17
                          Note: Own calculations based on Post Harvest Surveys. The
                          regression includes year and district dummies.




                                                 Table 10
                                          Average Budget Shares
                                               (percentage)


                                 National                        Rural                         Urban
                         total poor non-poor           total poor non-poor            total poor non-poor
Food              67.5           71.8       59.3        73.6    74.6      70.3        56.6    63.1      51.2
Clothing          5.6             4.8        7.1         5.6     5.2       7.0         5.5     3.6       7.1
Alcohol & Tobacco 3.6             2.9        4.9         3.7     3.0       6.0         3.3     2.3       4.1
Personal Goods    7.1             6.8        7.6         5.7     6.1       4.5         9.5     9.1       9.9
Housing           4.5             4.2        5.0        2.9     3.0       2.4         7.3     7.7       6.9
Education         2.5            2.6        2.3         1.9     2.1       1.0         3.6     3.9       3.3
Health             1.4            1.3        1.6         1.3     1.3       1.5         1.7     1.5       1.7
Transport         4.2             3.2        5.9         3.4     3.1       4.3         5.5     3.6       7.1
Remittances       1.3             0.7        2.4         1.0     0.7       1.9         1.9     0.8       2.8
Other             2.4             1.7        3.9        0.9     0.8       1.2         5.1     4.2       5.9
                         100.0 100.0       100.0       100.0 100.0       100.0       100.0 100.0        100.0
Note: The table reports budget shares. Own calculations based on Living Conditions Monitoring Survey (1998).




                                                       36
                                                Table 11
                                           Maize Consumption
                                              (percentage)


 Province                     1        2       3      4        5       6       7        8       9    Total
 Total Maize               22.5    17.6     29.3    3.7      14     5.6    14.9     25.2    32.9      18.5
  Rural                    26.3    22.9     30.5    2.9    25.1     4.7    14.6     28.6    33.4        21
  Urban                    16.1    15.7     17.7    9.7    11.9    10.8    17.2     12.9    27.7      14.2
 Home Production            7.6      1.6    14.7    1.1     0.9        2     6.8     5.2       12       5.4
  Rural                    11.6      4.8      16    1.2     5.2      2.1     7.5     6.5       13       8.2
  Urban                     0.9      0.4     2.5    0.6     0.1      0.9     2.2     0.5        2       0.5
 Industrial                 5.2    12.9      3.4      1    10.7      1.2     2.7     6.7     7.4       6.5
   Rural                    2.4     9.3      3.2    0.4     7.7      0.7     2.2     6.4     6.9       3.8
   Urban                     10    14.1      4.8    5.1    11.3      4.4     6.5       8    12.6      11.1
 Mugaiwa                    9.6      3.1    11.2    1.6     2.4      2.4     5.3    13.3    13.6        6.6
  Rural                    12.3      8.7    11.2    1.3    12.1      1.9     4.9    15.8    13.6          9
  Urban                     5.1      1.1    10.5    3.9     0.5      5.5     8.5     4.4    13.2        2.5
Note: The table reports budget shares (over total expenditure). Provinces are indexed as follows. 1: Central,
2: Copperbelt, 3: Eastern, 4: Luapala, 5: Lusaka, 6: Northern, 7: North-Western, 8: Southern, 9: Western.
Own calculations based on Living Conditions Monitoring Survey (1998).




                                                    37
                                   Figure 1
                          Propensity Score in Cotton
     Market agriculture                           Subsistence agriculture




0




    .025 .075 .125 .175 .225 .275 .325 .375 .425 .475 .525 .575 .625 .675 .725 .775 .875 .925

Note: The graph shows the proportion of market agriculture households and subsistence
agriculture households for diﬀerent values of the propensity score.




                                             38
                             Figure 2
           Income Shares Derived From Cash Agriculture
                           1991 -1998
30.0




20.0




10.0




 0.0
       6                       8                           10                  12
                                   log per capita income
Note: The graph shows the average shares of income derived from cash market agri-
culture. The solid and dotted lines represent the share estimated with 1998 and 1996
data respectively. The averages are estimated with non-parametric locally weighted
regressions (Fan, 1992).




                                         39
                            Figure 3
             Share of Maize Meals in Rural Zambia
                     Before Reforms (1991)

20




15




10




 5




 0
     5         6          7            8           9          10    11         12
                              log per equivalent adult income

Note: The graph shows the average budget share spent on industrial maize in rural
areas. The averages are estimated with non-parametric locally weighted regressions
(Fan, 1992).




                            Figure 4
             Share of Maize Meals in Rural Zambia
                      After Reforms (1998)

20




15




10




 5




 0

     8                        10                           12                  14
                              log per equivalent adult income

Note: The graph shows the average budget shares spent on maize. The solid
line represents the share of industrial maize, the broken line, the share of own
consumption, and the dotted line, the share spent on mugaiwa. The averages are
estimated with non-parametric locally weighted regressions (Fan, 1992).




                                         40
