NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF NANOSCALE SCIENCE:
INITIAL RESULTS AND NANOBANK
Lynne G. Zucker
Michael R. Darby
Working Paper 11181
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11181
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

An earlier version of this paper was presented at the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) Workshop
on Societal Implications of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA,
December 3-5, 2003. This research is supported by National Science Foundation Grant SES 0304727 (as
a Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team project), University of California's Industry-University
Cooperative Research Program, UCLA’s International Institute, and the Harold Price Center for
Entrepreneurial Studies at the UCLA Anderson School. We are indebted to our scientific advisors James
R. Heath, Evelyn Hu, Roy Doumani, Carlo Montemagno, and Fraser Stoddart, and to our research team,
especially Rob Liu, Emre Uyar, Rui Wu, and Stephanie Hwang. Certain data included herein are derived
from the High Impact Papers, Science Citation Index Expanded, U.S. State Indicators, and U.S. University
Indicators of the Institute for Scientific Information®, Inc. (ISI®), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: ©
Copyright Institute for Scientific Information®, Inc. 2000-2003. All rights reserved. This paper is a part of
the NBER's research program in Productivity. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of their employers or the National Bureau of Economic Research.The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2005 by Lynne G. Zucker and Michael R. Darby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Socio-economic Impact of Nanoscale Science: Initial Results and NanoBank
Lynne G. Zucker and Michael R. Darby
NBER Working Paper No. 11181
March 2005
JEL No. O310, L630, L650, M130, R120
ABSTRACT
Research on the nanoscale has revolutionized areas of science and has begun to have an impact on,
and be impacted by, society and economy. We are capturing early traces of these processes in
NanoBank, a large scale, multi-year project to provide a public data resource which will link
individuals and organizations involved in creating and using nano S&T across a number of activities
including publishing, patenting, research funding, and commercial financing, innovation and
production. We report preliminary results from our work in progress. Nanotechnology is on a similar
trajectory to biotechnology in terms of patents and publication, already accounting for over 2.5% of
scientific articles and 0.7% of patents. Joint university-firm research is widespread and increasing.
Regional agglomeration is also evident in both science and commercial applications, with the main
clusters of firm entry by both new and pre-existing firms forming around major research universities
publishing in nanoscience. Nanoscience has been highly concentrated in the United States, a few
European countries, and Japan, but China has recently passed Japan in total articles per year and is
beginning to have a significant number of highly-cited articles.
Lynne G. Zucker
University of California, Los Angeles
Organizational Research Program
Department of Sociology
Box 951551
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1551
and NBER
zucker@ucla.edu

Michael R. Darby
John E. Anderson Graduate School of
Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
darby@ucla.edu

Socio-economic Impact of Nanoscale Science:
Initial Results and NanoBank
by Lynne G. Zucker and Michael R. Darby
Research on the nanoscale has revolutionized areas of science and has begun to have an
impact, and be impacted by, society and economy. Early traces of these processes are already
available to us, and we are capturing these data in NanoBank now before the ephemeral traces are
lost to the social science and ethics research communities. NanoBank is a large scale, multi-year
project to provide a data resource for social scientists, ethicists, nanoscientists, government officials,
and the public. NanoBank will hold data elements that document the socio-economic impact of
nanoscience and nanotechnology, and institutional change that occurs either to support the
development or as a response to it. The research of the discovering scientists, those that learn from
them, the non-profit organizations that assess risks and/or benefits of the new technology, and the
process of industry formation will be documented. NanoBank traces the knowledge flows that
underlie these changes, with special emphasis on cross-discipline flows and flows that transfer
knowledge from discovering scientists to scientists working in firms. We begin the early part of the
process of disseminating findings based on NanoBank in the Figures included in this report.
The U.S. government has identified nanoscience and nanotechnology as a scientific and
technological opportunity of immense potential, formally launching a National Nanotechnology
Initiative (NNI) in January 2000. It is difficult to define simply the full range of nanoscience,
but the NNI’s steering committee settled on a definition of nanotechnology that incorporates the
scale (“approximately 1 – 100 nanometer”), the understanding, creation, and use of novel
properties and functions that occur at the nanoscale, and the integration into larger scale

1

assemblies.1 Roco, Williams, and Alivisatos (1999), Siegel, Hu, and Roco (1999), Roco (2001),
and Roco and Bainbridge (2001) provide a thorough review of the present state of nano S&T, the
implementation of the NNI, and an introduction to thinking about the implications of nano S&T
for our economy and society in the context of international developments in nanoscale research
and commercialization.
Our Approach
“Technology transfer is the movement of ideas in people” (Donald Kennedy, Stanford
University, March 18, 1994).
NanoBank is built on three insights into the processes of knowledge transfer,
commercialization, and industry change.

Turning first to knowledge transfer, scientific

breakthroughs often yield new knowledge that is initially tacit – not yet codified. New codes and
formulae describing breakthrough discoveries often develop slowly – with little incentive if value is
low and many competing opportunities if high. This tends to keeps the knowledge tacit.
Second, those with the most information about breakthrough discoveries are the scientists
actually making them, so there is initial scarcity: Scientists must learn the new knowledge from
the discoverer or someone trained by the discoverer, limiting diffusion (Zucker, Darby and Torero
2002). The combination of scarcity and tacitness yields natural excludability, a barrier to the
diffusion of the valuable knowledge.

Indeed, cooperation by the inventor is required for

successful commercialization by the licensee for 71 percent of the inventions licensed at

1

Subcommittee on Nanoscale Science, Engineering and Technology (NSET), Committee on

Technology, National Science and Technology Council, February 2000, full text can be found at
http://nano.gov/omb_nifty50.htm.

2

universities (Jensen and Thursby 2001: Table 1, p. 243; see also Agrawal and Henderson 2002;
Thursby and Thursby 2002.).
Third, commercialization of scientific breakthroughs requires access to naturally excludable
knowledge, both tacit and scarce, that constitutes intellectual human capital retained by the
discovering scientists. Thus, top scientists become the main resource around which firms are
built or transformed in both biotechnology (Zucker, Darby, and Brewer 1998) and
nanotechnology (Darby and Zucker 2003). Top discovering scientists who collaborate with
company scientists have strong positive effects on company success that increases as the extent
of involvement goes up (Zucker, Darby and Armstrong 1998, 2002).
Technological change at any given time is highly concentrated in a relatively few firms in a
few industries (Darby and Zucker 2003a; Harberger 1998).

This metamorphic progress

dramatically transforms existing industries, forms new industries, or both. It is misleading to
concentrate on the many firms in many industries achieving perfective progress through gradual
improvement or inching up. To understand or affect technological progress we must focus on the
exceptions – the industries and firms achieving metamorphic progress.
The source of the driving innovations for metamorphic change may be internal or external to
the industry, with external innovations using different technological bases the most threatening to
existing firms in a transforming industry (Tushman and Anderson 1986).

Biotechnology

transformed the pharmaceutical industry, and nanotechnology also uses different technological
bases likely to transform industries – but it is too early yet to identify which industries will
experience the largest impacts. In both cases, natural excludability of breakthroughs gives
discovering and other top scientists and engineers a key role and increases the likelihood of
metamorphic change.

3

In this paper, we report preliminary results based on core data files from an early pre-beta
test form of NanoBank that focuses on nanoscale research and commercialization--an area with
dramatic, recent breakthrough academic discoveries and evidence of likely metamorphic industry
change. For purposes of comparison, we will refer to biotechnology that is a well-studied recent
and continuing case of the development of a science-driven industry. In section I, we outline the
central features of NanoBank and report on our current work identifying nanoscale search terms and
phrases.

We compare nanotechnology to biotechnology in the next section to motivate our

approach and analyses.

Section III explores the extent and geography of localization of

nanoscience, including where and when firms are entering into nanotechnology and in what kinds
of technologies. Section IV provides some comparison of the U.S. nanoscale science base with
that in Europe, Japan, and some interesting recent developments in China (PRC). The final
section of the paper presents a summary of the evidence and our conclusions.

I. NanoBank under Construction

Theory-based databases are not merely lists of variables and their related data, but build
theoretically important relationships among variables that are predicted to alter the socio-economic
impact of nanoscale research, as well as variables predicted to alter the socio-economic feedback
effects on both the science and its commercialization Nanotechnology affects society, but society
also affects nanotechnology. NanoBank is designed to provide the raw materials to conduct further
research that can help understand and potentially guide the development and deployment of
nanoscience and its commercialization, while simultaneously addressing basic processes of interest
in social science.

4

NanoBank is designed as a data archive, an active site for exchanging papers and ideas
for social scientists and ethicists, and a site for interdisciplinary learning across scientific
disciplines through the construction of analogies and other methods. It will be located as one of
the sites available from the NNIN portal, and also located as one of the resources available from
the California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI at UCLA and UC Santa Barbara). 2 From design to
launch in under four years requires rapid decisions and an active program of informing and
engaging social scientists and ethicists likely to use this resource through professional
organizations, national and local government agencies, and non-profit policy advisory
organizations. We are also drawing in scientists who are crossing interdisciplinary boundaries,
via analogies and other tools to aid understanding and use of concepts from other disciplines.
The research on social and ethical impacts will be facilitated by and, in many cases,
enabled by NanoBank.

NanoBank is an integrated database, which will be a public web-

deployed digital library (DL). NanoBank links currently disparate data sets such as articles,
patents, firm financial reports and directory listings, and university data. Thus, a nano or social
scientist will be able to focus, for example, on articles and patents by a particular scientist
through implementation by and success of a company or companies for which the scientist is a
collaborator or officer.

Alternatively, an ethics researcher will be able to locate all firms

reporting research programs on products for which there are particular ethical concerns while
another might quantify university to firm knowledge flows or patents, articles, and products
resulting from particular research funding programs.

2

Principal Investigators for the NSF funded NanoBank project are Lynne Zucker, Michael

Darby, Roy Doumani, Jonathan Furner, UCLA, and Evelyn Hu, UCSB (SES 03074727).

5

NanoBank will also serve investors and firms seeking to allocate investment to promising
new technologies, and policymakers attempting to assess the effects of alternative policy
proposals. A NanoBank user might also seek all publications, patents, collaborations, alliances,
and stock-price returns of firms working, say, on a particular use of carbon nanotubes and trace
all academic publications and research grants in nano S&T tied to each firm involved in that use.
The key data elements that define the scope of content in NanoBank are outlined in
Figure 1. Related to each one are a series of specific elements (variables). We cannot review
those in detail here, but the searchable fields found at www.webofscience.com and at
www.uspto.com, plus the text found at www.edgar.gov, provide some feel for the underlying
richness of variables. To data at those sites we add links on specific variables within and between
sites, such as linking patents and research articles by the same person and venture capital
received and products in development by the same company. In fact, a key aspect of NanoBank
is that we will build links, supervised by Darby and Zucker, between data elements that theory
identifies as especially crucial to knowledge transfer and to productivity in both science and
industry.
We include some elements in NanoBank designed to track interdisciplinary convergence
across nano-, bio-, info-, cognio- areas of research and teaching (NBIC) and its outcomes in both
nanoscience and nanotechnology. These elements are starred in Figure 1, and they range from a
variety of interdisciplinary measures to tracking changes in departments and schools that reflect
and institutionalize interdisciplinary boundary changes. Two main NBIC themes are addressed:
1)

Track amount/quality of interdisciplinary research and training and timing/degree of new
organizational structure that institutionalizes these changes, and the impact of this

6

interdisciplinary convergence on products and success outcomes, with additional coding of
products by NBIC subarea (see Roco and Bainbridge 2002: Table 2, items B-F, p. 14).
2) Use of analogies/images of cross-discipline concepts to: (a) Communicate clearly across
discipline boundaries (in part, to decrease tacitness and hence natural excludability) and
stimulate discovery of new knowledge. (b) Facilitate borrowing of tools and other solutions
across discipline boundaries, as in the new interdisciplinary area of computational
biolinguistics.
NanoBank will also provide an important communication function for nanoscience and
engineering generally, and for special initiatives such as the NSF National Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Network (NNIN), through two archives on the site: (a) Vetted white papers
dealing with nano science and engineering, business applications and issues, legal issues, and
social and ethical impacts will provide a convenient source of reliable information for
practitioners, other professionals, and an informed public; and (b) Preprints or links to preprints
on an open basis subject to providing complete identification information on all affiliations and
commercial interests; this information will provide early access to nano-relevant research.

Improved Methods Under Development: Science Growth by Broad S&T Area
We are experimenting with alternative specifications for computer identification of
nanoscale articles. In this paper, nanoscale articles are identified by the union of these two
(overlapping) text searches: (1) for the string “nano”; and (2) for any of 475 nanoscale-specific
terms. All measurement terms are excluded. Some initial results are displayed in Figure 2 using
a dataset of high-impact (very highly cited) articles from ISI.

7

The nanoscale articles are

categorized by a broad science and technology classification scheme (see classification details in
Darby and Zucker 1999).
The number of articles rose initially most rapidly in semiconductors, but more recently
the biology-medicine-chemistry and multidisciplinary categories have also seen dramatic growth.
While the increase in information technology (IT) articles seems slight, other analyses not
reported here show that, given the lower overall number of articles published in IT, the
percentage increase is actually more dramatic than for the biology area.
As we develop new search strategies, we are benchmarking them against the Virtual Journal of
Nanoscale Science & Technology (hereafter, VJNano, found online at www.vjnano.org).
VJNano contains references to nanoscale articles published elsewhere as vetted by a
distinguished scientific advisory panel of researchers actively working on the nanoscale. The
search-based methodology used to produce Figure 2, discussed above, identify about 65 percent
of the articles in VJNano. This provides one test of the degree to which search terms and phrases
are able to identify recent nanoscale articles. With Jonathan Furner, we are combining these and
other methods with information studies techniques to develop computer algorithms that use
probability-based methods of discriminating between nano and non-nano.

II. Is the Growth of Nanotech Parallel to Biotech?
Comparing Nanotechnology and Biotechnology
Fundamentally, nanotechnology and biotechnology roots are in basic science and thus we
expect their development to follow roughly similar trajectories. While there are a number of
different ways to measure this, to begin the process we look at the rate of development of the
scientific knowledge base as indicated by scientific publishing and the rate of knowledge capture

8

as indicated by patenting. While publishing alone is sufficient to build the science-side of the
process, establishment of intellectual property rights is necessary for much of the
commercialization and its finance.
Figure 3 compares the remarkable increase in publishing and patenting that occurred
during the first twenty years of the biotechnology revolution with what is occurring now in nano
S&T. The Figure shows that the scientific and patenting growth of nanotechnology is of at least
the same order of magnitude as biotechnology at a similar stage of development. We use 1973
as the base year for the start of biotech and 1986 for nanotech to compare them at similar points
in their development (see the explanation of different years – and different methods of selection below).
For articles, nano S&T is maintaining a growing lead over biotechnology articles. It is clear that
nano S&T has burst upon the science and engineering scene a bit less suddenly than one would
judge by the current notices. In terms of publications, rapid growth began about 1990. Since
1990 the growth in nano S&T articles has been remarkable, and now exceeds 2.5 percent of all
science and engineering articles. Beginning in 1990, the percent of nano articles was
significantly greater than the 1981-1989 mean and increasing every year.
Figure 3 also shows steady growth in nanotechnology patents as a percent of all patent
issues. This growth is more dramatic considering that total patents also rise, increasing by about
150 percent over the same period. Actual counts of nano patents suggest a takeoff date for
nanotechnology in the late 1980s. We observe that nanotech patents are ahead of biotech patents
early in the process (through year 11) because very few patents were issued in biotech until the
courts gave the go ahead in 1980. Thirteen years into the biotech revolution (1986), biotech
patenting took off as: (a) gene sequences were patented with little proof of their use and (b)

9

many variations on drug candidates were patented in an attempt to prevent quick competition
from me-too drugs if one particular candidate were proved safe and effective.
Methods used in Figure 3: We identify nano articles using the text-search methodology
described earlier, searching titles and abstracts for all articles in Science Citation Index
Expanded through 2003 (Institute for Scientific Information 2003). Nano S&T patents are
identified in the same way as nano articles, searching both title and abstract at www.uspto.gov.
Biotech articles are defined in the figure as any that report a genetic sequence discovery (i.e.,
appear in GenBank), and this definition is conceptually overly narrow, but it has been proven in
practice a very useful measure in our research on biotech. Biotech patents are defined through
combining GenBank-related patents with the universe of biotechnology patents as identified by
the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office on their published, cd-rom distributed data set.
Development of Base Years for Biotech-Nanotech Comparison: The Cohen-Boyer
invention of genetic engineering (recombinant DNA) in 1973 is the conventional base year for
biotechnology.3 There is no consensus yet on the starting date for nanotechnology, but we will
tentatively use 1986 as the base year based on the development of instrumentation that enabled
manipulation of individual atoms and molecules at the nanoscale.
The atomic force microscope (AFM) was invented in 1986 by Binnig, Calvin Quate, and
Christoph Gerber (1986); the AFM greatly broadened the range of materials which could be
viewed at the atomic scale and enhanced the ability to manipulate individual atoms and
molecules.4 Haberle, Horber, and Binnig (1991) report a modified AFM for use on living cells
3
4

Cohen, Chang, Boyer, and Helling (1973) and Cohen and Boyer (1980).
The STM works by moving a very fine pointer back and forth over a surface with each scan

line displaced slightly from the next, called raster scanning in reference to the parallel lines that

10

with which they observed the effects of antibody attachment and changes in salinity on living red
blood cells. This built on earlier work developing the scanning tunneling microscope (STM)
conducted at IBM's Zurich Research Laboratory in 1981 by Gerd Karl Binnig and Heinrich
Rohrer (1982 and 1983); they received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1986 for their STM work.
The STM was the first instrument to enable scientists to obtain atomic-scale images and
ultimately to manipulate individual atoms on the surfaces of materials.
Darby and Zucker (2003b) argue that such inventions of procedures or instruments – not
exclusively the paradigm shifts famous from Kuhn (1962) – are the usual “inventions of a
method of inventing” which set off major scientific and industrial transformations.5 Instruments
are particularly important because they effectively codify much of the “know how” involved in a
breakthrough discovery making it possible for others to access and apply the new knowledge
without directly working with the discoverers and their students.

For a parallel example,

consider the gene splicing machines that made discovery of new genetic sequences so routine
that by 1988 graduate students at major research universities could no longer get a Ph.D. by
reporting the discovery of a new genetic sequence.
make up a television picture. A sensitive feedback mechanism maintains a constant distance
relative to the surface so that a three dimensional representation is obtained. The STM could be
used only on conductive materials (metals) due to the electron tunneling method used to maintain
the constant distance between pointer and surface.
5

Zvi Griliches (1957a, 1957b) was the first economist to study the class of breakthrough

discoveries which he named an “invention of a method of inventing.” His case was hybrid seed
corn, a method of breeding superior corn for specific localities that effectively excluded farmers
from reproducing the hybrid seed by saving part of their crop.

11

III. Geographic Concentration, Knowledge Transfer, and Firm Entry in Nanotech

There is concentration of knowledge in a few scientists and engineers who are pushing
the frontiers of nano S&T and in the laboratories in which they work, just as metamorphic
technological progress is concentrated in relatively few firms in relatively few industries. This
concentration is a notable characteristic of previous scientific breakthroughs, especially those
that involve a significant degree of tacit knowledge – art learned by doing with at the lab bench
level. This tacit knowledge provides natural excludability that limits the diffusion of the new
knowledge in cooperation with or even in the absence of explicit intellectual property rights of
the discovering scientists and their organizations (Zucker, Darby, and Brewer 1998 and Zucker,
Darby, and Armstrong 1998, 2002).
In Figure 4 as well as Figures 5, 6 and 7 that follow, we measure science base by number of
nanoscale-related publications in the ISI World of Science database. This database contains all the
ISI indexed-articles from 1980 through 2003 and nanoscale publications are identified by
searching for nanoscale-specific terms in the title and abstract (when available), as explained
above.6

6

The ISI database contains at least one research address and/or a reprint address except for

1.67% of the total observations. When the research address(es) is available, it is used as the
location of the article and the reprint address is used when no research address is reported. If n
different addresses are affiliated with the publication, we count 1/n article for each such
affiliation.

12

Geographic Concentration: Figure 4 shows the geographic distribution of the nanoscience
base in the U.S with respect to years and functional economic areas identified by the U.S. Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA)7. Ten regions with most nanoscale-related papers (out of 172 BEA
areas) account for 54 percent of the articles that has at least one coauthor with a US address. These
10 regions – New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island, San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, Los
Angeles-Riverside- Orange County, Boston-Worcester-Lawrence-Lowell-Brockton, WashingtonBaltimore, Chicago-Gary-Kenosha. Champagne-Urbana, Detroit-Ann Arbor-Flint, RaleighDurham-Chapel Hill, Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic City – are notable for the strength in nano
S&T of particular academic institutions and are not predictable by size, economy, or even overall
strength of the science base.8 As a further illustration of the concentration, almost 28 percent of all
nano articles is accounted for by the top-3 regions (New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island,
San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose and Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County.)
Knowledge Flow from Universities to Firms: When commercialization is occurring close to
the scientific frontier, it is more likely that natural excludability is a significant barrier to knowledge
transfer from discovering scientists to those who are applying the knowledge to develop commercial
products. Under these conditions, characteristic of both nanotech and biotech, participation at the
7

An address can be uniquely matched to a BEA area when the zip code is reported (which is the

case in 95.56 % of the observations). When the zip code is missing, the city and state information
were used to infer the BEA area, though in 2.21% of the cases resulted in multiple possible BEA
areas. When m different BEA areas have been determined to be a possible match for an
observation, each area is assigned 1/m the value of that observation.
8

Compare these regions, for example, with the relative importance of high-tech states in Darby

and Zucker (1999) and Zucker and Darby (1999).

13

lab bench level by top scientists who are making these discoveries is important to successful
commercial application, necessary but not sufficient. Star scientist authorships of articles as or with
employees of a firm were a potent predictor of the eventual success of biotech firms and Zucker,
Darby, and Armstrong (2002) showed that counts of articles authored by firm employees with
authors at top-112 universities had a significant (although smaller) impact on firm success.
To identify knowledge flows to firms in nanotechnology, we selected out all of the articles
that include a firm in California as one of its addresses. All such articles (CA-firm articles) were
then grouped into one of the five categories according to the other address reported for the same
article. This is far from a simple process: variant names, non-standard abbreviations, and spelling
errors make it difficult to determine the organization type. The categories are: “Firm Only” (for
CA-firm articles that report only firms as addresses); “With University” (for CA-firm articles that
have at least one university affiliated address); “With National Lab” (for CA-firm articles that have
no university affiliation but has at least one national lab affiliation); “With Foreign” (for CA-firm
articles that have no university or national lab affiliation, but has reported at least one foreign
address) and “With Other” (for CA-firm articles that don’t fall into any of the above categories.)9
In Figure 5 we see not only extensive and increasing publishing by scientist authors working
in firms, but also a rising percentage of these are written in collaboration with scientists and
engineers at universities. The university-firm knowledge flows represented by these articles indicate
not only the natural excludability that makes the costs of close collaboration across university-firm
9

Using all addresses reported in California, 95% were identified with a specific firm, university or

national lab. The rest are mainly composed of federal and state government agencies and non-profit
research institutions. Less than 5% have insufficient information to determine the organizational
type.

14

boundaries worth incurring, but also the expected commercial payoff of nanotechnology. While
Figure 5 is based only on California data at this point, we expect the results to replicate more
generally.
Birth of the Nanotechnology Industry: Figure 6 illustrates the number of firms first
publishing a nanoscale-related article in the ISI database by region and publication year with the
firm’s region based upon the address given by the author at the firm. Each time a firm first
publishes an article in a given region is counted as an entry in that region regardless of whether or
not the firm has already entered in another region. Hence, if an IBM Research Center in San Jose,
California enters nanotech earlier than a second IBM Research Center – located in Yorktown
Heights, New York – both the California and New York entries are reported in Figure 6 dated
according to the years in which they respectively occur.
The regions that have the most firms entering overlap with the regions where most
nanoscale articles are being written, except that San Diego, Denver-Boulder-Greeley and
Minneapolis-St. Paul appear in the top 10 regions for firm entry.
Darby and Zucker (2003b) show that in a multiple-poisson-regression context both the
number of highly cited articles published in a region and its average wage level (a measure of laborforce quality) are significant determinants of where and when firms enter nanotechnology. The
effects of federal research funding to and nano articles by authors from top-112 research
universities, regional employment, and total venture-capital flows are not statistically significant
when all of these variables are entered in the same poisson regression, although these variables may
be significant in regressions in which they are not competing with high-impact articles and/or
average wages. It is difficult with small samples to measure separate effects of highly correlated
variables such as high-impact articles (mostly authored by faculty with large federal research

15

funding) and the amount of federal research funding. We expect some additional variables will be
significant in future research when we can identify additional firms entering nanotechnology. The
statistical insignificance of past venture capital flows is consistent with efficiency in that market.
There is in fact no census or widely accepted database to consult as to which firms are
actively using nanotechnology in production or at least R&D activities – over the next few years, we
plan for NanoBank to fill that and other information gaps faced by both researchers in nano S&T
and those who study their impact. For now, the large number of articles ISI data base provide a
means of identifying firms with a sufficiently deep involvement to be either publishing highly cited
research articles or articles co-authored with professors from universities or both. Based on the
patterns observed in biotechnology, few other firms without such ties are likely to become
significant players.

IV. International Comparison
Figure 7 illustrates the international distribution of nano articles in the ISI database by year.
Of articles written during 1980-2003, 72 percent have authors in one or more of the U.S., Japan, and
the European Union.10 China (PRC) was also added as a separate group to illustrate her remarkable
improvement in recent years. Considering the whole period, the United States alone accounts for
29.15% of the world’s nano articles, establishing the U.S. as the most dominant player in
nanotechnology.
The data also suggest nano-related research becoming increasingly global throughout the
last decade. Many countries that were not significant in 1980s and early 90s increase their

10

The European Union articles are concentrated in Germany, France and the United Kingdom.

16

production dramatically. Other than China, which eventually caught up with Japan, countries like
South Korea and India can also be counted as examples.
There was also a great increase in the number of countries that engage in nano-related
research. While nano-related articles were produced in 43 different countries in year 1990, this
number increased to 102 in 2003. Overall, almost 150 different countries were cited in the ISI
articles in this time period. Both these factors cause a relative decline in the share of the U.S. nano
articles, when compared to the initial stages of the nano technology improvement. Even so, more
than 24% of the articles produced the world in 2003 were in the U.S., which is almost double the
number by the next country, China.
Initial results adjusting for quality of research articles are shown in Figure 8.

The

distribution of high impact (very highly cited) papers in the world further reinforces the picture of
U.S. dominance, but also shows that scientists and engineers in other nations are increasingly
publishing high impact articles in the area of nanoscale research. China’s great rise in nanoscience
publications is evidence of a shift in effort, but her number of high impact papers remains low
relative to the overall increase in publishing rate. Taken as a whole, these data confirm that the
strength and depth of the American science base points to the U.S. being the dominant player in
nanotechnology for some time to come, while the U.S. also faces significant and increasing
international competition.

V. Summary and Conclusions

Nanoscale science and technology has all the earmarks of the kind of breakthrough
metamorphic progress in which cascades of important scientific discoveries create the technological

17

opportunities that transform existing industries and create new ones. We expect nanotechnology to
account for a significant proportion of technological progress and economic growth over the next
several decades. NanoBank will track these changes.
Nanotechnology is on a similar trajectory to biotechnology, stemming also from basic
science breakthroughs, including important instrument invention relatively early in its development
to codify part of the most fundamental tacit knowledge: scanning probe and atomic force
microscopy, similar to the gene sequencing machines. However, much of the knowledge remains
tacit in nanoscience as in bioscience and is best transmitted by working at the lab bench by one of
the discoverers or someone trained by him/her, yielding natural excludability. As in biotechnology,
we find that nanotechnology companies are founded when and where top nanoscientists are
publishing. And we have also presented early evidence that the knowledge flow via collaboration in
the lab is increasing between university scientists and company scientists, as indicated by copublishing.
Regional agglomeration is also evident, with the main clusters forming around major
research universities publishing in nanoscience. While there is considerable overlap with the
biotechnology pattern, i.e. the relative dominance of the New York region and both Northern and
Southern California, there are also significant differences that we believe are due to different
resource-allocation decisions made in the past. The same is true at the national level: the U.S.
accounts for over 55 percent of the highly cited articles on the nanoscale identified as “High Impact
Articles” by ISI, while the U.S., European Union, Japan and China account for over 88 percent. So
the concentration of nanoscale work is quite high internationally, similar to that found within the
U.S.

18

It is too early to say where the most profitable commercial applications of nanotechnology
lie. However, we can derive some early indicators from observing the pattern of areas in which
firms enter nanotechnology, and over time decide to focus their efforts in product development,
since both decisions are heavily conditioned by expectations held about eventual profits in different
content areas of nanotechnology. Klevorick, Levin, Nelson, and Winter (1992) have emphasized
that profitability is based on the appropriability of returns by the pioneer(s) as well as upon
technological opportunity. Griliches (1957a, 1957b) argued that the earliest applications of an
invention of a method of inventing are to those areas with the greatest expected profitability – now
known as the lowest-hanging fruit. The low-lying-fruit theory suggests focusing for analysis of
early industrial formation and transformation on the regions with the strongest science bases in areas
where profitability is expected to be highest.
The race to apply nanotechnology to new products and services will be a long one. The
growth and changes in institutions necessary to support this revolution, from supporting new
institutes to dealing with cross-pressures between disciplines in interdisciplinary research, will
determine part of the outcome. Interest groups operating in the nanotechnology field will alter what
is done, when it is done, and how it is done – and possibly even whether it is done. Policy issues on
many fronts are already confronting nanotechnology, and must be successfully addressed for
nanoscale research and commercialization to grow and prosper.

19

REFERENCES
Agrawal, A. and Rebecca Henderson, “Putting Patents in Context,” Management Science,
48(1):44-60.
Binnig, Gerd Karl, Calvin F. Quate, and Christoph Gerber, “Atomic Force Microscope,”
Physical Review Letters, March 3, 1986, 56(9): 930-933.
Binnig, Gerd Karl, and Heinrich Rohrer, “Scanning Tunneling Microscopy,” Helvetica Physica
Acta, 1982, 55(6): 726-735.
Binnig, Gerd Karl, and Heinrich Rohrer, “Scanning Tunneling Microscopy,” Surface Science,
1983, 126(1-3): 236-244.
Cohen, Stanley N., and Herbert W. Boyer, “Process for producing biologically functional
molecular chimeras,” United States Patent 4,237,224, December 2, 1980.
Cohen, Stanley, A. Chang, Herbert Boyer, and R. Helling, “Construction of Biologically
Functional Bacterial Plasmids in vitro,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, November 1973, 70(11): 3240-3244.
Darby, Michael R., and Lynne G. Zucker, California's Science Base: Size, Quality and
Productivity, A Report to the California Council on Science and Technology, February 3,
1999, Sacramento, CA: California Council on Science and Technology, 1999.
Darby, Michael R., and Lynne G. Zucker, “Growing by Leaps and Inches: Creative Destruction,
Real Cost Reduction, and Inching Up,” Economic Inquiry, 2003, 41: 1-19. (2003a)
Darby, Michael R., and Lynne G. Zucker, “Grilichesian Breakthroughs: Inventions of Methods
of Inventing in Nanotechnology and Biotechnology,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 9825, July 2003. (2003b)

20

Griliches, Zvi, “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change,”
Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Economics, University of Chicago, 1957. (1957a)
Griliches, Zvi, “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change,”
Econometrica, October 1957, 25(4): 501-522. (1957b)
Haberle, W., J. K. H. Horber, and Gerd Karl Binnig, “Force Microscopy on Living Cells,”
Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B, March-April 1991, Part 2, 9(2): 1210-1213.
Harberger, Arnold C., “A Vision of the Growth Process,” American Economic Review, March
1998, 88(1): 1-32.
Institute for Scientific Information®, Inc., U.S. State Indicators, electronic database, 2000.
(2000a)
Institute for Scientific Information®, Inc., U.S. University Indicators, electronic database, 2000.
(2000b)
Institute for Scientific Information®, Inc., High Impact Papers, electronic database, 2000.
(2000c)
Institute for Scientific Information®, Inc., Science Citation Index Expanded, electronic database,
2003.
Jensen, Richard, and Marie Thursby, "Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Tale of University
Licensing," American Economic Review, March 2001, 91(1): 240-259.
Klevorick, Alvin K., Richard C. Levin, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter, “On the
Sources and Significance of Interindustry Differences in Technological Opportunities,”
Research Policy, March 1995, 24(2): 185-205.
Kuhn, Thomas S., The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1962.

21

Roco, Mihail C., “From Vision to Implementation of the U.S. National Nanotechnology Initiative,”
Journal

of

Nanoparticle

Research,

Feb.

2001,

3(1):

5-11.

http://kapis.wkap.nl/sample.pdf?324433
Roco, Mihail C., and William Sims Bainbridge, eds., Societal Implications of Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology,

Boston,

MA:

Kluwer

Academic

Publishers,

2001.

http://www.wtec.org/loyola/nano/societalimpact/ anosi.pdf
Roco, Mihail C., R. Stanley Williams, and Paul Alivisatos, eds, Nanotechnology Research
Directions: IWGN Workshop Report –Vision for Nanotechnology in the Next Decade,
Boston,

MA:

Kluwer

Academic

Publishers,

1999.

http://www.wtec.org/loyola/nano/IWGN.Research.Directions/
Siegel, Richard W., Evelyn Hu, and Mihail C. Roco, eds., Nanostructure Science and
Technology: R & D Status and Trends in Nanoparticles, Nanostructured Materials and
Nanodevices,

Boston,

MA:

Kluwer

Academic

Publishers,

1999.

http://www.wtec.org/loyola/nano/
Tushman, Michael L., and Philip Anderson, "Technological Discontinuities and Organizational
Environments," Administrative Science Quarterly, March 1986, 31(1): 439-465.
Thursby, Jerry and Marie Thursby Jerry G., and Marie Thursby, “Who Is Selling the Ivory
Tower? Sources of Growth in University Licensing,” Management Science, January 2002,
48(1): 90-104.
U.S. Subcommittee on Nanoscale Science, Engineering and Technology (NSET), Committee on
Technology, National Science and Technology Council, “Nanotechnology definition
(NSET, February 2000),” February 2000, as posted at http://nano.gov/omb_nifty50.htm.

22

Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby, "Virtuous Circles of Productivity: Star Bioscientists
and the Institutional Transformation of Industry," National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 5342, November 1995.
Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby, "Star Scientists and Institutional Transformation:
Patterns of Invention and Innovation in the Formation of the Biotechnology Industry,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, November 12, 1996, 93(23): 12,70912,716.
Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby, California's Inventive Activity: Patent Indicators of
Quantity, Quality, and Organizational Origins, A Report to the California Council on
Science and Technology, October 11, 1999, Sacramento, CA: California Council on
Science and Technology, 1999.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Jeff Armstrong, "Geographically Localized
Knowledge: Spillovers or Markets?", Economic Inquiry, January 1998, 36(1): 65-86.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Jeff Armstrong, "Commercializing Knowledge:
University Science, Knowledge Capture, and Firm Performance in Biotechnology,"
Management Science, January 2002, 48(1): 138-153.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Marilynn B. Brewer, "Intellectual Human Capital and
the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises," American Economic Review, March 1998,
88(1): 290-306.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Máximo Torero, "Labor Mobility from Academe to
Commerce," Journal of Labor Economics, July 2002, 20(3): 629-660.

23

Figure 1. NanoBank.org: Examples of Defining Data Element Links [1]
Name of Person
Patent inventor
Article author
Principal investigator (PI)
Dissertation author
Dissertation chair
Officer/founder of firm
Science advisory board chair
Science advisory board member
*Coinventor, author, etc.
Discipline of Person
Department, curent or former [2]
Department of dissertation [2]
Date or Time
Patent application & grant dates
Article publication date
Grant/contract begin & end dates
Dissertation filing date
Dissertation filing date
Directory/database dates
Firm founding date
Firm nanotech entry date
Financial reporting dates
Initial public offering (IPO) date
Merger or alliance dates
Venture capital round dates
*Interdisciplinary team start dates
*Dept., institute, center entry/change/
merger date
*New interdisc. journal areas/start date
*Existing journal new discipline/area
entry date
*Fed. Instit., IGA program start date
*Date of move between disciplines [3]
Notes:

Organization
Patent assignee
Affiliation on article
Grant/contract recipient
University lists--NRC, IPEDS
Firm directory listings
Public firm databases (filings)
Financial market databases
Mergers & alliances database
Venture capital firm database
Investment bank database
Federal laboratory listings
Research institute directories
Organization's parent org. (if any)
*Non-profit directories, tax filings
Industry of Organization
Firm/university/fed lab/res. Inst.
SIC or NAICS industry codes
Venture Economics industry codes
*Nonprofit tax codes [501(c)(3), etc.]
Science & Technology Area Codes
US & International patent classes
ISI journal area
PACS codes/text
Nano S&T subareas (VJNano et al. )
Z-D broad science/tech area codes
*NBIC product codes
Geo-location
Patent inventor's address
Patent assignee's address
Author address
Grantee address(es)
Organization address(es)

Inputs, Outputs, and Success Measures
These can be measured at person, organization or
sub-organization level and aggregated (as appropriate)
based on: organization; city, state, region or country;
discipline, industry, science/technology area, time;
or combinations (e.g., by firm, region, and year)
Patent: counts, citations, claims
Articles: counts, citations
*Employment (& membership for nonprofits)
*Interdisciplinary Collaborations: counts, classifications,
citations for articles and patents
Products in development: counts, classifications
Products on the market: counts, classifications
Venture capital: round counts, round values
Offerings: IPO value, later offering values and types
Investment bank reputation rankings
Stock price history
Impact of risk assessment on stock price:
(1) Product failure, adverse event news
(2) NPO report, event news
Doctoral programs: ranking, graduates, faculty, funding
Awards: Nobels, NAS/NAE/IOM, Phi Beta Kappa, etc.
Grants/contracts: Federal, SBIR, ATP
*Interdisciplinarity
*Cross-discipline co-chair on dissertation: counts
*Cross-discipline co-authors, co-inventors: counts,
citations, claims for patents
*Cross-discipline firm officers, firm science boards: counts
*Cross-discipline articles in old & new journals: counts,
citations
*Cross-discipline membership: depts., instits., centers,
IGAs: counts
*NBIC Interdisciplinarity Convergence
*Analogies/images of cross-discipline concepts
*New cross-discipline analogies/tools
*Cross-discipline teaching, patenting, research

* indicates NBIC elements
[1] Identify and search on specific terms in all NBIC areas.
[2] Non-academics: use former department or dissertation department.
[3] E.g., if dissertation discipline is different from department of first job.

24

Figure 2. High-Impact Nanoscale Articles by Major S&T Category, 1980-2001

Number of High-Impact
Nanoscale Articles

400
350
300
250
200
150
100

Semiconductors, ICs, Superconductors
Multidisciplinary

50
0

Other Engineering
2000-01*

*Data for 2000-01 multiplied by 2 for
comparability

1996-99

1992-95

Information Technologies
1988-91

1984-87

1980-83

Biology, Medicine, Chemistry

25

Percent of S&E Articles or Patents

Figure 3. Comparing Nanotech (1986–2004) and Biotech (1973–1994)
Publishing and Patenting Trajectories

Years from Base Year (1986 for Nanotech, 1973 for Biotech)

26

2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400

1980-83

1984-87

1988-91

1992-95

1996-99

200
0
2000-03

Number of Nanoscale Articles

Figure 4. Nanoscience Geographic Concentration by Region, 1980-2003

N
Sa ew Y
n
L
o
Bo os A Fran rk-N
cis or
W sto ng
Ch ash n-W eles co-Othern
ica ing
orc -Ri
C
ak N
De hamp go-G ton-B este versi land ew J
aig ary alti r-L de- -Sa erse
Ph troi
Ra ilad t-Ann n-Ur -Ken more awre Oran n Jo y-Lo
e
s
nc
g
lei
ng
e-L e C e
gh lphia Arb bana osha
Isl
o
o
-D
ow un
an
urh Wilm r-Fli
d
e
t
ll-B y
am
ing nt
r
-C
oc
ha ton-A
ktn
pe
t
la n
lH
tic
ill
Cit
y

27

Figure 5. Tracing Knowledge Flow to Commerce:
California Firm Articles by Year and Co-Authorship, 1980-2003
250

With other coauthors (not elsewhere classified)
Number of Nanoscale Articles

200
With foreign co-authors
150

With national laboratories

100
With universities
Firms only
50

0

1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

Firms Only

With Universities

With National Labs

28

With Foreign Co-authors

With Other (n.e.c.)

Figure 6. Birth of the Nanotech Industry by Region, 1980-2003

120
100
80
60
40
20

1980-83

1984-87

1988-91

0

2000-03
1996-99
1992-95

Number of Firms in Region
First Publishing a Nanoscale
Article

140

Sa
Ne n Fra
Bo w Yor ncisc
Los ston-W k-No o-Oak
Wa Ange orce rthern landSa shing les-R ster-L New San J
nD
ton
o
J
Ph
-Ba iversid awren ersey se
ilad iego
c
l
e
t
L
e
i
-Or
mo
Ch
elp
ang -Lowe ong Is
re
ica
h
i
a
g
la
ll
-W
eC
De
ilm
nve o-Ga
oun -Brock nd
i
r
n
y- K
r-B
Min
ty
tn
gto
oul
nea
der enosh n-Atla
pol
-Gr
a
ntic
is-S
eel
Cit
t. P
e
y
y
aul

29

Figure 7. Nanoscience Geographic Concentration by Country, 1980-2003

Number of Nanoscale Articles

25000

20000

15000

10000

5000
United States
European Union
0

Other Countries
2000-03

1996-99

Japan
1992-95

1988-91

30

China
1984-87

1980-83

Figure 8. High-Impact Nanoscale Articles by Country and Quadrennia

Number of High-Impact Nanoscale
Articles

400
350
300
250
200
150

United States

100

European Union

50

Other Countries

0

200001* 1996- 199299
95

Japan
198891

China
198487

*Data for 2000-01 multiplied by 2 for comparability

31

198083

