                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          INTEGRATING INDUSTRY AND NATIONAL ECONOMIC ACCOUNTS:
                   FIRST STEPS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS

                                           Ann M. Lawson
                                           Brian C. Moyer
                                            Sumiye Okubo
                                           Mark A. Planting

                                         Working Paper 11187
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11187


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




The authors wish to acknowledge Matthew Atkinson, Mahnaz Fahim-Nader, Jiemin Guo, Karen Horowitz,
Sherlene K. S. Lum, George Smith, and all other staff of the Industry Accounts Directorate at BEA, who
made significant contributions directly and indirectly to the development of this paper. We thank Jack
Triplett, Eric Bartelsman, and other participants of the NBER/CRIW conference in April 2004 for their many
helpful comments on the direction of this research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Ann M. Lawson, Brian C. Moyer, Sumiye Okubo, and Mark A. Planting. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Integrating Industry and National Economic Accounts: First Steps and Future Improvements
Ann M. Lawson, Brian C. Moyer, Sumiye Okubo, and Mark A. Planting
NBER Working Paper No. 11187
March 2005
JEL No. C13, C67, C81, E01, L16

                                           ABSTRACT

The integration of the annual I-O accounts with the GDP-by-industry accounts is the most recent in
a series of improvements to the industry accounts provided by the BEA in recent years. BEA
prepares two sets of national industry accounts: The I-O accounts, which consist of the benchmark
I-O accounts and the annual I-O accounts, and the GDPby- industry accounts. Both the I-O accounts
and the GDP-by-industry accounts present measures of gross output, intermediate inputs, and value
added by industry. However, in the past, they were inconsistent because of the use of different
methodologies, classification frameworks, and source data.


The integration of these accounts eliminated these inconsistencies and improved the accuracy of both
sets of accounts. The integration of the annual industry accounts represents a major advance in the
timeliness, accuracy, and consistency of these accounts, and is a result of significant improvements
in BEA’s estimating methods. The paper describes the new methodology, and the future steps
required to integrate the industry accounts with the NIPAs. The new methodology combines source
data between the two industry accounts to improve accuracy; it prepares the newly integrated
accounts within an I-O framework that balances and reconciles industry production with commodity
usage. Moreover, the new methodology allows the acceleration of the release of the annual I-O
accounts by 2 years and for the first time, provides a consistent time series of annual I-O accounts.


Three appendices are provided: A description of the probability-based method to rank source data
by quality; a description of the new balancing produced for producing the annual I-O accounts; and
a description of the computation method used to estimate chaintype price and quantity indexes in the
GDP-by-industry accounts.


Ann M. Lawson
Bureau of Economic Analysis

Brian C. Moyer

Sumiye Okubo

Mark A. Planting
                                                                                                                                    2


                                                    Table of Contents

I. Introduction .............................................................................................................3
II. Partial Integration: The First Step ...........................................................................7
       1. The Traditional I-O Accounts Methodology ...............................................8
       2. The Traditional GDP-by-Industry Accounts Methodology..........................9
       3. Combining the Two Methodologies ...........................................................11
III. Full Integration: The Long-run Goal ..................................................................15
IV. The Partial Integration Methodology....................................................................17
       1. Step 1: Level of Industry and Commodity Detail......................................18
       2. Step 2: Revised 1997 Benchmark I-O Accounts .......................................18
       3. Step 3: A Time Series of Value Added for 1998-2002..............................23
       4. Step 4: Updated and Balanced Annual I-O Accounts for 1998-2002........24
                a. Industry and Commodity Gross Output .........................................24
                b. Intermediate Inputs to Industries ...................................................25
                c. Domestic Supply ............................................................................26
                d. Commodity Composition of Final Uses excluding Imports and
                       Exports and Changes in Private Inventories ..................................26
                e. Balancing the Use Table ................................................................27
       5. Step 5: Price and Quantity Indexes for the GDP-by-Industry Accounts ...27
                a. Indexes for Gross Output and Intermediate Inputs by Industry.....28
                b. Indexes for Value Added by Industry............................................28
V. Future Research....................................................................................................29
Appendix A. Estimating the “Combined” Level of Value Added by Industry ...........31
Appendix B. New Updating and Balancing Processes for BEA’s Annual
               I-O Tables ..............................................................................................35
Appendix C. Computing Chain-Type Price and Quantity Indexes in the
              GDP-by-Industry Accounts ....................................................................44
References.....................................................................................................................48
Table A1: Comparison of BLS and Census Nonagricultural Payroll Data for
          Selected Private Industries, 1992 ................................................................50
Table A2: BLS and Census Nonagricultural Payroll Data for Private Industries:
          Comparison of Levels, 1992 and 1997 .........................................................51
Table A3: Comparisons in Growth Rates for Census and BLS Payroll Data
          by Industry 1992 and 1997 ...........................................................................54
Table B: Industries and Commodities in the Integrated Accounts .............................56
Table C: NIPA Changes Incorporated into the 1997 Benchmark I-O Accounts ........57
Table D: 1997 Industry Value Added Estimates ........................................................58
Table E: Principal Source Data for Value-Added Extrapolators .................................60
Table F: Principal Sources of Data for Industry and Commodity Output and Prices..61
Chart 1: Use Table: Commodities Used by Industries and Final Uses.......................69
Chart 2: Components of GDI-Based Value Added by Industry ..................................70
Chart 3: Relationships Among National Economic Accounts.....................................71
Chart 4: Merging Information for Setting Value-Added Levels .................................72
Chart 5: Probability Distributions of Value Added for Educational Services .............73
                                                                                                          3


                  Integrating Industry and National Economic Accounts:
                           First Steps and Future Improvements

          Ann M. Lawson, Brian C. Moyer, Sumiye Okubo, and Mark A. Planting


I. Introduction

        As part of its continuing efforts to improve the system of economic accounts, the

Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) has begun a series of strategic initiatives to

ultimately integrate the gross-domestic-product-(GDP)-by-industry, annual input-output

(I-O), and benchmark I-O programs within the industry accounts, as well as to integrate

the industry accounts with the national income and product accounts (NIPAs).2

Full achievement of this goal will require several years of effort by BEA, as well as the

continuing participation and cooperation by other statistical agencies, particularly the

Bureau of the Census and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), to further enhance source

data. In the interim, BEA has moved forward with integrating two out of three of its

industry programs—specifically the merging of the GDP-by-industry accounts with the

annual I-O accounts. Initial results of this effort will be released in June 2004 as part of

BEA’s 5-year comprehensive revision.

        The integration of the GDP-by-industry accounts with the annual I-O accounts is

the most recent in a series of improvements to the industry accounts. These

improvements include the following: Resuming the publication of the annual I-O

accounts; accelerating the release of the annual I-O accounts to within 3 years after the



2
  In addition, it is BEA’s long-run goal to integrate the industry accounts and NIPAs with related regional
accounts, namely gross state product (GSP) by industry and regional I-O multiplier estimates. Consistency
between the annual I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry accounts will improve the quality of the GSP
accounts, and any increase in timeliness of the GDP-by-industry estimates will be reflected in more speedy
delivery of the GSP estimates. Consistent and better measures of value added would also potentially
strengthen the links between the GSP accounts and the regional I-O multiplier estimates.
                                                                                                   4

end of the reference year; expanding the GDP-by-industry accounts to include gross

output and intermediate inputs for all industries; developing an accelerated set of GDP-

by-industry accounts that are available with a lag of 4 months after the end of the

reference year; and continuing to work closely with the Bureau of the Census on new

initiatives to improve the quality and the timeliness of the source data used to prepare the

industry accounts.

           With these improvements to the industry accounts in place, as well as with the

general improvements made to the quality of industry source data, BEA is ready to

integrate the annual I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry accounts as a first step

towards full integration.3 For purposes of the current paper, this integration is being

referred to as “partial integration” and is the first tangible result of the initiative to reach

BEA’s data users.

           This partial integration could have been achieved through a variety of methods.

For example, many countries produce integrated annual I-O accounts and GDP-by-

industry accounts by assuming that the industry ratios of intermediate inputs to gross

output do not change from the most recent set of benchmark I-O accounts. By making

this assumption, these ratios are then used to estimate a time series of value added by

industry from the annual source data on gross output by industry. BEA has taken a very

different approach in developing its integration methodology because of the richness of

the source data that are available in the United States. For example, the Bureau of the

Census, BLS, and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) provide data that can be used to

estimate value added by industry in various ways. However, the quality of these source


3
    For a discussion on integrating the industry accounts, see Yuskavage (2000).
                                                                                                        5

data varies by data series and by industry, particularly in terms of their relative coverage

and definitional consistency. As a result, BEA has developed a method that ranks the

available source data based on measures of coverage and consistency, among other

factors, and then estimates a balanced set of annual I-O accounts and GDP-by- industry

accounts that incorporate the resulting weighted average of these source data. In this

manner, BEA’s integrated annual I-O accounts and GDP-by-industry accounts will

provide a more consistent and a more accurate set of estimates.

        For full integration of the industry accounts, the measure and level of value added

by industry for the industry accounts will be based on the benchmark I-O accounts,

beginning with the 2002 accounts. These accounts are prepared for years of the

quinquennial economic census and are currently used to establish the measure and level

of final expenditures by use category contributing to GDP in the NIPAs. Annual updates

of the integrated industry accounts would be based on less comprehensive survey and

administrative record data available in nonbenchmark years. For full integration, the

measures of value added by industry would be independent of the NIPA measures of

gross domestic income (GDI), and would provide a “feedback” loop to the NIPAs that

would improve the estimates of the commodity composition of GDP final expenditures.4

To achieve this ambitious goal, BEA is working cooperatively with the Census Bureau,

BLS, and other statistical agencies to make the necessary improvements to the quality



4
  BEA currently uses two approaches to measure GDP: The expenditures approach and the income
approach. The expenditures approach measures GDP as the sum of consumption spending, investment
spending, government expenditures, and exports minus imports. The income approach measures GDP as
the sum of compensation of employees, taxes on production and imports, less subsidies, and gross
operating surplus. These approaches allow maximum use of up-to-date, high-quality economic indicators
from the Bureau of the Census, the IRS, and the BLS to produce timely, reliable measures of the
economy’s current performance.
                                                                                              6

and coverage of the underlying source data, particularly for information on industry

expenses.

       This paper has five sections and three appendices. The first section is this

introduction. The second section describes in greater detail the partial integration being

achieved in the short run. The third section presents BEA’s vision for full integration in

the long run, including some of the major requirements for achieving this goal as well as

the major benefits. The fourth section describes the methodology developed for the

partial integration of the annual industry accounts. The last section outlines the future

steps required to reach the goal of full integration. The appendices include an expanded

description of the probability-based method used to develop a weighted-average estimate

of each industry’s gross operating surplus; a detailed description of the new balancing

procedure developed for automating production of the annual I-O tables; and a statement

of the computation method used to estimate chain-type price and quantity indexes in the

GDP-by-industry accounts.

        Highlights of the partial integration methodology are as follows:

   •   It allows BEA to incorporate the most timely and highest quality source data

       available into both the annual I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry accounts.

   •   The annual I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry accounts will be released

       concurrently for 1998-2002 in June of this year, and for the first time both sets of

       accounts will present fully consistent measures of gross output, intermediate

       inputs, and value added by industry.

   •   The quality of the annual industry accounts will be improved because the

       accounts will be prepared within a balanced I-O framework; that is, all the
                                                                                               7

       components of the accounts will be in agreement within a balanced row-and-

       column framework.

   •   The release of the annual I-O accounts will be accelerated by 2 years in a

       sequence of two steps that will be completed by the fall of 2004, when they will

       be released 1 year after the end of the reference year.

   •   For the first time, the 1998-2002 annual I-O accounts will be presented as a

       consistent time series; as a consequence, the annual I-O accounts will be more

       useful for analyses of trends over time.



II. Partial Integration: The First Step

       BEA prepares two sets of national industry accounts: The I-O accounts, which

consist of the benchmark I-O accounts and the annual I-O accounts, and the GDP-by-

industry accounts. Both the I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry accounts present

measures of gross output, intermediate inputs, and value added by industry; however,

they are often inconsistent because of the use of different methodologies, classification

frameworks, and source data. These inconsistencies are frustrating to data users, who

would like to be able to combine the richness of information from each for their own

applications. The goal of partial integration is to eliminate these inconsistencies, as well

as to improve the accuracy of the combined accounts by drawing on their relative

strengths in methodologies and source data. In this section, the traditional I-O and GDP-

by-industry methodologies are reviewed and the comparative advantages of each are

examined in the context of an integrated methodology that produces both sets of

accounts.
                                                                                                              8


    II.1 The Traditional I-O Accounts Methodology

         The I-O accounts present a detailed picture of how industries interact to provide

inputs to, and use output from, each other to produce the Nation’s GDP. The I-O

accounts consist of benchmark I-O accounts and annual I-O accounts. The benchmark I-

O accounts are prepared every 5 years and are based on data from the quinquennial

economic census covering most businesses.5 The annual I-O accounts update the most

recent benchmark I-O accounts, and, although they are more timely than the benchmark

I-O accounts, they are generally less detailed because they rely on annual data based on

smaller sample surveys.6 At present, the I-O accounts are prepared only in current

dollars.7

         Both the benchmark and the annual I-O accounts are prepared within a balanced

row-and-column framework that is presented in two tables: A “make” table and a “use”

table. The make table shows the commodities that are produced by each industry, and the

use table shows the commodities that are used in industry production and that are

consumed by final users. In the use table, the columns consist of industries and final uses

(chart 1). The column total for an industry is its gross output (consisting of sales or

receipts, other operating income, commodity taxes, and inventory change). The rows in

the use table consist of commodities and value added. The commodities are the goods

and services that are produced by industries or imported and that are consumed either by

industries in their production processes or by final users. The commodities consumed by

industries in the production process are referred to as intermediate inputs (consisting of

energy, materials, and purchased services). Value added in the I-O accounts is computed

5
  For more information, see Lawson, et. al. (2002)
6
  For more information, see Planting and Kuhbach.
7
  BEA is beginning research to explore the feasibility of preparing real (inflation-adjusted) I-O accounts.
                                                                                                           9

as a residual--that is, as gross output less intermediate inputs by industry. In concept, this

residual, which represents the sum of the costs incurred and the incomes earned in

production, consists of compensation of employees, gross operating surplus, and taxes on

production and imports, less subsidies.8 GDP equals valued added summed over all

industries, and it also equals final uses summed over all commodities.

         The I-O accounts have traditionally served two major purposes, both of which

have focused on information about the use of commodities and which have supported

BEA’s NIPAs. First, the accounts have provided the NIPAs with best-level estimates of

the commodities that comprise final expenditures for GDP in benchmark years. Second,

they provide the NIPAs with information to split estimates of commodities produced

annually into their business (intermediate) and final consumer components--information

that is critical for estimating GDP final expenditures in nonbenchmark years. Because of

their importance in determining the levels of GDP in the NIPAs, the I-O accounts have

traditionally focused more on the commodity composition of the economy and less on the

measures of value added by industry.

    II.2 The Traditional GDP-by-Industry Accounts Methodology

         In contrast to the I-O accounts, the GDP-by-industry accounts have traditionally

focused on the industry composition of the U.S. economy and the relative performance of

these industries as reflected in their measures of value added. The GDP-by-industry


8
  Previously, these costs and incomes were classified as either compensation of employees, property-type
income, or indirect business tax and nontax liability. These new classifications are consistent with the
aggregations introduced as part of the comprehensive NIPA revision; see Moulton and Seskin for more
information. Specifically, all the nontax liabilities except special assessments are removed from indirect
business tax and nontax liability, and the remainder of this category is renamed “taxes on production and
imports;” the nontax liabilities except special assessments are added to property-type income; subsidies are
removed from property-type income, and the remainder of this category is renamed “gross operating
surplus;” and subsidies are netted against the value of taxes on production and imports.
                                                                                             10

accounts are particularly suited for time series analysis of changes in industry shares of

GDP and contributions to GDP growth. They provide annual estimates of gross output,

of intermediate inputs, and of value added by industry and the corresponding price and

quantity indexes.9

           The GDP-by-industry accounts use a different estimating approach than that used

for the I-O accounts. They measure value added by industry as the sum of the costs

incurred and the incomes earned in production. Value added by industry is estimated as

the sum of the industry distributions of compensation of employees, gross operating

surplus, and taxes on production and imports, less subsidies (chart 2). In the GDP-by-

industry accounts, total intermediate inputs by industry are measured as a residual--that

is, total intermediate inputs equal gross output less value added for an industry.

           The GDP-by-industry estimates are based on data from three primary sources.

Gross output by industry is based on establishment-based annual survey data from the

Bureau of the Census that are used to extrapolate best-level estimates from the most

recent set of benchmark I-O accounts. The measures of value added by industry are

derived from the industry distributions of the components of gross domestic income

(GDI) from the NIPAs, which, in turn, are based on establishment-based data from the

Bureau of Labor Statistics and on enterprise-based annual tax return and administrative

record data from the IRS.

           Real measures of gross output and intermediate inputs by industry are estimated

by deflating with detailed price indexes. Price indexes and quantity indexes are derived

for each industry’s gross output, of intermediate inputs, and of value added.



9
    For more information, see Lum, et. al.
                                                                                                     11


     II.3 Combining the Two Methodologies

        The primary strength of the I-O methodology is the balanced row-and-column

framework in which the detailed estimates of gross output and intermediate inputs by

industry are prepared; this framework allows for a simultaneous look at both the

economy’s industries and commodities. The primary strength of the GDP-by-industry

accounts methodology is the direct approach to estimating a time series of value added by

industry from high quality source income data. The methodology for partial integration

incorporates the relative strengths of both. It yields a new and improved set of annual I-

O accounts and GDP-by-industry accounts that are prepared within a balanced

framework and that incorporate the most timely and highest quality source data available.

It also ensures the consistency of the estimates of gross output, of intermediate inputs,

and of value added by industry across the two sets of accounts.

        The strength of using a balanced I-O framework is demonstrated by again

referring to chart 1. A balanced use table ensures that the industry estimates of the I-O

accounts (the column totals) are in balance with the commodity estimates of the I-O

accounts (the row totals).10 This framework tracks all of the detailed input and output

flows in the economy and guarantees that each commodity that is produced is either

consumed by industries as an intermediate input or is consumed by final users. An

imbalance in the use table--for example, too little, or too much, supply of a commodity

after intermediate inputs by industry and final uses have been accounted for—flags an

inconsistency in the data. Therefore, a balanced framework provides a “consistency




10
  The I-O framework also includes a balanced make table, which requires that the different commodities
produced by industries are consistent with total commodity and industry outputs for the economy.
                                                                                                      12

check” of the use table. No comparable procedure to balance industries and commodities

exists for the GDP-by-industry accounts.

        The strength of the GDP-by-industry methodology is that the estimates of value

added by industry are derived directly from high quality source data, so these measures

generally provide better estimates of value added for industries relative to the I-O

estimates. Nonetheless, several factors can affect the quality of the GDP-by-industry

estimates for specific industries. For example, gross operating surplus, one component of

value added by industry, includes several items--such as corporate profits before tax,

corporate net interest, and corporate capital consumption allowances--that are based on

corporate tax return data from the IRS. Because the consolidated tax return data of an

enterprise may account for activities by several establishments classified in different

industries, BEA must convert these enterprise- or company-based data to an

establishment or plant basis. The conversion can introduce errors because it is based on

employment data for establishments that are cross-classified by enterprise, and because it

is based on relationships from an economic census year that are likely to change over

time. In addition, proprietors’ income, another component of gross operating surplus, can

introduce errors because the industry distributions of proprietors’ income are based on

incomplete source data. Industries with large shares of value added from proprietors’

income are regarded as having lower quality estimates.11




11
  Proprietors’ income is defined here to equal the sum of NIPA estimates for proprietors’ income without
inventory valuation adjustment (IVA) and capital consumption adjustment (CCAdj), proprietors’ net
interest, proprietors’ capital consumption allowance, and proprietors’ IVA. The NIPA adjustment to
nonfarm proprietors’ income without IVA and CCAdj for misreporting on income tax returns is shown in
NIPA table 7.14 “Relation of Nonfarm Proprietors’ Income in the National Income and Product Accounts
to Corresponding Measures as Published by the Internal Revenue Service.”
                                                                                                      13

        The GDP-by-industry measures of value-added may be of a higher or lower

quality than those from the benchmark I-O accounts, depending on the data used. For an

industry with high quality data on gross output and intermediate inputs, the measure of

value added from the benchmark I-O accounts may be superior, particularly when the

GDP-by-industry measure includes a large enterprise-establishment adjustment or a

substantial amount of proprietors’ income. Alternatively, for an industry with a small

enterprise-establishment adjustment and a negligible amount of proprietors’ income, the

GDP-by-industry measure may be superior, particularly if the coverage of intermediate

inputs in the quinquennial economic census is small for the benchmark I-O measure. For

the 1997 benchmark I-O accounts, less than half of all intermediate inputs were covered

by the economic census; for many industries, this results in lower quality measures of

value added. In contrast, for nonbenchmark years, the GDP-by-industry accounts always

provide the preferred measures of value added, because estimates of intermediate inputs

in the annual I-O accounts are currently based on very sparse data and are unable to yield

high quality measures of value added by industry.12

        The advantages of a partial integration methodology, however, go beyond

incorporating the best methods and source data from each methodology. Because the

annual I-O accounts will be estimated concurrently with the GDP-by-industry accounts,

they will be released on an accelerated schedule. The 2002 annual I-O table, scheduled

for release in June 2004, will be released 18 months rather than 36 months after the end

of the reference year. In addition, beginning in the fall of 2004, the annual I-O accounts


12
  The Bureau of the Census has recently undertaken initiatives to improve the coverage of intermediate
inputs by industry in several of its annual surveys. For example, the Annual Survey of Manufactures has
expanded its coverage of expenses to include purchased services by industry and the Service Annual
Survey has initiated the collection of data on expenses by industry.
                                                                                           14

will adopt the revision schedule of the NIPAs; at that time, the revised tables for 2001

and 2002 and new tables for 2003 will be released. The revised I-O estimates that are

consistent with the annually revised NIPA estimates will provide users with yet another

level of consistency. Finally, the partial integration methodology will impose a time

series consistency on the annual I-O tables, making the tables more useful for analyses of

trends over time.

       A further advantage of the partial integration methodology is a “feedback loop” to

the NIPAs that is demonstrated by examining the relationships among the national

accounts (chart 3). Before the integration of the annual I-O accounts and the GDP-by-

industry accounts, the benchmark I-O accounts provided the following: A starting point

for updating the annual I-O accounts (arrow 1), the best-level estimates of gross output to

the GDP-by-industry accounts (arrow 2), and the best-level estimates and commodity

splits of GDP to the NIPAs (arrow 3). The NIPAs provided estimates of GDI by industry

to the GDP-by-industry accounts (arrow 4) and information on the annual composition of

GDP to the annual I-O accounts (arrow 5). The partial integration results in an exchange

of information between the annual I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry accounts

(arrow 6), and it also provides a feedback loop to the NIPAs (arrow 7). Because the

integrated industry accounts will be prepared within a balanced framework, they will

provide annual estimates of the commodity composition of GDP final expenditures that

could potentially be used to improve the NIPA measures of GDP.
                                                                                          15


III. Full Integration: The Long-Run Goal

       Integration of the annual I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry accounts is only

the first step, although a very important one, towards BEA’s long-run goal to fully

integrate all components of its industry accounts, including the benchmark I-O accounts,

and to integrate the industry accounts with the NIPAs. Although full integration is

dependent upon continued costly investments by the Federal statistical agencies to

improve the coverage and consistency of their economic data, the benefits are significant

in providing higher quality information to data users. With more consistent and

comprehensive data on industry inputs, the benchmark I-O accounts would provide the

best measures of value added by industry for benchmark years. With updated annual

information on intermediate inputs by industry, the annual I-O accounts and the GDP-by-

industry accounts would provide annual updates of value added by industry that would be

independent of the NIPA measures of GDP. With full integration, BEA would have a

production-based measure of GDP that would provide new information to the NIPAs

through the feedback loop discussed earlier (chart 3). That is to say, it could provide

valuable insights into imbalances between BEA’s primary measure of GDP based on the

final expenditures approach and its “shadow” measure based on income—that is, GDI.

       BEA views the underlying framework now being implemented for partial

integration as able to accommodate the requirements for full integration. That being said,

however, for full integration, the data needed to populate much of this framework is

presently missing, particularly consistent and comprehensive data on intermediate inputs

for industries. For example, less than half of the intermediate input estimates in the 1997

benchmark I-O accounts were based on high quality, consistent data collected by the
                                                                                            16

Bureau of the Census; estimates for the balance were based on fragmented information

from trade associations, company annual reports, anecdotal information, and prior

benchmark I-O accounts. To be reliable, a production-based estimate of GDP requires an

expansion by Census in its coverage of business expenses from less than half to 100

percent. The methods developed by BEA to achieve partial integration in the short run

are not an adequate substitute for these improvements to source data in the long run, if

the goals of full integration are to be realized. To acquire this information, BEA is

working collaboratively with other statistical agencies, particularly the Bureau of the

Census to both expand information collected for its annual surveys and for its

quinquennial economic census, beginning with that for 2002.

       Full integration also implies greater consistency in the data provided by different

statistical agencies. For example, the quality of BEA’s industry estimates can be affected

by inconsistencies in the sampling frames used by the statistical agencies, as well as

differences in classification and data collection and tabulation practices. Table A

compares estimates of nonagricultural payroll data collected by the Bureau of the Census

with wage and salary data collected by BLS for selected industries in 1992. Industries for

which comparable information was not available are excluded from the table. The

comparison shows that the estimates differ by 10 percent or more for about half of these

industries. Although these differences do not directly affect measures of total value

added, they can potentially impact the reliability of BEA’s estimates of the labor-capital

splits of industry value added. BEA envisions that it will be able to further enhance the

consistency and quality of its fully integrated accounts because data-sharing initiatives

should reveal the sources of these and other similar differences in source data from the
                                                                                          17

various Federal statistical agencies. In the case cited, the consistency between its

measures of gross output by industry and compensation of employees by industry, would

be improved if payroll by industry data prepared by the Bureau of the Census and the

wages and salaries data prepared by BLS were brought into agreement by the source

agencies.

       At the earliest, full integration could not be attained until the 2008-2010

timeframe, which is when expanded data from the 2002 Economic Census will be fully

incorporated into BEA’s economic accounts, beginning with the release of the 2002

benchmark I-O accounts in 2007. If limited data sharing by statistical agencies is also

made viable in the interim, BEA will be able to better identify the sources of the

differences in data from other agencies such as those identified in the example presented

above for BLS and Census data. The major benefit of such data sharing would be to

enhance the consistency and quality of BEA’s fully-integrated economic accounts.



IV. The Partial Integration Methodology

       The methodology, including the source data and the estimating procedures that

will be used for the partial integration of the annual I-O accounts and the GDP-by-

industry accounts is discussed in this section. The methodology is described in a

sequence of five steps: (1) Establishing a level of detail for both industries and

commodities; (2) revising the previously published 1997 benchmark I-O accounts that

will serve as a reference point for the integrated accounts; (3) developing a 1998-2002

time series for the annual estimates of value added by industry; (4) updating and

balancing the annual I-O accounts for 1998-2002, incorporating the revised 1997
                                                                                           18

benchmark I-O accounts from step 2 and the 1998-2002 estimates of value added by

industry from step 3; and (5) preparing price and quantity indexes for the GDP-by-

industry accounts for 1998-2002.

   IV.1 Step 1: Level of Industry and Commodity Detail

       The first step in integrating the annual I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry

accounts is to establish the level of detail that can be used for both sets of accounts.

Table B shows this detail and the corresponding 1997 North American Industry

Classification System (NAICS) industry codes. Table B no longer shows a statistical

discrepancy that has traditionally appeared as an industry in the GDP-by-industry

accounts. This reflects the use of a balanced framework which requires consistency

between GDP measured in terms of final expenditures and in terms of value added or

income. In addition, table B does not include an industry for the inventory valuation

adjustment, which has traditionally been shown in the I-O accounts. In the integrated

accounts, the inventory valuation adjustment is treated as a secondary product produced

by industries and included in their gross output, as well as a separate commodity going to

final demand. The level of detail shown in table B applies to both industries and

commodities and serves as the publication level of detail. Most of the estimation

procedures, however, are applied at a finer level of industry and commodity detail in

order to ensure the best estimates at the publication level.

   IV.2 Step 2: Revised 1997 Benchmark I-O Accounts

       The second step in the partial integration process is to revise the previously

published 1997 benchmark I-O accounts, because it must provide the relationships and

levels for integrating the annual I-O accounts and GDP-by-industry accounts. The
                                                                                                       19

necessary revisions are from two sources. First, the 1997 benchmark I-O accounts must

be modified to incorporate the definitional, methodological, and statistical changes from

the 2003 comprehensive revision of the NIPAs. Incorporating these changes ensures that

the integrated accounts for 1998-2002 are consistent with the levels and composition of

GDP in the NIPAs. The major NIPA changes and their effects on the 1997 benchmark I-

O accounts are summarized in table C.

        Second, after the NIPA revisions are incorporated, the level and the composition

of value added for each industry must be further modified on the basis of information

from both the I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry accounts.13 As discussed above,

value added by industry in the I-O accounts is computed as the difference between gross

output and intermediate inputs by industry, and value added by industry in the GDP-by-

industry accounts is computed from the industry distributions of GDI from the NIPAs. In

general, these two measures of value added for an industry will differ (see the first two

columns of table D).14

        Chart 4 shows a matrix that demonstrates how the quality of the value added by

industry estimates varies across the benchmark I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry

accounts. For example, both the benchmark I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry

accounts provide good measures of value added for the health care industry because of

the near-complete coverage of gross output and intermediate inputs by the economic


13
   The GDP-by-industry value added that is based on the NIPA GDI estimates will also incorporate the
results from the 2003 comprehensive NIPA revision.
14
   Research indicates that the magnitude and sign of these differences vary across industries and across
time. For example, using data for 1992, Yuskavage (2000) finds that the property-type income for the
manufacturing sector is, on average, lower in the GDP-by-industry accounts than in the benchmark I-O
accounts. However, more recent research, using data for 1997, finds that the reverse is true; for the
manufacturing sector, the gross operating surplus from the GDP-by-industry accounts is, on average, larger
than the gross operating surplus from benchmark I-O accounts. BEA is continuing its research into the
sources of these differences.
                                                                                                     20

census and the relatively small amount of redistributions of income resulting from

enterprise-establishment adjustments. On the other hand, both sets of accounts provide

poor measures for the construction industry because of incomplete coverage in the

economic census and because of large, lower-quality, enterprise-establishment

adjustments. For many industries, the quality of industry value added is mixed. Mining

value added, for example, is good in the benchmark I-O accounts because of near-

complete industry coverage, yet poor in the GDP-by-industry accounts because of

relatively very large enterprise-establishment adjustments. The partial integration

methodology draws the best information from both sets of accounts into a single,

“combined” estimate of value added for each industry. These combined measures are

then incorporated into the 1997 benchmark I-O accounts.15

          The combined value added for an industry is an average with weights

determined by criteria that reflect the relative quality of value added from the two sets of

accounts. In general, these criteria are based on the quality of the source data used for

each. The criteria for the benchmark I-O accounts include the following:

     •   The percent of intermediate inputs by industry that are covered by source data

         from the quinquennial economic census, and

     •   the percent of an industry’s total gross output that is accounted for by the

         quinquennial economic census.

The criteria for the GDP-by-industry accounts include the following:




15
  The estimates of “compensation of employees” and “taxes on production and imports, less subsidies” in
the revised 1997 benchmark I-O accounts are consistent with those published in the NIPAs. For census-
covered industries, the compensation in the previously published 1997 benchmark I-O accounts was based
on the 1997 Economic Census. See Lawson, et al. (2002), p. 31.
                                                                                                             21


     •   The quality and the size of adjustments used to convert the enterprise-based,

         profit-type income data to an establishment basis, and

     •   the percent of an industry’s value added that is accounted for by proprietors’

         income.

         For both the benchmark I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry accounts, these

criteria, along with expert analyst judgment, are applied at the industry level shown in

table B in order to identify point estimates and estimates of variance for each industry’s

measure of value added.16 These point estimates and estimates of variance are used to

develop a probability distribution of value added for each industry from each set of

accounts. Each probability distribution represents a measure of the likelihood that the

“true” value added takes on a particular value, given the information available. The

distributions are then combined to produce a measure of value added for each industry.

Essentially, the combined measure is an average of the two point estimates with the

weights being determined by the relative variances--that is, a point estimate with a

smaller variance receives a larger weight. Appendix A provides technical details on the

procedures used.

         Chart 5 gives an example of this process for the educational services industry.

The point estimate of value added is $63.4 billion from the revised 1997 benchmark I-O

accounts and $61.3 billion from the GDP-by-industry accounts. The benchmark I-O

value-added estimate reflects only a limited amount of information on this industry’s


16
   The estimates are prepared at this level of detail because the industry distributions of GDI are available at
this level. These estimates are allocated to more detailed industries when the revised benchmark I-O table
is balanced. Source data for 1997 were not available on the 1997 North American Industry Classification
System (NAICS) basis for all of the components of GDI. For selected components, BEA converted data
from the 1987 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) basis to the 1997 NAICS basis.
                                                                                          22
gross output and intermediate inputs, because most establishments classified in this

industry are out-of-scope of the quinquennial economic census. Therefore, the

information used to prepare the I-O estimates was drawn from a variety of sources,

including trade association data. The quality of these data is not as high as data from the

economic census. In contrast, the GDP-by-industry value-added estimate reflects

relatively complete data, based on the industry distributions of GDI from the NIPAs.

Nevertheless, examining the two quality criteria for the GDP-by-industry accounts

reveals that proprietors’ income for this industry is about 3 percent of total value added

and that the amount of adjustment required to convert enterprise-based profit-type

income data to an establishment basis is about 1 percent. This implies that the combined

estimate should be close, but not equal to, the GDP-by-industry point estimate.

       A more formal analysis of the educational services industry is shown in chart 5,

which includes the related probability distributions for each of the two point estimates.

Note that the GDP-by-industry distribution is more peaked (smaller variance) than the

distribution from the I-O accounts (larger variance). The smaller variance reflects a

relatively good GDP-by-industry estimate; the larger variance for the benchmark I-O

accounts reflects a relatively lower quality estimate. As expected, the combined estimate

of $62.2 billion is closer to the GDP-by-industry estimate than to the I-O estimate; the

GDP-by-industry estimate is given a weight of about 57 percent, while the I-O estimate is

given a weight of about 43 percent. Because more information is used to make this

combined estimate, its overall quality is higher than that for either of the individual

estimates, as shown by their distributions in chart 5. A complete list of the combined

estimates of value added by industry is shown in the third column of table D.
                                                                                                      23

        After the two sets of revisions have been made to the 1997 benchmark I-O

accounts, it is then balanced. For this balancing, each industry’s gross output and new

measure of value added are fixed, and its total intermediate inputs is allowed to adjust to

the difference. Balancing ensures that the use of commodities equals their supply, the

sum of each industry’s value added and intermediate inputs equals its gross output, and

the sum of final uses equals published GDP. The revised and balanced 1997 benchmark

I-O accounts then provide a starting point for preparing the integrated accounts for 1998-

2002.

     IV.3 Step 3: A Time Series of Value Added for 1998-2002

        A time series of value added by industry is prepared by extrapolating the revised

1997 benchmark I-O estimates of value added by industry forward to 1998-2002, using

the GDI-based measure of value added from the GDP-by-industry accounts as the

extrapolator for each industry. The integrated industry accounts for 1998-2002 are

presented on the 1997 NAICS basis.17 The components of GDI that compose value

added by industry and information on the major source data and on the industrial

distribution for each component are shown in table E.

        As discussed above, the quality of the GDI-based measures of value added

depends on a number of factors, including the size of adjustments required to convert

enterprise-based, profit-type GDI data to an establishment basis and the size of

proprietors’ income. Nonetheless, they are preferred as growth indicators when

compared with those from the annual I-O residual methodology because of the scarcity of

annual data on intermediate inputs for credible measures of value added.

17
  For earlier years, GDP-by-industry estimates are available currently on a 1987 SIC basis only. BEA is
currently conducting research on methods to extend the GDP-by-industry estimates backwards for years
prior to 1998 on the 1997 NAICS basis.
                                                                                                         24

         After extrapolating the revised 1997 benchmark I-O level of value added forward

with the GDI-based measure for each industry, the resulting sum of value added across

industries will not necessarily sum to GDP in a given year--part of the difference being

the statistical discrepancy and the other part being extrapolation errors.18 This procedure

allocates this difference in two steps. In the first step, expert analyst judgment is used to

adjust some industries with known measurement problems. In the second step, the

remaining difference is distributed across industries in proportion to the industries’ value

added.

     IV.4 Step 4: Updated and Balanced Annual I-O Accounts for 1998-2002

         Five tasks must be completed sequentially to update and balance each of the five

annual I-O tables for 1998-2002. These tasks include (1) estimating gross output for each

industry and commodity; (2) estimating the commodity composition of intermediate

inputs for each industry; (3) estimating the domestic supply for each commodity; (4)

incorporating estimates of commodities used for personal consumption, for gross private

fixed investment, and for government consumption and investment as part of GDP final-

demand expenditures; and (5) balancing the use of commodities with available supply

and the output of industries with necessary inputs for production.

      IV.4.a Industry and Commodity Gross Output

         For most industries and commodities, annual source data are available to estimate

current-year industry and commodity gross output. The data sources used are shown in

Table F. Manufacturing, trade, and most service industry estimates are based on annual

18
   BEA also investigated using gross output by industry as an extrapolator for the revised 1997 benchmark
I-O value added. This procedureBwhich assumes industry input-output ratios are constant over timeBwas
not adopted, because tests on historical data showed that it yields larger discrepancies between the sum of
extrapolated value added and GDP relative to GDI extrapolation.
                                                                                                      25

survey data from the Bureau of the Census. Agriculture, insurance, and government

enterprise estimates, as well as transportation, utilities, finance, and real estate estimates,

are primarily based on data from other government statistical agencies and private

sources. For those industries and commodities for which annual source data are not

available at the 1997 benchmark I-O level of detail, more aggregated source data are used

as extrapolators.

      IV.4.b Intermediate Inputs to Industries

        Industry inputs are estimated in three steps. First, for domestic inputs, each

industry’s current-year output is valued in terms of the previous year’s prices, using an

industry price index that is calculated--in a Fisher index-number formula--as a weighted

average of the price indexes for commodities produced by the industry. Estimates of

inputs from foreign sources are revalued using import price indexes. For commodities

for which a price index is unavailable, an aggregate price index is applied to multiple

commodities. The data sources used to prepare these indexes are shown in table F.

        Second, each industry’s current-year output, valued in the prices for the previous

year, is multiplied by the previous year’s direct requirements coefficient for the same

industry. The initial set of coefficients used are from the revised 1997 benchmark I-O

accounts. The result of this multiplication yields current-year intermediate inputs valued

in the prices of the previous year.19 At this point, the composition of an industry’s inputs

per dollar of output (valued in the prices of the previous year) is unchanged from that of

the previous year. To adjust for changes in relative prices, the results are reflated to

current-year prices, using the commodity price indexes.


19
  A direct requirements coefficient represents the amount of a commodity required by an industry to
produce a dollar of the industry’s output.
                                                                                                           26

         Finally, commodity taxes, transportation costs, and trade margins for each

intermediate input are estimated. Commodity taxes are added to increase the value of

intermediate inputs from basic prices to producers’ prices, and transportation costs and

trade margins are added to increase the value further to purchasers’ prices.20 Estimates for

commodity taxes and total transportation costs and margins are developed as part of the

annual estimates of commodity gross output and are distributed to transactions using

1997 benchmark I-O relationships.

      IV.4.c Domestic Supply

         The domestic supply is estimated. The domestic supply of each commodity is the

total value of goods and services available for consumption as intermediate inputs by

industries or for final use as personal consumption, private fixed investment, and

government consumption and gross investment. It is calculated as domestic commodity

output, plus government sales, and imports less exports and change in private inventories.

Imports and exports are based on foreign trade statistics from the Bureau of the Census

and on BEA’s international transactions accounts. Changes in private inventories are

from the NIPAs and the commodity composition of inventories held by industries is

based on relationships from the revised 1997 benchmark I-O accounts.

     IV.4.d Commodity Composition of Final Uses excluding Imports and Exports
and Changes in Private Inventories

         The annual estimates of the major expenditure components of final uses for

personal consumption, private fixed investment, and government consumption and gross

investment are obtained directly from the NIPAs. The initial commodity compositions of


20
   The basic price is the price received by the producer for goods sold; it excludes the taxes collected by the
producer from purchasers, as well as transportation costs and trade margins.
                                                                                         27

these components are estimated using relationships from the revised 1997 benchmark I-O

accounts.

     IV.4.e Balancing the Use Table

       Finally, commodities and industries are brought into balance using a

biproportional adjustment procedure. This procedure sequentially adjusts rows and

columns to equal the estimated output control totals. The adjustments are made

iteratively until the use of each commodity equals its domestic supply, the sum of value

added and intermediate inputs for each industry equals its gross output, and final-demand

expenditures equal levels in the NIPAs. Unlike many I-O balancing systems, the system

employed for the annual I-O tables takes advantage of the very detailed relationships

included in the 1997 benchmark I-O accounts and balances in both producers’ and

purchasers’ prices. The system balances approximately 3,000 rows and 1,200 columns

while maintaining information on transportation costs and margins for each transaction.

Appendix B provides a more detailed discussion of the techniques used for this

balancing.

       The annual I-O accounts are finalized for 1998-2002 after the results have been

reviewed and verified. The measures of gross output, intermediate inputs, and value

added by industry are then incorporated into the GDP-by-industry accounts.

   IV.5 Step 5: Price and Quantity Indexes for the GDP-by-Industry Accounts

       Price and quantity indexes for the GDP-by-industry accounts are prepared in two

steps. First, price and quantity indexes for gross output and intermediate inputs are

prepared for each industry. Second, information on gross output by industry is combined
                                                                                         28

with information on intermediate inputs by industry to derive price and quantity indexes

for value added by industry, using the double-deflation procedure.

   IV.5.a Indexes for Gross Output and Intermediate Inputs by Industry

       Price and quantity indexes for gross output by industry are derived by separately

deflating each commodity produced by an industry and included in its gross output.

Information on the commodities produced by industries is obtained from annual I-O

make tables. Price and quantity indexes for intermediate inputs are estimated by

deflating the commodities used by industries from the annual I-O use tables. The

commodity price indexes used for this deflation are listed in table F. When a commodity

price index is based on more than one detailed price index, a Fisher index-number

formula is used to prepare the composite index. Appendix C “Computing Chain-Type

Price and Quantity Indexes in the GDP-by-Industry Accounts” shows the Fisher index-

number formulas that are used to prepare the price and quantity indexes for gross output

and intermediate inputs by industry.

     IV.5.b Indexes for Value Added by Industry

       Price and quantity indexes for value added by industry are calculated using the

double-deflation method. In the double-deflation method, separate estimates of gross

output and intermediate inputs by industry are combined in a Fisher index-number

formula in order to generate price and quantity indexes for value added by industry (see

Appendix C). This method is preferred for computing price and quantity indexes for

value added by industry because it requires the fewest assumptions about the

relationships among gross outputs.
                                                                                           29


V. Future Research

       There are several areas of research that must be addressed in order to achieve

BEA’s long-run goal of full integration of the accounts. The most important of these

include:

   •   Additional evaluation of the coverage, quality, and consistency of data from

       different sources for the purpose of improving BEA’s industry accounts overall

       and its estimates of value added by industry specifically. This includes working

       cooperatively with other statistical agencies for the purpose of collecting

       additional data as well as expanding data sharing initiatives to address differences

       across alternative data sources.

   •   Related research to determine the underlying reasons for the discrepancies that

       existed between the GDP-by-industry and I-O levels of value added prior to

       setting a “combined” level for the integrated accounts. The fact that these

       discrepancies were clearly evident prior to the integration indicates underlying

       inconsistencies in source data and methodologies that need to be explored further.

       This research will also require working cooperatively with the statistical agencies

       providing the source data.

   •   Continued research to develop new methods and data sources that improve

       measures of gross operating surplus and direct measures of value-added-by-

       industry that are consistent with establishment-based definitions for industries.

       This is in contrast to the method of estimating value added as a residual resulting

       from intermediate purchases being subtracted from gross output. Although this
                                                                                             30


         method results in consistent estimates, it also picks up statistical errors that do not

         have anything to do with value added.

     •   Development of additional procedures to incorporate new data from the 2002

         Economic Census and annual surveys of intermediate inputs by industry into

         BEA’s industry accounts on a more accelerated basis, including techniques for

         evaluating “best-level” estimates as compared to “best-change” estimates.

     •   Development of new processes and procedures for incorporating information

         from the production-based approach of measuring GDP into the NIPAs on a

         timely basis.

     •   Extension of the NAICS-based industry accounts backwards for years prior to

         1998. For the period 1947-86, research is underway to develop current-dollar

         GDP-by-industry estimates for broad industry groups. 21 Additional research is

         needed to create current-dollar annual I-O tables for years prior to 1998.




21
  In November 2004, BEA published the NAICS-based GDP-by-Industry Accounts for the period 1987-
97. See Yuskavage and Pho.
                                                                                               31



Appendix A: Estimating the “Combined” Level of Value Added by Industry


        This appendix describes the procedure used to determine the “combined”

estimates of value added by industry that are incorporated into the revised 1997

benchmark input-output (I-O) accounts. The procedure allows for the best information

from both the I-O accounts and the Gross-Domestic-Product (GDP)-by-industry accounts

to be used in determining the combined estimates. This is accomplished by preparing a

weighted average of the two independent measures of value-added where the weights

reflect the relative quality of the two measures. For each of the 61 industries presented in

table B, a weighted average is given by


                Combined i = bi ,I −O (I - O i ) + bi ,GDP by Industry (GDP by Industry i ),


where (I-O i) is industry i’s point estimate of value added from the benchmark I-O

accounts and (GDP by Industry i) is industry i’s point estimate from the GDP-by-industry

accounts. bi , I −O and bi ,GDP by Industry are the weights for the benchmark I-O accounts and the

GDP-by-industry accounts, respectively.

        In this linear combination, the weights are a simple function of the relative

precision of each point estimate. A modeling framework is developed to estimate the

precision of each industry’s value-added estimator. The precision of each point estimate

is summarized using two measures. First, an ordinal quality ranking of industries is

developed for both the benchmark I-O accounts and the GDP-by-industry accounts.

Second, an approximate 95-percent confidence interval for each point estimate is

determined by evaluating the uncertainty in the underlying source data. Implicit in both
                                                                                          32

the ordinal ranking and the confidence intervals are the quality criteria outlined on page

19 of the main text. A review of these criteria suggests that a significant amount of

expert analyst judgment is incorporated into this framework.

       Two practical considerations constrained the modeling framework finally selected

by BEA for estimating weights. First, the overall objective is to obtain the most accurate

weighted average feasible from the information currently available. Second, the model

must not be overly sensitive to misspecifications of the 95- percent confidence intervals.

       The chosen model requires the following assumptions:

       1. Information about each benchmark I-O and GDP-by-industry value-added

           estimate can be effectively summarized by estimating the mean and standard

           deviation of a normal distribution. (This assumption implies that the standard

           deviation accurately summarizes the uncertainty associated with each

           estimator.)

       2. The relative quality of the estimates from the benchmark I-O accounts and the

           GDP-by-industry accounts can be evaluated based on their point estimate-to-

           standard deviation ratios.

       3. The point estimate-to-standard deviation ratios for all industries can be

           represented by an ordered vector with elements sampled from a beta

           distribution.

       The steps for estimating each industry’s standard deviation are as follows (for

illustrative purposes, only the benchmark I-O accounts are discussed but the process is

performed on the GDP-by-industry accounts as well):
                                                                                    33

1. For the benchmark I-O accounts, set candidate values for the two parameters of

   the beta distribution as a starting point. This distribution is evaluated as a

   candidate for characterizing the underlying distribution of point estimate-to-

   standard deviation ratios for all industries in the benchmark I-O accounts.

2. Sample 61 values from the distribution from step 1.

3. Rank order the 61 values from step 2 and assign one to each benchmark industry

   based on its ordinal ranking.

4. For each industry, use the assigned point estimate-to-standard deviation ratio and

   the known point estimate to determine the implied standard deviation--that is,

   solve the following equation for industry i’s standard deviation.

            Error Metrici = (Standard Deviationi) / (Point Estimatei).

5. Repeat this process many times (on average, about 5000 times), storing the

   implied standard deviations of the industry estimators from each repetition.

6. Compute the average of the sampled standard deviations for each industry using

   the results from step 5; use this average to develop a 95-percent confidence

   interval based on the normal distribution—that is,

                 N(Point Estimatei, Average Standard Deviation).

7. Compare the upper and lower bounds of the confidence interval estimated in step

   6 with the original 95-percent confidence interval estimated for the benchmark I-

   O accounts.

8. Repeat steps 1 through 7 with all candidate beta parameters. Find the beta

   parameters that minimize the sum of squared deviations between the 95-percent

   confidence intervals from the benchmark I-O accounts and those from step 6.
                                                                                                                        34

    9. After estimating the beta parameters from step 8, follow steps 2 through 6 to

            estimate the standard deviation for each of the 61 industries in the benchmark I-O

            accounts.

            This procedure approximates the estimator variance for each benchmark I-O and

GDP-by-industry value-added estimate. The estimator variance estimates are used to

determine the weights for the combined estimates. Estimators with smaller variances are

given greater weight, that is to say, the following weights are used to estimate the

combined level of value added for each industry:

                    σ2                                                                         σ2   i , I −O
bi ,I-O =                                            and bi ,GDP by Industry =
                        i , GDP bt Industry


            σ   2
                i , GDP bt Industry   + σ i , I -O
                                              2
                                                                                 σ   2
                                                                                     i , GDP bt Industry   + σ i2,I-O
                                                                                                    35



Appendix B: New Updating and Balancing Processes for BEA’s Annual I-O Tables


        Since 1999, when the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) reinstated its annual

input-output (I-O) program beginning with the release of accounts for 1996, BEA has had

among its many goals that of releasing annual I-O tables on a schedule synchronized with

that for the GDP-by-industry accounts. To achieve this goal implies regularly providing

a time series of annual I-O tables with those for the most recent years being updated and

revised through the standard advance, preliminary, and final iterations—a potentially

very resource-intensive process.

        The five broad tasks required to produce annual I-O tables were identified and

discussed in the main body of this report (see section III, step 4, beginning on page 21).

In evaluating likely prospects for increased automation, BEA focused on task 5,

“balancing the use table,” which has tended to be very labor intensive because of BEA’s

extensive use of hand adjustments for the process. This appendix summarizes the results

of BEA’s research in this area and describes the changes being incorporated into the

current balancing procedures for the 1998-2002 annual I-O accounts.1

        The appendix is divided into three sections. The first section describes BEA’s

new balancing procedure. The second section describes the different tests that BEA

performed on this procedure before it was adopted. The third section provides summary

remarks.



1
 For further information on this research, see the paper, “Increasing the Timeliness of U.S. Annual I-O
Accounts,” by M. Planting and J. Guo, in Economic Systems Research, No. 2, Vol. 16, 2004. The complete
paper can also be obtained from BEA’s Web site at http://www.bea.gov/bea/papers/Timeliness.pdf.
                                                                                              36


1. Expanded Automation of Balancing Procedures

       BEA has developed a new set of automated procedures for balancing its time

series of integrated annual I-O tables for 1998 to 2002. Consistent with the research

results, the new balancing procedures:

           •   Are based on an adjusted RAS (bi-proportional) process;

           •   balance the I-O table in producers’ and purchasers’ prices simultaneously;

           •   incorporate more exogenous data; and

           •   process the tables at the most detailed level of data feasible.

       The new procedures generally begin with an I-O use table that has been updated,

following steps one through four described in the main body of this report. The I-O use

table matrix is then balanced in both basic prices and purchasers’ prices. (The

purchasers’ price equals the basic price plus commodity taxes, transportation costs, and

margin costs.) This process allocates transportation costs and margin costs to industries

and final uses as functions of how the commodities are moved by the economy’s

transportation system (rail, truck, water, air, pipeline, and gas pipeline) and through its

distribution channels (wholesale trade and retail trade). In the use table, these costs are

summed for each industry and shown as separate commodity purchases.

       The new balancing procedures require fifteen matrices, each of which must be

balanced internally, while maintaining the different relationships specified among

matrices. The following matrices are prepared: A matrix with commodities valued in

basic prices and one in purchasers’ prices; one for commodity taxes; one for each of the

six transportation modes (rail, truck, water, air, oil pipe, and gas pipe); one for wholesale

trade margin; one for retail trade margin; and two matrices for taxes by each type of
                                                                                            37

margin (see Figure 1). The transportation and wholesale trade matrices are of the same

dimensions as those for producers’ and purchasers’ prices. The retail trade matrix is a

single vector with one margin total for all consuming industries and final users. The

matrix valued in basic prices is related to that valued in purchasers’ prices through the

taxes, transportation, and trade matrices. A cell in the purchasers’ value matrix equals

the corresponding cell in the basic value matrix plus the cells in the taxes, transportation

and trade matrices; conversely, a cell in the basic value matrix equals the corresponding

cell in the purchasers’ value matrix less those in the taxes, transportation and trade

matrices.

       Control totals are identified for each matrix. The basic price, tax, transportation,

and trade matrices are two dimensional and have separate control totals for each row or

commodity. The retail trade margin matrices are one dimensional and have single control

totals for the margin, sales tax, and other retail tax. The purchasers’ price matrix is two

dimensional and is the sum of producers’ price inputs plus transportation and trade

margin costs; it has column control totals for each industry and final use category.

         Detailed national income and product accounts (NIPA) estimates, in purchasers’

prices, are used as controls for the different types of final uses. These detailed data

provide the basis for expanding estimates of personal consumption expenditures from one

to 210 categories; gross private fixed investment from one to 33; structures, from one to

26; and government expenditures and investment from six to 136. Elements that remain

constant or fixed in all matrices include exports, imports, changes in business inventories,

and other negative cells.
                                                                                             38

       Balancing the fifteen matrices is complex and requires several steps and

iterations. Beginning first with the rows, adjustment factors are calculated, equaling the

row control less the sum of the fixed cells in the row, divided by the sum of the new cells

less the fixed cells. These adjustment factors are applied to the row cells that are not

fixed in each matrix. The purchasers’ price matrix is then calculated as the sum of the

twelve other matrices. To balance the columns, adjustment factors are again calculated,

this time equaling the column control less the sum of the fixed cells in the column,

divided by the sum of the column cells less the fixed cells. These factors are then applied

to the column cells that are not fixed in each matrix. The cells in the basic price matrix

are then calculated as the difference between the purchasers’ price and the sum of the

twelve other matrices.

       After a set number of iterations, and when the cells are close to being balanced in

both basic and purchasers’ values, then the taxes, transportation, and trade matrices are

forced to also balance to their respective row control totals. The balancing of the taxes,

transportation, and trade matrices is delayed until the matrices valued in basic and

purchasers’ prices are approximately balanced in order to maintain the initial tax rates,

transportation cost rates, and trade margin rates as long as possible.



2. Tests on the New Procedures

       BEA tested both the new balancing procedures and an alternative, more highly-

automated set of procedures, referred to as a “basic model,” using an old workfile with

1997 detailed data. Results were then compared to the published 1997 annual I-O use

table. Unlike the new procedures which balance multiple matrices, the basic model

balances the table in producers’ prices only. To evaluate the results from the two
                                                                                        39

approaches, a set of tests were designed to answer the following questions:

   •   Does balancing in both producers’ and purchasers’ prices improve results? Most

       I-O tables are balanced in producers’ prices (basic model). However, balancing in

       producers’ prices ignores the detailed estimates of final use expenditures from the

       NIPAs, which are valued in purchasers’ prices as well as the relationships

       between transportation and margin costs and the use of goods. It is hypothesized

       that valuing in purchasers’ prices and using detailed data from the NIPAs improve

       the reliability of the balancing model.

   •   Does the addition of known estimates of value added for industries improve

       results? Value added makes up a significant portion of each industry’s input

       structure. It is hypothesized that providing estimates of value added for industries

       significantly reduces necessary adjustments and improves overall results. (Value

       added is determined endogenously as a residual for the basic model.)

   •   Does greater industry and commodity detail improve the results? The more

       aggregated the table, the more diverse the mix of products grouped together as a

       single commodity and the more diverse the market. Conversely, the more

       disaggregated the table, the more specialized commodities are to different

       markets. It is hypothesized that using more detail at the working level improves

       the initial distributions of commodities to users and, consequently, also improves

       the reliability of the balancing model.

       To answer these questions, BEA designed twelve tests that could be used to

compare results from the new procedures with those from the basic model. Each version

of a use table was balanced, using both the new adjustment process and the basic
                                                                                              40

adjustment process. For the balancing, each was run through 40 iterations. Each final

use table was then collapsed to the summary level and compared to the published 1997

annual I-O use table.

       The measure used for comparing results is the direct coefficient—that is, the

amount of a commodity required by an industry to produce a dollar of output. The fewer

the differences in direct coefficients between the balanced tables and the published 1997

annual table, the better the balancing model. Our comparisons were limited to the larger

cells of the use table, that is, to direct coefficients with underlying intermediate values of

$100 million or greater in producers’ prices, and to those cells with absolute value

difference (published less the balanced direct coefficient) of greater than 0.01 for direct

coefficients.

       Table 1 provides the major test results. Overall, large coefficient differences

decreased from 11.7 percent for the basic model, balanced at the publication level of data

and using value added calculated as a residual, to 5.8 percent for the new model, balanced

at the source data level and using independent, fixed value-added estimates. The major

conclusions from the tests are as follows:

   •   Results from the new balancing procedures are better than those from the basic

       model;

   •   working with more detail data improves results;

   •   the addition of known value-added estimates improves results; and

   •   the new balancing procedures result in only 5.8 percent of the direct coefficients

       changing by more that 0.01 with a absolute average change of 0.029.
                                                                                            41


3. Conclusions

       One of BEA’s goals has been to develop the capability for producing I-O tables

that are more current but are not extremely resource intensive to produce. Research to

this end has resulted in BEA’s development of new automated procedures for balancing

its use tables. From the test results examined, it is concluded that the best results are

obtained when balancing in both purchasers’ and basic prices. The test results also show

that providing fixed estimates of value added and working at the detailed source data

level both improve final results. However, although the new procedures produce use

tables that are fairly comparable to the published table, the remaining differences are still

important. Additional research is needed to evaluate these remaining coefficient

differences and their causes.
                                                                                                            42




            Table 1. Large Coefficient Differences from the New Balancing Model
                     Compared with those from the Basic Balancing Model 1



                                                          Percent of          Mean
                                                              cells         absolute
                                                           with large       value of
             Model        Balancing           Value       coefficient      coefficient
                            level             added       differences      difference



                            Detailed         Residual         11.7            0.027
                       publication level      Fixed           9.8             0.025
              Basic

                          Source data        Residual         8.3             0.030
                             level            Fixed           6.5             0.028



                          Detailed           Residual         7.3             0.032
                       publication level      Fixed           9.6             0.027
              New

                          Source data        Residual         7.3             0.033
                             level            Fixed           5.8             0.029




1
 Large coefficient differences are defined as those greater than 0.01 from the same cell in the published
1997 I-O use table.
                                                                              43



Figure 1. Relationship between Basic Value and Purchasers’ Value Matrices
                       in the New Balancing Model


                        Purchasers’ value




                                                           Commodity output
                  Margins

             Transportation costs

          Basic value




                 Industry output
                                                                                                   44


Appendix C: Computing Chain-Type Price and Quantity Indexes in the GDP-by-
Industry Accounts

          The computation of the chain-type Fisher price and quantity indexes for gross

output, intermediate inputs, and value added for an industry or an aggregate is

summarized below. The value-added price index for an industry represents the price of

its primary factors of productionBthat is, it represents the price of capital and labor used

in the production of gross output. Similarly, the value-added quantity index for an

industry represents the quantity of capital and labor used in the production of gross

output.

1. Chain-type price indexes

          In the notation, LPt-1, t refers to the Laspeyres price relative for the years t-1 and t,

PPt-1, t refers to the Paasche price relative, FPt-1, t refers to the Fisher price relative, and

CPt refers to the Fisher chain-type price index. The superscript GO refers to gross output,

II refers to intermediate inputs, and VA refers to value added; p refers to detailed prices,

and q refers to quantities.

          Laspeyres price relatives for gross output, intermediate inputs, and value added,

respectively, are:


                               LP   GO
                                            =
                                              ∑p GO
                                                 t       qtGO
                                                           −1
                                                                 ,
                                              ∑p
                                  t −1, t        GO
                                                 t −1    qtGO
                                                           −1


                               LP   II
                                            =
                                              ∑p  t
                                                   II
                                                        qtII−1
                                                                 , and
                                              ∑p
                                  t −1, t         II
                                                 t −1   qtII−1
                                              (∑ p GO
                                                             −1 ) − (∑ pt qt −1 )
                                                           qtGO          II II

                               LP  VA
                                            =      t
                                                                                      .
                                              (∑ p          −1 ) − (∑ pt −1 qt −1 )
                                  t −1, t         GO
                                                  t −1    qtGO          II    II




          Paasche price relatives for gross output, intermediate inputs, and value added are:
                                                                                            45


                                          ∑p   GO
                                                       qtGO
                               −1, t =
                                               t
                           PPt GO                             ,
                                          ∑p   GO
                                               t −1    qtGO

                           PP   II
                                        =
                                          ∑p    t
                                                 II
                                                      qtII
                                                             , and
                                          ∑p
                              t −1, t           II
                                               t −1   qtII
                                          (∑ p   GO
                                                        qtGO ) − (∑ ptII qtII )
                           PP  VA
                                        =        t
                                                                                    .
                                          (∑ p          qtGO ) − (∑ ptII−1 qtII )
                              t −1, t           GO
                                                t −1



       Fisher price relatives for gross output, intermediate inputs, and value added are:

                                    −1, t =
                                FPt GO          −1, t × PPt −1, t ,
                                            LPt GO          GO



                                FPt −II1,t = LPt −II1,t × PPt −II1,t , and

                                   −1, t =
                                FPtVA         −1, t × PPt −1, t .
                                           LPtVA         VA




       Fisher chain-type price indexes for gross output, intermediate inputs, and value

added for years after the reference year are:


                                         CPt GO = CPt GO
                                                      −1 × FPt −1, t ,
                                                               GO


                                         CPt II = CPt −II1 × FPt −II1, t , and
                                         CPtVA = CPtVA
                                                    −1 × FPt −1, t .
                                                            VA




       In the reference year (2000 for this comprehensive revision),

                                  CPt GO = CPt II = CPtVA = 100.
                                                                                                                  46


2. Chain-type quantity indexes

        In the notation, LQt-1, t refers to the Laspeyres quantity relative for the years t-1

and t, PQt-1, t refers to the Paasche quantity relative, FQt-1, t refers to the Fisher quantity

relative, and CQt refers to the Fisher chain-type quantity index. The superscript GO

refers to gross output, II refers to intermediate inputs, and VA refers to value added; p

refers to detailed prices, and q refers to quantities.

        Laspeyres quantity relatives for gross output, intermediate inputs, and value

added, respectively, are:



                                 LQ        GO
                                                    =
                                                      ∑p       GO
                                                               t −1    qtGO
                                                                                ,
                                                      ∑p
                                          t −1, t              GO
                                                               t −1    qtGO
                                                                         −1


                                 LQ        II
                                                    =
                                                      ∑p         II
                                                                t −1   qtII
                                                                                , and
                                                      ∑p
                                          t −1, t               II
                                                               t −1    qtII−1
                                                      (∑ p       GO
                                                                 t −1    qtGO ) − (∑ ptII−1 qtII )
                                 LQ       VA
                                                    =                                                         .
                                                      (∑ p                 −1 ) − (∑ pt −1 qt −1 )
                                          t −1, t               GO
                                                                t −1     qtGO          II    II




    Paasche quantity relatives for gross output, intermediate inputs, and value added are:


                            PQ   GO
                                          =
                                            ∑p q ,    GO
                                                      t
                                                                 GO
                                                                 t

                                            ∑p q
                                t −1, t               GO         GO
                                                      t          t −1


                            PQtII−1,t     =
                                            ∑ p q , andt
                                                        II
                                                                t
                                                                 II


                                            ∑p q      t
                                                       II       II
                                                               t −1

                                            (∑ p q ) − (∑ p
                                                          GO       GO                     II
                                                                                               qtII )
                            PQtVA         =              t         t                     t
                                                                                                          .
                                            (∑ p q ) − ( ∑ p
                                −1, t                   GO        GO                     II
                                                        t         t −1                  t      qtII−1 )

        Fisher quantity relatives for gross output, intermediate inputs, and value added

are:
                                                                                       47


                                 −1, t =
                              FQtGO         −1, t × PQt −1, t ,
                                         LQtGO         GO



                              FQtII−1,t = LQtII−1,t × PQtII−1,t , and

                                  −1, t =
                              FQtVA          −1, t × PQt −1, t .
                                          LQtVA        VA




       Fisher chain-type quantity indexes for gross output, intermediate inputs, and value

added for years after the reference year are:

                                CQtGO = CQtGO
                                           −1 × FQt −1, t ,
                                                   GO


                                CQtII = CQtII−1 × FQtII−1,t , and
                                CQtVA = CQtVA
                                           −1 × FQt −1, t .
                                                  VA




       In the reference year (2000 for this comprehensive revision),

                               CQtGO = CQtII = CQtVA = 100.
                                                                                  48

                                     References

Lawson, Ann M. 2000. Current and Future Directions for the U.S. Industry Accounts.
      Paper presented at the 13th International Conference on Input-Output Techniques,
      Macerata, Italy, August 21–25. Available on the Internet at
      http://www.bea.gov/bea/papers/usindacc.pdf

Lawson, Ann M., Kurt S. Bersani, Mahnaz Fahim-Nader, and Jiemin Guo. 2002.
      “Benchmark Input-Output Accounts of the United States, 1997.” Survey of
      Current Business 82 (December): 19–109. Available on the Internet at
       http://www.bea.gov/bea/ARTICLES/2002/12December/1202I-OAccounts2.pdf

Lawson, Ann, M., Sumiye O. Okubo, and Mark A. Planting. 2000. “Annual Input-Output
      Accounts of the United States, 1996.” Survey of Current Business 80 (January):
      37–86. Available on the Internet at
      http://www.bea.gov/bea/articles/NATIONAL/Inputout/2000/0100io.pdf

Lum, Sherlene K.S., Brian C. Moyer, and Robert E. Yuskavage. 2000. “Improved
      Estimates of Gross Product by Industry for 1947–98.” Survey of Current
      Business 80 (June): 24–54. Available on the Internet at
      http://www.bea.gov/bea/articles/National/NIPAREL/2000/0600gpi.pdf

Moulton, Brent R. and Eugene P. Seskin. 2003. “Preview of the 2003 Comprehensive
      Revision of the National Income and Product Accounts: Changes in Definitions
      and Classifications.” Survey of Current Business 83 (June): 17–34. Available on
      the Internet at
      http://www.bea.gov/bea/ARTICLES/2003/06June/0603NIPArevs.pdf

Moyer, Brian C., Mark A. Planting, Mahnaz Fahim-Nader, and Sherlene K.S. Lum.
      2004. “Preview of the Comprehensive Revision of the Annual Industry
      Accounts.” Survey of Current Business 84 (March): 38–51. Available on the
      Internet at
      http://www.bea.gov/bea/ARTICLES/2004/03March/0304IndustryAcctsV3.pdf

Moyer, Brian C., Mark A. Planting, Paul V. Kern, and Abigail Kish. 2004. “Improved
      Annual Industry Accounts for 1998-2003.” Survey of Current Business 84 (June):
      21–57. Available on the Internet at
      http://www.bea.gov/bea/ARTICLES/2004/06June/0604GDP_Industry.pdf

Planting, Mark and Jiemin Guo. 2004. “Increasing the Timeliness of U.S. Annual I-O
       Accounts.” Economic Systems Research, No. 2, Vol. 16. Available on the Internet
       at http://www.bea.gov/bea/papers/Timeliness.pdf

Planting, Mark A. and Peter D. Kuhbach. 2001. “Annual Input-Output Accounts of the
       U.S. Economy, 1998.” Survey of Current Business 81 (December): 41–70.
                                                                                   49

       Available on the Internet at
       http://www.bea.gov/bea/ARTICLES/2001/12december/1201io98.pdf

Yuskavage, Robert E. 2000. Priorities for Industry Accounts at BEA. Paper presented at
      a meeting of the BEA Advisory Committee, November 17. Available on the
      Internet at http://www.bea.gov/bea/papers/priority.pdf

Yuskavage, Robert E. 2002. “Gross Domestic Product by Industry, A Progress Report on
      Accelerated Estimates.” Survey of Current Business 82 (June): 19–27. Available
      on the Internet at
      http://www.bea.gov/bea/ARTICLES/2002/06June/0602GDPbyIndy.pdf

Yuskavage, Robert E. and Yvon H. Pho. 2004. “Gross Domestic Product by Industry for
      1987–2000, New Estimates on the North American Industry Classification
      System.” Survey of Current Business 84 (November): 33–53. Available on the
      Internet at
      http://www.bea.gov/bea/ARTICLES/2004/11November/1104GDP_by_Indy.pdf
                                                                                                                       50

Table A1. Comparison of BLS and Census Nonagricultural Payroll Data for Selected Private Industries, 1992 /1/
[Millions of dollars unless otherwise noted]

                                                                                                        Absolute
                Industry description                       BLS          Census       BLS less            percent
                                                                                     Census             difference

                        Total                              2,046,864    2,020,570         26,294                       1.3

                                Industries with absolute difference of 10 percent or more


  Membership organizations                                   15,458        10,188          5,270                     34.1
  Tobacco products                                            2,103         2,534           -431                     20.5
  Miscellaneous repair services                               8,263         9,849         -1,586                     19.2
  Health services                                           236,388       278,598        -42,210                     17.9
  Pipelines, except natural gas                                 975           821            154                     15.8
  Motor freight transportation and warehousing               35,536        41,070         -5,534                     15.6
  Leather and leather products                                2,320         1,973            347                     15.0
  Security and commodity brokers and dealers                 39,908        34,390          5,518                     13.8
  Oil and gas extraction                                     15,539        13,933          1,606                     10.3
  Insurance agents, brokers, and services                    21,327        19,123          2,204                     10.3
  Nondepository credit institutions                          15,007        16,509         -1,502                     10.0

                            Industries with absolute difference of 5 to less than 10 percent


  Real estate                                                29,634        26,817          2,817                       9.5
  Textile mill products                                      14,801        13,531          1,270                       8.6
  Transportation services                                     8,959         8,225            734                       8.2
  Water transportation                                        5,949         5,481            468                       7.9
  Industrial machinery and equipment                         69,749        64,588          5,161                       7.4
  Social services                                            27,508        25,565          1,943                       7.1
  Retail trade                                              268,207       249,328         18,879                       7.0
  Holding and other investment offices                       10,313         9,626            687                       6.7
  Transportation equipment                                   74,475        69,706          4,769                       6.4
  Paper and allied products                                  24,542        23,079          1,463                       6.0
  Amusement and recreation services                          20,816        19,612          1,204                       5.8
  Motion pictures                                             9,611        10,160           -549                       5.7
  Stone, clay, and glass products                            15,283        14,441            842                       5.5
  Wholesale trade                                           199,687       188,780         10,907                       5.5

                                Industries with absolute difference of less than 5 percent


  Primary metal industries                                   24,612        23,483           1,129                      4.6
  Lumber and wood products                                   15,345        14,669             676                      4.4
  Petroleum and coal products                                 7,568         7,246             322                      4.2
  Local and interurban passenger transportation               5,624         5,394             230                      4.1
  Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products                 24,058        25,028            -970                      4.0
  Food and kindred products                                  44,712        43,032           1,680                      3.8
  Automotive repair, services, and parking                   17,207        16,597             610                      3.5
  Depository institutions                                    59,464        57,479           1,985                      3.3
  Fabricated metal products                                  39,745        40,929          -1,184                      3.0
  Construction                                              122,135       118,600           3,535                      2.9
  Electric, gas, and sanitary services                       40,683        39,623           1,060                      2.6
  Electronic and other electric equipment                    52,057        50,812           1,245                      2.4
  Communications                                             48,908        47,742           1,166                      2.4
  Chemicals and allied products                              47,911        46,835           1,076                      2.2
  Insurance carriers                                         49,457        50,559          -1,102                      2.2
  Instruments and related products                           35,932        36,613            -681                      1.9
  Apparel and other textile products                         16,792        16,506             286                      1.7
  Legal services                                             40,480        39,995             485                      1.2
  Nonmetallic minerals, except fuels                          3,291         3,265              26                      0.8
  Printing and publishing                                    43,655        43,926            -271                      0.6
  Business services                                         115,010       114,446             564                      0.5
  Furniture and fixtures                                     10,650        10,678             -28                      0.3
  Miscellaneous manufacturing industries                      9,210         9,189              21                      0.2



/1/ Several industries are excluded because of differences in coverage or nondisclosure issues. These industries include:
Metal mining, coal mining, air transportation, hotels and other lodging places, personal services, educational services,
museums, art galleries, and botanical gardens, membership organizations, engineering and accounting services.
                                                                                                                                                            51

Table A2. BLS and Census Nonagricultural Payroll Data for Private Industries: Comparison of Levels, 1992 and 1997
[Millions of dollars unless otherwise noted]

                                                          BLS               Census /1/                               Difference in Levels
                                                                                                              1992                            1997
                  Industry description                                                                            As percent                       As percent
                                                1992            1997      1992         1997       In dollars of Census level      In dollars    of Census level
                                                                                                   (col 5) =       (col 6) =       (col 7) =        (col 8) =
                                                (col 1)         (col 2)   (col 3)     (col 4)   (col 1)-(col 3) (col 5)/(col 1) (col 2)-(col 4) (col 7)/(col 2)

Total                                          2,256,116 3,034,863 /2/               2,911,663 ...             ...                    123,200              4.2

Mining                                            26,372         29,785     24,906      26,857         1,466                5.9         2,928             10.9
  Metal mining                                     2,226          2,705 /2/              2,460 ...             ...                        245             10.0
  Coal mining                                      5,317          4,694 /2/              4,535 ...             ...                        159              3.5
  Oil and gas extraction                          15,539         18,219     13,933      15,830         1,606              11.5          2,388             15.1
  Nonmetallic minerals, except fuels               3,291          4,167      3,265       4,032            26               0.8            135              3.3

Construction                                    122,135         179,339   118,600     172,196          3,535                3.0         7,143              4.1

Manufacturing                                   575,521         714,405   558,795     681,201         16,726                3.0        33,204              4.9
  Food and kindred products                      44,712          52,574    43,032      50,694          1,680                3.9         1,880              3.7
  Tobacco products                                2,103           2,302     2,534 /2/                   -431              -17.0 ...             ...
  Textile mill products                          14,801          16,139    13,531      15,087          1,270                9.4         1,053               7.0
  Apparel and other textile products             16,792          16,652    16,506      17,053            286                1.7          -401              -2.3
  Lumber and wood products                       15,345          21,143    14,669      19,661            676                4.6         1,482               7.5
  Furniture and fixtures                         10,650          13,864    10,678      13,995            -28               -0.3          -131              -0.9
  Paper and allied products                      24,542          28,714    23,079 /2/                  1,463                6.3 ...             ...
  Printing and publishing                        43,655          53,960    43,926      54,734           -271               -0.6          -774              -1.4
  Chemicals and allied products                  47,911          57,677    46,835      54,291          1,076                2.3         3,386               6.2
  Petroleum and coal products                     7,568           8,221     7,246       7,787            322                4.4           434               5.6
  Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products     24,058          31,847    25,028      32,510           -970               -3.9          -663              -2.0
  Leather and leather products                    2,320           2,177     1,973 /2/                    347               17.6 ...             ...
  Stone, clay, and glass products                15,283          19,458    14,441      17,945            842                5.8         1,513              8.4
  Primary metal industries                       24,612          29,819    23,483      28,373          1,129                4.8         1,446              5.1
  Fabricated metal products                      39,745          51,607    40,929      53,621         -1,184               -2.9        -2,015             -3.8
  Industrial machinery and equipment             69,749          94,231    64,588      83,033          5,161                8.0        11,198             13.5
  Electronic and other electric equipment        52,057          72,228    50,812      72,257          1,245                2.5           -30              0.0
  Transportation equipment                       74,475          88,768    69,706      77,709          4,769                6.8        11,059             14.2
Table A2. BLS and Census Nonagricultural Payroll Data for Private Industries: Comparison of Levels, 1992 and 1997
[Millions of dollars unless otherwise noted]

                                                         BLS                Census /1/                                 Difference in Levels
                                                                                                            1992                               1997
                  Industry description                                                                          As percent                           As percent
                                                  1992         1997        1992        1997     In dollars of Census level         In dollars    of Census level
                                                                                                 (col 5) =       (col 6) =          (col 7) =         (col 8) =
                                                  (col 1)      (col 2)    (col 3)     (col 4) (col 1)-(col 3) (col 5)/(col 1) (col 2)-(col 4) (col 7)/(col 2)
  Instruments and related products                  35,932       41,585     36,613 /2/                  -681              -1.9 ...               ...
  Miscellaneous manufacturing industries             9,210       11,438      9,189      11,329             21              0.2               110                1.0

Transportation, communication, utilities /3/      178,919      232,237 /2/            205,932 ...                ...                      26,305              12.8
  Local and interurban passenger transportation     5,624        7,887      5,394 /2/                      230                4.3 ...              ...
  Motor freight transportation and warehousing     35,536       49,536     41,070      57,503           -5,534              -13.5         -7,967             -13.9
  Water transportation                              5,949        6,925      5,481       6,732              468                8.5            192               2.9
  Transportation by air /3/                        32,285       41,176 /2/             11,931 ...                ...              ...              ...
  Pipelines, except natural gas                       975          840        821         790             154                18.7             51               6.4
  Transportation services                           8,959       13,156      8,225 /2/                     734                 8.9 ...              ...
  Communications                                   48,908       67,823     47,742      65,261           1,166                 2.4          2,562               3.9
  Electric, gas, and sanitary services             40,683       44,894     39,623      42,219           1,060                 2.7          2,676               6.3

Wholesale trade                                   199,687      263,529    188,780     251,952          10,907                 5.8         11,577               4.6

Retail trade                                      268,207      348,478    249,328     322,920          18,879                 7.6         25,558               7.9

Finance, insurance, real estate                   225,110      312,156    214,504     313,245          10,606                4.9          -1,088              -0.3
  Depository institutions                          59,464       73,530     57,479 /2/                   1,985                3.5 ...               ...
  Nondepository credit institutions                15,007       25,186     16,509 /2/                  -1,502               -9.1 ...               ...
  Security and commodity brokers and dealers       39,908       67,816     34,390 /2/                   5,518               16.0 ...               ...
  Insurance carriers                               49,457       61,731     50,559      66,763          -1,102               -2.2          -5,032              -7.5
  Insurance agents, brokers, and services          21,327       28,610     19,123      25,907           2,204               11.5           2,703              10.4
  Real estate                                      29,634       39,506     26,817      34,382           2,817               10.5           5,124              14.9
  Holding and other investment offices             10,313       15,777      9,626      14,712             687                7.1           1,065               7.2

Services                                          660,165      954,933    655,243     937,360           4,922                 0.8         17,574               1.9
  Hotels and other lodging places /5/              22,707       30,358     20,615      28,426 ...                ...                       1,932               6.8
  Personal services /4/ /5/                        15,071       18,965     14,950      18,432 ...                ...                ...            ...
  Business services                               115,010      218,755    114,446     219,148              564                0.5           -393              -0.2
  Automotive repair, services, and parking         17,207       25,225     16,597      24,076              610                3.7          1,149               4.8
  Miscellaneous repair services                     8,263       10,472      9,849      11,510           -1,586              -16.1         -1,038              -9.0
Table A2. BLS and Census Nonagricultural Payroll Data for Private Industries: Comparison of Levels, 1992 and 1997
[Millions of dollars unless otherwise noted]

                                                                     BLS                 Census /1/                               Difference in Levels
                                                                                                                            1992                                   1997
                  Industry description                                                                                            As percent                             As percent
                                                              1992         1997        1992        1997          In dollars of Census level            In dollars    of Census level
                                                                                                                  (col 5) =        (col 6) =            (col 7) =         (col 8) =
                                                              (col 1)      (col 2)    (col 3)     (col 4)    (col 1)-(col 3) (col 5)/(col 1)        (col 2)-(col 4) (col 7)/(col 2)
  Motion pictures                                                9,611       17,114     10,160      14,395               -549               -5.4              2,718                18.9
  Amusement and recreation services                             20,816       32,158     19,612      30,840              1,204                6.1              1,318                 4.3
  Health services                                              236,388      305,990   278,598      353,787           -42,210               -15.2            -47,797               -13.5
  Legal services                                                40,480       48,093     39,995      48,231                485                1.2                -138               -0.3
  Educational services /4/ /7/                                  31,413       42,804      3,550       4,326   ...              ...                  ...               ...
  Social services                                               27,508       40,761     25,565      34,984              1,943                7.6              5,777                16.5
  Museums, art galleries, and botanical gardens /6/              1,274        1,828      1,233       1,812   ...              ...                                 16                0.9
  Membership organizations /4/                                  15,458       20,256     10,188         683              5,270               51.7   ...               ...
  Engineering and accounting services /5/                       96,960      139,415     81,339     128,710   ...              ...                            10,704                 8.3
  Services, not elsewhere classified                             1,999        2,741      3,121 /2/                     -1,122              -35.9   ...               ...

Notes:
/1/ Equals the published Census payroll estimate for an industry plus published estimate for auxiliaries serving the industry.
/2/ Data not disclosed by Census.
/3/ Census data exclude large certificated air carriers.
/4/ Census data exclude non taxables in 1997.
/5/ Census data exclude non taxables in 1992.
/6/ Census data exclude taxables in 1992.
/7/ Census data exclude private elementary and secondary schools and colleges and universities.
                                                                                                                  54

Table A3. Comparisons in Growth Rates for Census and BLS Payroll Data by Industry, 1992-97

                                                 BLS Wages Data        Census Payroll Data
                    Industry Description        92-97 Growth Rate       92-97 Growth Rate           BLS less Census
                                                   (percent) /1/           (percent) /1/               (percent)

Total Private /2/                                              6.1 ...                        ...

Mining                                                          2.5                    1.5                        0.9
Metal mining                                                    4.0 ...                       ...
Coal mining                                                    -2.5 ...                       ...
Oil and gas extraction                                          3.2                    2.6                        0.6
Nonmetallic minerals, except fuels                              4.8                    4.3                        0.5

Construction                                                   8.0                     7.7                        0.2

Manufacturing                                                   4.4                    4.0                        0.4
Food and kindred products                                       3.3                    3.3                        0.0
Tobacco products                                                1.8   ...                     ...
Textile mill products                                           1.7                    2.2                       -0.5
Apparel and other textile products                             -0.2                    0.7                       -0.8
Lumber and wood products                                        6.6                    6.0                        0.6
Furniture and fixtures                                          5.4                    5.6                       -0.1
Paper and allied products                                       3.2   ...                     ...
Printing and publishing                                         4.3                    4.5                       -0.2
Chemicals and allied products                                   3.8                    3.0                        0.8
Petroleum and coal products                                     1.7                    1.4                        0.2
Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products                      5.8                    5.4                        0.4
Leather and leather products                                   -1.3   ...                     ...
Stone, clay, and glass products                                 4.9                    4.4                        0.5
Primary metal industries                                        3.9                    3.9                        0.1
Fabricated metal products                                       5.4                    5.6                       -0.2
Industrial machinery and equipment                              6.2                    5.2                        1.0
Electronic and other electric equipment                         6.8                    7.3                       -0.5
Transportation equipment                                        3.6                    2.2                        1.4
Instruments and related products                                3.0   ...                     ...
Miscellaneous manufacturing industries                          4.4                    4.3                        0.2

Transportation, communication, utilities /2/                    5.4   ...                     ...
Local and interurban passenger transportation                   7.0   ...                     ...
Motor freight transportation and warehousing                    6.9                    7.0                       -0.1
Water transportation                                            3.1                    4.2                       -1.1
Transportation by air /2/                                       5.0   ...                     ...
Pipelines, except natural gas                                  -2.9                    -0.8                      -2.1
Transportation services                                         8.0   ...                     ...
Communications                                                  6.8                    6.5                        0.3
Electric, gas, and sanitary services                            2.0                    1.3                        0.7

Wholesale trade                                                5.7                     5.9                       -0.2

Retail trade                                                   5.4                     5.3                        0.1

Finance, insurance, real estate                                6.8                     7.9                       -1.1
Depository institutions                                        4.3 ...                        ...
Nondepository credit institutions                             10.9 ...                        ...
Security and commodity brokers and dealers                    11.2 ...                        ...
Insurance carriers                                             4.5                     5.7                       -1.2
Insurance agents, brokers, and services                        6.1                     6.3                       -0.2
Table A3. Comparisons in Growth Rates for Census and BLS Payroll Data by Industry, 1992-97

                                                          BLS Wages Data      Census Payroll Data
                 Industry Description                    92-97 Growth Rate     92-97 Growth Rate              BLS less Census
                                                            (percent) /1/         (percent) /1/                  (percent)
Real estate                                                               5.9                   5.1                         0.8
Holding and other investment offices                                      8.9                   8.9                         0.0

Services                                                                  7.7                     7.4                       0.2
Hotels and other lodging places /4/                                       6.0   ...                     ...
Personal services /3/ /4/                                                 4.7                     4.3                       0.4
Business services                                                        13.7                    13.9                      -0.2
Automotive repair, services, and parking                                  8.0                     7.7                       0.2
Miscellaneous repair services                                             4.9                     3.2                       1.7
Motion pictures                                                          12.2                     7.2                       5.0
Amusement and recreation services                                         9.1                     9.5                      -0.4
Health services                                                           5.3                     4.9                       0.4
Legal services                                                            3.5                     3.8                      -0.3
Educational services /3/ /6/                                              6.4   ...                     ...
Social services                                                           8.2                     6.5                       1.7
Museums, art galleries, and botanical gardens /5/                         7.5   ...                     ...
Membership organizations /3/                                              5.6   ...                     ...
Engineering and accounting services /4/                                   7.5   ...                     ...
Services, not elsewhere classified                                        6.5   ...                     ...

... Data not disclosed by Census

Notes:
/1/ Computed at an average annual rate
/2/ Census data exclude large certificated air carriers
/3/ Census data exclude non taxables in 1997
/4/ Census data exclude non taxables in 1992
/5/ Census data exclude taxables in 1992
/6/ Census data exclude private elementary and secondary schools and colleges and universities
                                                                                                    56
Table B. Industries and Commodities in the Integrated Accounts
                      1997 NAICS industries                                      1997 NAICS codes

All industries

 Private industries

  Agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting                             11
   Farms                                                                  111, 112
   Forestry, fishing, and related activities                              113, 114, 115

  Mining                                                                  21
   Oil and gas extraction                                                 211
   Mining, except oil and gas                                             212
   Support activities for mining                                          213

  Utilities                                                               22
  Construction                                                            23

  Manufacturing                                                           31, 32, 33
   Durable goods                                                          33, 321, 327
    Wood products                                                         321
    Nonmetallic mineral products                                          327
    Primary metals                                                        331
    Fabricated metal products                                             332
    Machinery                                                             333
    Computer and electronic products                                      334
    Electrical equipment, appliances, and components                      335
    Motor vehicle, bodies and trailers, and parts                         3361, 3362, 3363
    Other transportation equipment                                        3364, 3365, 3366, 3369
    Furniture and related products                                        337
    Miscellaneous manufacturing                                           339

   Nondurable goods                                                       31, 32 (except 321 and 327)
    Food and beverage and tobacco products                                311, 312
    Textile mills and textile product mills                               313, 314
    Apparel and leather and allied products                               315, 316
    Paper products                                                        322
    Printing and related support activities                               323
    Petroleum and coal products                                           324
    Chemical products                                                     325
    Plastics and rubber products                                          326

  Wholesale trade                                                         42
  Retail trade                                                            44, 45

  Transportation and warehousing                                          48, 49
   Air transportation                                                     481
   Rail transportation                                                    482
   Water transportation                                                   483
   Truck transportation                                                   484
   Transit and ground passenger transportation                            485
   Pipeline transportation                                                486
   Other transportation and support activities                            487, 488, 492
   Warehousing and storage                                                493

  Information                                                             51
   Publishing industries (includes software)                              511
   Motion picture and sound recording industries                          512
   Broadcasting and telecommunications                                    513
   Information and data processing services                               514

  Finance and insurance                                                   52
   Federal Reserve banks, credit intermediation, and related activities   521, 522
   Securities, commodity contracts, and investments                       523
   Insurance carriers and related activities                              524
   Funds, trusts, and other financial vehicles                            525

  Real estate and rental and leasing                                      53
   Real estate                                                            531
   Rental and leasing services and lessors of intangible assets           532, 533

  Professional, scientific, and technical services                        54
   Legal services                                                         5411
   Computer systems design and related services                           5415
   Miscellaneous professional, scientific, and technical services         5412-5414, 5416-5419

  Management of companies and enterprises                                 55

  Administrative and waste management services                            56
   Administrative and support services                                    561
   Waste management and remediation services                              562

  Educational services                                                    61

  Health care and social assistance                                       62
   Ambulatory health care services                                        621
   Hospitals and nursing and residential care facilities                  622, 623
   Social assistance                                                      624

  Arts, entertainment, and recreation                                     71
   Performing arts, spectator sports, museums, and related activities     711, 712
   Amusements, gambling, and recreation industries                        713

  Accommodation and food services                                         72
   Accommodation                                                          721
   Food services and drinking places                                      722

  Other services, except government                                       81

 Government                                                               92
  Federal                                                                 n.a.
   General government                                                     n.a.
   Government enterprises                                                 n.a.

   State and local                                                        n.a.
    General government                                                    n.a.
    Government enterprises                                                n.a.

n.a. Not applicable.
                                                                                                                           57


          Table C. NIPA Changes Incorporated into the 1997 Benchmark Input-Output (I-O) Accounts

                        NIPA changes1                                         I-O components affected
    Recognize the implicit services provided by property       Industry and commodity gross output for insurance
    and casualty insurance companies and provide a more        carriers and related activities; intermediate inputs and
    appropriate treatment of insured losses.                   gross operating surplus for all industries; final uses.

    Allocate a portion of the implicit services of             Industry and commodity gross output for Federal
    commercial banks to borrowers.                             Reserve banks, credit intermediation and related
                                                               activities; intermediate inputs and gross operating
                                                               surplus for all industries; final uses.

    Redefine change in private farm inventories to include     Intermediate inputs and gross operating surplus for
    farm materials and supplies.                               the farms industry; change in private inventories.


    Reclassify Indian tribal government activities from the    Gross output, intermediate inputs, and value added
    private sector to the state and local government sector.   for the amusements, gambling, and recreation;
                                                               accommodation; and state and local government
                                                               enterprises industries; state and local general
                                                               government.
    Reclassify military grants-in-kind as exports.             Federal general government; exports.

                                                               Gross output and intermediate inputs for the state and
    Recognize explicitly the services produced by general
                                                               local general government and Federal general
    government and treat government purchases of goods
                                                               government industries.
    and services as intermediate inputs.


    Reclassify business nontax liability as current transfer   Taxes on production and imports, less subsidies and
    payments to government and as rent and royalties to        gross operating surplus for all industries; gross
    government.                                                output for the rental and leasing services and lessors
                                                               of intangible assets industry; purchases of the rental
                                                               and leasing services and lessors of intangible assets
                                                               commodity by selected industries.


NIPA National income and product accounts




1
  For details, see Brent R. Moulton and Eugene P. Seskin, “Preview of the 2003 Comprehensive Revision of the National
Income and Product Accounts: Changes in Definitions and Classifications,” Survey of Current Business 83 (June 2003): 20.
                                                                                                     58

Table D. 1997 Industry Value Added Estimates
                                                                       Revised      GDP-by
                              Industry                               benchmark I-   industry   Combined
                                                                      O accounts    accounts

Farms……………………………………………………………………… 88,142                                              88,142     88,142
Forestry, fishing, and related activities…………………………………… 21,110                       23,771     22,595
Oil and gas extraction…………………………………………………… 48,084                                    59,236     52,902
Mining, except oil and gas………………………………………………… 25,869                                 27,854     26,414
Support activities for mining……………………………………………… 11,941                               18,439     13,333
Utilities…………………………………………………………………… 162,264                                         180,852    180,289
Construction……………………………………………………………… 310,029                                        346,223    337,558
Wood products…………………………………………………………… 26,207                                          30,666     28,008
Nonmetallic mineral products…………………………………………… 40,720                                 37,829     40,708
Primary metals…………………………………………………………… 43,799                                         51,214     48,337
Fabricated metal products………………………………………………… 114,396                                102,625    108,119
Machinery………………………………………………………………… 104,664                                           88,649     98,164
Computer and electronic products………………………………………… 178,019                            144,110    154,403
Electrical equipment, appliances, and components……………………… 41,230                     79,140     45,596
Motor vehicle, bodies and trailers, and parts……………………………… 93,396                    117,083    103,195
Other transportation equipment…………………………………………… 55,538                               52,444     54,418
Furniture and related products…………………………………………… 28,181                               25,568     27,060
Miscellaneous manufacturing…………………………………………… 47,861                                  47,793     47,729
Food and beverage and tobacco products………………………………… 158,928                         130,224    135,357
Textile mills and textile product mills…………………………………… 26,012                         27,829     26,996
Apparel and leather and allied products………………………………… 28,918                          26,249     27,186
Paper products…………………………………………………………… 51,046                                         51,354     51,484
Printing and related support activities…………………………………… 42,725                         47,362     44,667
Petroleum and coal products……………………………………………… 22,595                                 67,926     27,116
Chemical products………………………………………………………… 149,879                                     150,776    150,846
Plastics and rubber products……………………………………………… 62,402                                49,828     60,704
Wholesale trade…………………………………………………………… 487,913                                      531,865    521,250
Retail trade………………………………………………………………… 517,499                                       588,270    574,192
Air transportation………………………………………………………… 45,285                                      55,017     49,457
Rail transportation………………………………………………………… 23,133                                     22,590     23,030
Water transportation……………………………………………………… 7,162                                       6,273      6,510
Truck transportation……………………………………………………… 87,016                                     76,343     80,524
Transit and ground passenger transportation……………………………… 17,090                       12,164     12,978
Pipeline transportation…………………………………………………… 9,227                                     8,095      8,774
Other transportation and support activities……………………………… 50,523                       59,586     55,032
Warehousing and storage………………………………………………… 19,014                                    20,003     19,549
Publishing industries (includes software)………………………………… 114,475                       65,572     87,457
Motion picture and sound recording industries…………………………… 25,272                      22,899     24,298
Broadcasting and telecommunications…………………………………… 196,395                           212,151    208,862
Information and data processing services………………………………… 30,418                         18,550     27,189
Federal Reserve banks, credit intermediation, and related activities……… 274,457     251,974    259,541
Securities, commodity contracts, and investments……………………… 107,598                   131,109    119,470
Insurance carriers and related activities…………………………………… 175,610                     217,464    206,566
Funds, trusts, and other financial vehicles………………………………… 9,957                        9,882      9,965
Real estate………………………………………………………………… 944,801                                        886,560    908,544
Table D. 1997 Industry Value Added Estimates
                                                                    Revised      GDP-by
                             Industry                             benchmark I-   industry   Combined
                                                                   O accounts    accounts

Rental and leasing services and lessors of intangible assets……………… 118,401        74,444     89,854
Legal services…………………………………………………………… 111,052                                    119,435    114,460
Computer systems design and related services…………………………… 69,536                    87,477     78,642
Miscellaneous professional, scientific, and technical services…………… 343,445      308,416    325,057
Management of companies and enterprises ……………………………… 145,665                     145,665    145,665
Administrative and support services……………………………………… 228,861                       197,921    211,363
Waste management and remediation services…………………………… 22,618                       20,339     21,372
Educational services……………………………………………………… 63,371                                  61,295     62,240
Ambulatory health care services………………………………………… 267,784                          261,920    267,232
Hospitals and nursing and residential care facilities……………………… 205,830           199,526    203,543
Social assistance………………………………………………………… 38,834                                    43,181     40,065
Performing arts, spectator sports, museums, and related activities……… 30,050      34,717     32,911
Amusements, gambling, and recreation industries……………………… 45,180                   37,667     41,133
Accommodation…………………………………………………………… 75,769                                       71,018     74,689
Food services and drinking places………………………………………… 151,890                        133,183    141,062
Other services, except government……………………………………… 206,147                         185,476    197,403
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60


Table E. Principal Source Data for Value-Added Extrapolators


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Industrial distribution
                    Component of gross domestic income                                                                                                        Major source data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Distribution available
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in source data                   Data or assumption used if distribution by establishment is not available in source data


Compensation of employees, paid
  Wages and salary accruals /1/.……………...……………………………………… BLS tabulations of wages and salaries of employees covered by state UI programs and OPM data on wages and salaries of Federal Government employees.                                             Establishment.
  Supplements to wages and salaries
    Employer contributions for employee pension and insurance funds………… DOL tabulations of IRS data (Form 5500) on pension plans, HHS data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey on health insurance, and trade association data for other types.   None./2/                 BLS employer cost index and UI tabulations.
    Employer contributions for government social insurance………………………Federal budget data.                                                                                                                                                                 None.                    Social Security Administration and BLS tabulations.

Taxes on production and imports less subsidies
  Taxes on production and imports…………………………………………………… Federal budget data and Census Bureau data on state and local governments.                                                                                                                        None.                    Property taxes are based on BEA capital stock distribution.
  Subsidies…………………………………………………………………………………            Federal budget data and Census Bureau data on state and local governments.                                                                                                                        None.                    Payments are assigned to the industries being supported.

Gross operating surplus
  Private enterprises
    Net interest and miscellaneous payments, domestic industries
      Corporate………………………………………………………………………… IRS tabulations of data from corporate tax returns (Form 1120 series), FFIEC Call Report data on commercial banks, trade association data on life insurance companies.                                      Company.                 Census Bureau company-establishment employment matrix.
      Noncorporate………………………………………………………………………IRS tabulations of tax return data from sole proprietorships (Form 1040 Schedule C) and partnerships (Form 1065), FRB flow-of-funds-account data on residential mortgages.                                 Company.                 Assumed to be equivalent to an establishment distribution.
    Business current transfer payments (net)…………….………………………… IRS tabulations of data from corporate tax returns (Form 1120 series), trade association data for property-casualty insurance net settlements and for other types.                         Company.                 Industry-specific payments are assigned to those industries; others are based on IRS company industry distribut
    Proprietors' income with IVA and without CCAdj
      Farm…………………………………………………………………………………                                       USDA farm income statistics.                                                                                                                                            Establishment.
      Nonfarm
        Proprietors' income without IVA and CCAdj…………………………………IRS tabulations of tax return data from sole proprietorships (Form 1040 Schedule C) and partnerships (Form 1065).                                                                         Company.                 Assumed to be equivalent to an establishment distribution.
        IVA……………………………………………………………………………… BLS prices and IRS inventory data.                                                                                                                                                                            Establishment.
    Rental income of persons without CCAdj…………………………………………Census Bureau data on housing units and rents from the American Housing Survey, HMDA data on residential mortgages, and IRS tabulations of data from individual tax returns (Form 1040).      Establishment.
    Corporate profits before tax with IVA and without CCAdj, domestic industries
        Corporate profits before tax without IVA and CCAdj……………………… IRS tabulations of data from corporate tax returns (Form 1120 series) and regulatory agencies and public financial reports data.                                                    Company.                 Census Bureau company-establishment employment matrix.
        IVA……………………………………………………………………………… BLS prices and IRS inventory data.                                                                                                                                                                            Establishment.
    Capital consumption allowances
        Corporate…………………………………………………………………………                                   IRS tabulations of data from corporate tax returns (Form 1120 series).                                                                                                  Company.                 Census Bureau company-establishment employment matrix.
        Noncorporate……………………………………………………………………IRS tabulations of tax return data from sole proprietorships (Form 1040 Schedule C) and partnerships (Form 1065).                                                                                         Company.                 Assumed to be equivalent to an establishment distribution.

   Current surplus of government enterprises…………………………………………Federal budget data and Census Bureau data on state and local governments.                                                                                                                  Establishment.

   Consumption of fixed capital
    Households and institutions /3/……………………………………………………BEA capital stock estimates.                                                                                                                                                                     Establishment.
    Government………………………………………………………………………… BEA capital stock estimates.                                                                                                                                                                                 Type of agency.


1. Includes wage and salary disbursements to the rest of the world and excludes wages and salaries received from the rest of the world.
2. A company-based industrial distribution for pension plans is available in the source data.
3. Consists of owner-occupied housing and nonprofit institutions primarily serving households.

BEA     Bureau of Economic Analysis
BLS     Bureau of Labor Statistics
CCAdj Capital consumption adjustment
DOL    Department of Labor
FFIEC Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council
FRB    Federal Reserve Board of Gvernors
HCFA Health Care Financing Administration
HHS    Department of Health and Human Services
HMDA Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
IRS   Internal Revenue Service
IVA   Inventory valuation adjustment
OPM   Office of Personnel Management
UI     Unemployment insurance
USDA U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                                                                                      61



             Table F. Principal Sources of Data for Industry and Commodity Output and Prices

  Industry and commodity          Source data for extrapolator       Source data for price index
Agriculture, forestry, fishing
and hunting

      Farms………………                USDA cash receipts from           USDA prices received by farmers;
                                   marketing and inventory          PPI.
                                   change.

      Forestry, fishing, and     For forestry, Census Bureau       PPI; NOAA; NIPA deflator.
     related activities…….         shipments; for fishing, NOAA
                                   value of fish landings; for
                                   related activities, NIPA
                                   estimates.



Mining

      Oil and gas extraction…    DOE quantity produced and         For crude petroleum and natural
                                   prices.                           gas, IPD from DOE; for natural
                                                                     gas liquids, PPI.


      Mining, except oil and     DOE quantity produced and         IPD from DOE and USGS.
      gas…………………                   average price for uranium and
                                   coal; USGS quantity and price
                                   data for all others.


        Support activities for   DOE, USGS, and trade sources      IPD from DOE, USGS and trade
        mining……………                for quantity produced and         sources; for exploration, PPI.
                                   prices.


Utilities

        Electric utilities……….   EIA.                              PPI.

        Natural gas…………..        EIA quantity and price data.      PPI.

       Water, sewage, and        PCE.                              CPI.
       other systems……….
                                                                                                    62




 Industry and commodity          Source data for extrapolator       Source data for price index
Construction

     For the Department of      DOD expenditures data.            DOD prices for military
     Defense (DOD) ……….                                             construction; cost indexes from
                                                                    trade sources and government
                                                                    agencies for other construction.


    For state and local         Census Bureau data from the       Cost indexes from government
    highways……………                 ASGF.                             agencies.


     For private electric and   Federal regulatory agencies and   Cost indexes from trade sources
    gas utilities………….            trade sources expenditures        and government agencies.
                                  data.

    For farms, excluding        USDA expenditures data.           Trade sources cost index; Census
    residential……………..                                              Bureau price deflator for new
                                                                    single-family houses under
                                                                    construction.

     For other                  Census Bureau data on value of    Trade sources and government
    nonresidential………….           construction put in place.        agency cost indexes; Census
                                                                    Bureau price index for new
                                                                    single-family houses under
                                                                    construction; BEA quality-
                                                                    adjusted price indexes for
                                                                    factories, office buildings,
                                                                    warehouses, and schools.

    For other                   Census Bureau data on value of    Census Bureau price index for
    residential………..              construction put in place.        new single-family houses under
                                                                    construction; BEA price index
                                                                    for multifamily construction.
                                                                                                         63




  Industry and commodity              Source data for extrapolator       Source data for price index

Manufacturing                        Census Bureau data on            PPI; quality adjusted price indexes
                                       shipments and inventory          for computers,
                                       change.                           photocopying equipment, digital
                                                                        telephone switching equipment,
                                                                        and LAN equipment; BEA price
                                                                        indexes based on DOD prices
                                                                        paid for military equipment.


Wholesale trade                      Census Bureau ATS data.          Sales price by kind-of-business
                                                                        computed from PPI.


Retail trade                         Census Bureau ARTS data.         Sales price by kind-of-business
                                                                        computed from CPI.

Transportation and
warehousing
                                                                      IPD for total passenger-related
      Air transportation..........   BTS Air Carrier Financial
                                                                        revenues and passenger miles
                                       Statistics.
                                                                        from DOT; IPD for total freight-,
                                                                        mail-, and express-related
                                                                        revenues and ton miles from
                                                                        DOT; wages and salaries per
                                                                        employee from BLS.


                                                                      PPI.
       Rail transportation…...       Amtrak and trade sources.

                                                                      PPI for freight; for passengers,
       Water transportation...       Army Corps of Engineers; trade
                                                                        CPI.
                                       sources.

                                                                      PPI.
       Truck transportation…         Census Bureau SAS.

                                                                      For taxicabs, intercity buses, and
       Transit and ground            PCE; BTS.
                                                                        other local transit, PCE price
       passenger
                                                                        index; for school buses, BLS
       transportation………
                                                                        data on wages and salaries per
                                                                        employee.
                                                                                                        64




  Industry and commodity           Source data for extrapolator       Source data for price index


     Pipeline transportation...   Trade sources.                    PPI.


       Other transportation       PCE.                              For sightseeing, PCE price index;
      and support activities..                                         for other transportation and
                                                                      support activities, PCE price
                                                                      indexes and PPI.


       Warehousing and            Census Bureau SAS.
       Storage……...………                                              PPI.



Information

      Publishing industries       Census Bureau SAS.                BEA price indexes for
      (includes software)…                                            prepackaged and custom
                                                                      software for software
                                                                      publishers; for all other
                                                                      publishing industries, PPI.

      Motion picture and          Census Bureau SAS.                PCE price indexes.
      sound recording
       industries………

      Broadcasting and            Census Bureau SAS.                For cable networks, programming,
      telecommunications…                                             and telecommunications, PPI;
                                                                      for radio and television
                                                                      broadcasting, network receipts,
                                                                      and all other
                                                                      telecommunications, composite
                                                                      price index of PPIs.


       Information and            Census Bureau SAS.                For information services, PCE
      data processing                                                 price indexes; for data
       services…………                                                   processing services, PPI.

Finance and insurance

        Federal Reserve           FDIC; FRB; NIPA imputed service   PCE price indexes; other
        banks, credit               charges; NCUA; and other          government data.
                                                                                                           65




  Industry and commodity           Source data for extrapolator         Source data for price index
         intermediation, and       private agencies.
        related activities…….


       Securities,               SEC FOCUS Report.                    PCE price indexes.
       commodity contracts,
       investments…..


       Insurance carriers and    Trade sources for insurance          For health and life insurance, PCE
       related activities……..      carriers; BEA estimates for          price indexes; for property and
                                   property and casualty                casualty insurance, PPI; for
                                   insurance; for all other             agents, brokers, and services,
                                   insurance, PCE; for insurance        composite price index based on
                                   agents, brokers, and services,       trade sources data and PCE
                                   IRS tabulations of business tax      price indexes.
                                   returns.


      Funds, trusts, and         NIPA imputed service charges for     IPD from NIPA imputed service
      other financial              other financial institutions;       charges; composite price
      vehicles…………                 EBSA data on pension funds.          index based on PCE price
                                                                        indexes; PPI data; BLS data on
                                                                        wages and salaries per full-
                                                                        time employee.


Real estate and rental and
  leasing

       Real estate………            For residential dwellings and real   For nonfarm residential dwellings,
                                   estate agents and managers,          NIPA price index; for
                                   NIPA housing data; for               nonresidential dwellings, PPI;
                                   nonresidential dwellings, IRS        for real estate managers and
                                   tabulations of business tax          agents, PPI and trade sources;
                                   returns; NIPA rental value of        IPD for nonprofit and farm
                                   buildings owned by nonprofits.       residential dwellings.



        Rental and leasing       For rental and leasing services,     For automotive equipment rental,
        services and lessors       Census Bureau SAS; for               PPI; for other rental services,
       of intangible assets…..     royalties, IRS tabulations of        PCE price indexes; for royalties,
                                   business tax returns.                PCE price index and IPD from
                                                                        DOE and PPI.
                                                                                                        66




  Industry and commodity              Source data for extrapolator     Source data for price index


Professional, scientific, and
technical services

        Legal services ...........   Census Bureau SAS.              PPI.


        Computer systems             Census Bureau SAS.              BEA price indexes for
       design and related                                              prepackaged and custom
       services…………….                                                  software.


       Miscellaneous            Census Bureau SAS.                   PPI; BLS wages and salaries per
       professional, scientific                                        full-time employee.
       and technical services..


Management of companies              BLS wages and salaries.         BLS wages and salaries per full-
and enterprises                                                       time employee.


Administrative and waste
  management services

      Administrative and             Census Bureau SAS.              BLS wages and salaries per full-
      support services..........                                       time employee; PCE price
                                                                       indexes; PPI.
      Waste management               Census Bureau SAS.
      and remediation                                                CPI.
      services…………….



Educational services                 PCE.                            PCE price index based on trade
                                                                      sources.


Health care and social
  assistance

      Ambulatory health care
      services………………                 Census Bureau SAS.              PPI; PCE price indexes.
                                                                                                         67




  Industry and commodity           Source data for extrapolator          Source data for price index

       Hospitals and             Census Bureau SAS.                    PCE price indexes.
       nursing and residential
       care facilities………

     Social assistance………        Census Bureau SAS.                    PCE price indexes.


Arts, entertainment, and
 recreation

      Performing arts,           Census Bureau SAS.                    PCE price indexes.
     spectator sports,
     museums, and related
      activities…………….

     Amusements, gambling,       Census Bureau SAS.                    PCE price indexes.
    and recreation
    industries…………..


Accommodation and food
 services

     Accommodation……….           Census Bureau ARTS.                   For hotels and motels, PPI; PCE
                                                                         price index.

     Food services and           Census Bureau ARTS.                   CPI.
     drinking places………


Other services except            For religious, labor, and             CPI; BLS data on wages and
 government                        political organizations, PCE; for     salaries per full-time employee;
                                   other services, Census Bureau         PCE price indexes.
                                   SAS; for private households,
                                   BEA compensation of
                                   employees.



Government

  Federal

     General government…
                                                                                                             68




  Industry and commodity            Source data for extrapolator            Source data for price index
                                  NIPA estimates.                         NIPA price indexes.

       Government
       enterprises……………..         USPS receipts; for electric             For USPS and electric utilities,
                                    utilities, DOE; other                   PPI; for all others, PCE price
                                    government data.                        index and NIPA price indexes.
   State and local

       General government …
                                  NIPA estimates.                         NIPA price indexes.
       Government enterprises..
                                  For electric utilities, DOE data; for   PPI.
                                    other enterprises, BEA data on
                                    revenue by type.


ARTS      Annual Retail Trade Survey, Census Bureau
ASGF      Annual Survey of Government Finances, Census Bureau
ATS       Annual Trade Survey, Census Bureau
BEA       Bureau of Economic Analysis
BLS       Bureau of Labor Statistics
BTS       Bureau of Transportation Statistics
CPI       Consumer Price Index, BLS
DOC       Department of Commerce
DOD       Department of Defense
DOE       Department of Energy
DOT       Department of Transportation
EBSA      Employee Benefits Security Administration
EIA       Energy Information Administration
FDIC      Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
FOCUS     Financial and Operational Combined Uniform Single Report, SEC
FRB      Federal Reserve Board of Governors
IPD      Implicit price deflator
IRS      Internal Revenue Service
NCUA     National Credit Union Association
NIPA     National income and product accounts, BEA
NOAA     National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
PCE       Personal consumption expenditures, BEA
PPI      Producer Price Index, BLS
SAS      Service Annual Survey
SEC      Securities and Exchange Commission
USDA     U.S. Department of Agriculture
USGS     U.S. Geological Survey, Office of Minerals
USPS     U. S. Postal Service
Chart 1. Use Table: Commodities Used by Industries and Final Uses

                                                                                                                                                                                    Industries                                                                                                                                                              Final Uses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Personal                                                   Government
                                              Agriculture,                                                                                                                         Professional, Management Administrative                                                            Other                                                                  Exports      Imports
                                                                                                                                Transportation                         Real estate                                                       Health care     Arts,     Accommodation                             Total     consump-                Change in                          consumption             Total
                                                forestry,                                                  Wholesale   Retail                              Finance and              scientific, of companies   and waste   Educational                                              services,                                   Private fixed               of goods     of goods
                                                             Mining Utilities Construction Manufacturing                             and       Information             and rental                                                        and social entertainment,    and food                Government   interme-       tion                 business                           expenditures   GDP   Commodity
                                              fishing, and                                                  trade      trade                                insurance              and technical     and      management    services                                                 except                                     investment                     and          and
                                                                                                                                 warehousing                           and leasing   services                                            assistance and recreation    services                             diate use   expendi-               inventories                           and gross            Output
                                                 hunting                                                                                                                                          enterprises   services                                                           government                                                               services     services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tures                                                     investment
                   Agriculture, forestry,
                   fishing, and hunting
                          Mining
                          Utilities
                       Construction

                 Manufactured products

                     Wholesale trade
                       Retail trade
                   Transportation and
                      warehousing
                        Information

                 Finance and insurance

                  Real estate and rental
                        and leasing
                  Professional, scientific,
                  and technical services
                     Management of
                     companies and
                       enterprises
   Commodities     Administrative and
                   waste management
                        services
                   Educational services
                  Health care and social
                        assistance
                 Arts, entertainment, and
                        recreation
                   Accommodation and
                      food services
                  Other services, except
                      government
                       Government

                     Other inputs /1/

                 Total intermediate inputs

                    Compensation of
                      employees
   Value Added
                 Taxes on production and
                  imports, less subsidies


                 Gross operating surplus

                           Total

     Total Industry Output



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Total commodity output
  1. Includes noncomparable imports, scrap, used goods, inventory valuation adjustment, and rest-of-the-world adjustment.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Total industry output
  GDP Gross domestic product

  U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
                                                                                                                        70
          Chart 2. Components of GDI-Based Value Added by Industry



Value added        Compensation of employees                        Wage and salary accruals
                                                                    Supplements to wages and salaries

                   Taxes on production and imports less subsidies   Taxes on production and imports
                                                                    Less: Subsidies

                   Gross operating surplus                          Corporate net interest and miscellaneous payments
                                                                    Noncorporate net interest
                                                                    Corporate profits before tax
                                                                    Proprietors’ income
                                                                    Rental income of persons
                                                                    Corporate capital consumption allowance
                                                                    Noncorporate capital consumption allowance
                                                                    Corporate inventory valuation adjustment
                                                                    Proprietors’ inventory valuation adjustment
                                                                    Business current transfer payments
                                                                    Current surplus of government enterprises
                                                                    Government consumption of fixed capital



 U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
Chart 3. Relationships Among National Economic Accounts



                                                       Benchmark I-O
                                                         accounts
                                               2                           1

                        GDP-by-industry            6                           Annual I-O
                          accounts                                              accounts
                                                              3        5
                                               4


                                                                       7
                                                          NIPAs


  GDP Gross domestic product
  I-O Input-output
  NIPAs National Income and product accounts
  U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
                                                                         72




    Chart 4. Merging Information for Setting Value-Added Levels


                                    Benchmark Value Added



                    Good Benchmark data/          Good Benchmark data/
                  good GDP-by-industry data     poor GDP-by-industry data

GDP-by-                  e.g., Health care             e.g., Mining
Industry
 Value
 Added              Poor Benchmark data/          Poor Benchmark data/
                  Good GDP-by-industry data     poor GDP-by-industry data

                       e.g., Transportation/         e.g. Construction
                           Warehousing



U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
Chart 5. Probability Distributions of Value Added
for Educational Services

         GDP-by-industry accounts


                                                 Combined


                                                   Revised 1997 benchmark
                                                   I-O accounts




             60,000      61,000      62,000 63,000    64,000 65,000     66,000
                            Value added (Millions of dollars)
  U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
