                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE AMPLIFICATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT FLUCTUATIONS
                            THROUGH SELF-SELECTION

                                             Robert E. Hall

                                         Working Paper 11186
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11186


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




This research is part of the research program on Economic Fluctuations and Growth of the NBER. I am
grateful to Dale Mortensen, Eva Nagypál, and Robert Shimer for helpful comments. A file containing data
and programs will be available at Stanford.edu/ rehall The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Robert E. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Amplification of Unemployment Fluctuations through Self-Selection
Robert E. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 11185
March 2005
JEL No. E24, E32, J64

                                            ABSTRACT


Unemployment arises from frictions in the matching of job-seekers and employers. The level of

resources that employers devote to evaluating applicants for jobs is a key factor in the magnitude of

the frictions. Unemployment will be low if employers can review applicants cheaply. The cost of

evaluation per hire depends on the fraction of applicants who are qualified for the job. Applicants

may be better informed about their qualifications than are employers. If incentives induce self-

selection by job-seekers, so that they apply mainly for jobs where they are qualified, friction and thus

unemployment will be low. Self-selection is strongest in markets where unemployment is low and

jobs are easy to find. Because of this positive feedback, the equilibrium in a market with self-

selection is fragile—unemployment is sensitive to its determinants. Self-selection provides a

mechanism for amplification of small changes in the determinants of unemployment.

Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@stanford.edu
1    Introduction
Persistent high unemployment following a recession is a central puzzle of macroe-
conomics. When unemployment is high, jobs are hard to find, so the opportunity
cost to the job-seeker for taking a given job is low. The marginal revenue product
of labor appears to be only slightly diminished in a slack labor market—recessions
are not the result of a collapse of productivity. The joint surplus enjoyed by an
employer and worker hired into a newly created job is unusually high. Were both
parties to respond to the enlarged surplus by redoubling their efforts to locate each
other, unemployment would melt away quickly. An important friction prevents
them from accomplishing this.
     Since J.M Keynes focused the attention of economists on the puzzle, wage
stickiness has been the most important culprit. The simple idea that the wage
remains too high in a recession to permit the employment of the normal fraction of
the labor force retains a firm grip on macroeconomics. But coherent fundamental
explanations of sticky wages have eluded macroeconomics.
     The past 20 years have seen the development of a widely accepted theory of
non-wage frictions in the labor market. Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) is a major
milestone in the development of the model. The friction arises from probabilistic
matching of job-seekers and employers in a setting where the resources deployed
by employers control the matching rate. The model portrays an equilibrium where
employers expand matching effort up to the point that it exhausts the profit they
expect from an additional hire. After a disturbance, the model reaches a new equi-
librium rapidly because employers expand recruiting effort if unemployment is
unusually high. Flexible wages play a key role in the model—higher employment
reduces wages by lowering the opportunity cost of job seekers. The equilibrating
force in the model is so strong that it cannot come close to matching the observed
volatility of unemployment from booms to recessions, a point made recently by
Shimer (2005).
     This paper explores a different source of friction that limits or even eliminates
employers’ incentives to increase recruiting activity when unemployment is high.
The model contains a countervailing force sufficiently powerful to offset the ba-
sic drive to create jobs when job-seekers’ opportunity costs are low. In normal
times, job-seekers self-select when applying for jobs. They visit only the employ-


                                          2
ers where they will be most productive. But when unemployment is high, job-
seekers are less selective, because it pays to take less remunerative jobs when their
opportunity costs are lower thanks to low probabilities of finding other jobs soon.
Employers find themselves besieged by less qualified applicants.
    In December 2002, the Wall Street Journal reported:

      With 8.5 million Americans looking for work, it should be relatively
      easy for employers to find the right person for a job. Not so at 7-
      Eleven Inc. The Dallas convenience-store chain needs to fill field-
      management positions and has piles of resumes. But locating appli-
      cants with the right skills has proven as tough, if not tougher, than
      during the boom times, the company says. Why? People looking for
      work are being less selective, applying for positions for which they
      aren’t necessarily well-suited. That makes the task of sifting through
      applicants more difficult. ”In good times people use the rifle approach
      for their job search. When people are skittish, they tend to use the
      shotgun,” says Joe Eulberg, 7-Eleven’s vice president of human re-
      sources. With the national unemployment rate at 6%, many companies
      are finding themselves flooded with candidates who don’t fit into job
      openings. ”Our officers are getting inundated,” says Dan Kaplan, di-
      rector of recruiting for Washington, D.C., mortgage giant Fannie Mae,
      which is looking to fill routine slots. ”At times, you’re looking at vol-
      umes of resumes. It muddies up your thinking. You may settle [for a
      less-than-ideal candidate] because it’s easy to.”

The model of this paper captures the phenomenon described in this article.
    Recent research applying the matching model to aggregate fluctuations in un-
employment has taken productivity as the underlying exogenous driving force. The
model in this paper takes a different point of view. As in the standard Mortensen-
Pissarides model, changes in productivity have only small effects on unemployment—
see Shimer (2005). The amount of self-selection in the market is actually invariant
to productivity in my model. Self-selection is sensitive to other factors, notably
changes in how well informed job-seekers are about their qualifications for the
jobs that employers are trying to fill.
    This paper can be seen as a rehabilitation of the reallocation theory of un-

                                         3
employment fluctuations, Lilien (1982). In its original form, that theory ascribed
periods of high unemployment to shocks that caused shrinkage of some sectors and
expansion of others. Abraham and Katz (1986) challenged that view by observing
that vacancies should rise along with unemployment during periods of reallocation.
Vacancies and other measures of recruiting effort, such as help-wanted advertising,
actually fall substantially in recessions. In the new version of the reallocation the-
ory based on the idea in this paper, the shocks and resulting movements of workers
alter the level of knowledge about the likelihood of being qualified. I show that
unemployment is higher—potentially much higher—when job-seekers are less in-
formed. Though this paper does not spell out the mechanism, it seems reasonable
that an alteration in the industry composition of labor demand, such as the collapse
of IT employment in 2001, would reduce knowledge in this way.
    It goes almost without saying that the core of the model in this paper comes
from Akerlof (1970). Purchasers (here, employers) are ignorant of information
known to sellers (here, job-seekers) but make an inference in which the seller’s de-
sire to trade is an important piece of information. The subsequent literature on ad-
verse selection in the labor market is much too extensive to summarize adequately
here. The model developed here has some points of resemblance to Montgomery
(1999). The labor market in that paper can have self-sustaining cycles as the hiring
policies of employers respond to the mix of good and bad workers among the pool
of job-seekers.


2    Implications of Imperfect Information about Qualifica-
     tions
In the model, a job-seeker observes the value of a random variable, y, that contains
information as to whether the job-seeker is qualified for a particular job. The job-
seeker decides whether to apply for the job based on the value of y. The employer’s
only immediate knowledge about match productivity is that the worker has decided
to apply. The employer then evaluates every applicant and determines whether the
worker is truly qualified.
    Job-seeker and employer are risk-neutral. Let Q denote the event “applicant is
qualified” and N the event “applicant is not qualified” The job-seeker is concerned
with

                                          4
                                  x = Prob[Q|y],                                 (1)
chooses a cutoff value of x, x∗ , and applies for a job when x meets the cutoff. I
assume that x is strictly increasing in the signal y and denote the inverse of their
relationship y = φ(x). The employer is concerned with

                 q(x∗ ) = Prob[Q|x ≥ x∗ ] = Prob[Q|y ≥ φ(x∗ )],                  (2)
the likelihood that an applicant is qualified, which determines the payoff to the
investment in evaluating the applicant. I will make use of the selection premium
ratio,
                                              q(x∗ )
                                    π(x∗ ) =         .                           (3)
                                               x∗
I take the distributions of y conditional on Q and N to be known to job-seekers and
workers, along with the unconditional probability that a worker is qualified.
     Job-seekers queue up or otherwise compete with each other for access to a flow
of signals about job opportunities. The job-seeker applies for each job that meets
the cutoff level of qualification likelihood, x∗ . Application imposes a cost kW on
the job-seeker. Employers incur a cost kE to determine for sure whether or not the
applicant is qualified.
     I assume that an employer cannot shift the cost of evaluation to job-seekers—
the employer cannot charge an applicant a fee up front. In other words, the cost
kE refers to an action by the employer hidden from the job-seeker. The model is
consistent with additional costs, such as those of credentials issued by a trusted
third party, but these costs are not part of kE .
     All qualified job-seekers bargain with their prospective employers over the
wage. Qualified job-seekers are homogeneous and all matches enjoy a positive
joint surplus, S. Following Mortensen-Pissarides, I assume that the resulting wage
bargain divides the surplus in given proportions, with a fraction ν to the employer
and the remainder to the worker. See Hall and Milgrom (2005) for a discussion
of the conditions under which this would be a reasonable approximation to the
outcome of bargaining within the framework of modern bargaining theory.
     The essential feature of the model is that job-seekers make a marginal decision
and employers respond to the average consequences of that decision. Job-seekers
set their cutoff signal to the point where they are indifferent between the expected

                                         5
benefit from applying or going on to the next opportunity. They enjoy a rent arising
from the value in excess of the application cost that all opportunities with signals
above the cutoff will deliver. As in Mortensen-Pissarides, employers create oppor-
tunities up to the point that their average subsequent value just equals the evaluation
cost. Employers earn no rent.
    The job-seeker sets the cutoff value, x∗ , at the level where the worker’s share
of the expected surplus just pays for the cost of applying:

                                kW = βx∗ (1 − ν)S.                                 (4)

Here β is the one-period discount ratio, reflecting the delay between application
and the onset of employment.
    The representative employer is in equilibrium when its share of the expected
surplus equals the cost of evaluating an applicant:

                                  kE = βq(x∗ )νS.                                  (5)

    Dividing the employer’s equilibrium condition by the job-seeker’s condition
gives a simple equilibrium condition for the cutoff point, x∗ :

                                          ν    kE
                                π(x∗ )       =    .                                (6)
                                         1−ν   kW
The selection premium π(x∗ ) is the key object in the model. Under certain condi-
tions, it is a relatively flat function—the payoff to selection, in ratio terms, is not
sensitive to the selection point x∗ . In that case, small changes in the determinants
result in large changes in the amount of self-selection, indexed by x∗ , and thus
in large changes in unemployment and other measures of conditions in the labor
market.


3    Determinants of the Selection Premium, π
Because the cutoffs considered here are of the form x ≥ x∗ , I use counter-cdfs of
the generic form F (y) = Prob[y 0 ≥ y] with density f (y) = −F 0 (y). The signal y
has the counter-cdf FQ (y) for qualified applicants and FN (y) for unqualified ones.
I let α denote the marginal or unconditional probability of being qualified. Thus the


                                           6
marginal distribution of y is a mixture of two distributions, with mixing parameter
α and marginal counter-cdf,

                          F (y) = αFQ (y) + (1 − α)FN (y).                        (7)

      The constructions of interest are
                                                  αfQ (y)
                     x = Prob[Q|y] =                                              (8)
                                          αfQ (y) + (1 − α)fN (y)

and
                                                   αFQ (y)
                  q = Prob[Q|y 0 ≥ y] =                            .              (9)
                                           αFQ (y) + (1 − α)FN (y)
These two equations define q(x) implicitly. In addition, equation (8) defines the
relation between x and y, y = φ(x). The marginal counter-cdf of x is G(x) =
F (φ(x)).

3.1     Alternative distributions of the signal, y
I consider two specifications. In the first, the distribution of y is exponential con-
ditional on qualification (Q) and non-qualification (N ):

                                    FQ (y) = e−θy                                (10)

                                     FN (y) = e−y                                (11)

with θ < 1, so that a higher value of y signals a higher likelihood of qualification.
I take θ = 0.55.
     In the second specification, y has a linear density with support [0, 1]:

                            FQ (y) = 1 − (1 + θ)y + θy 2                         (12)

                            FN (y) = 1 − (1 − θ)y − θy 2 ,                       (13)

where θ < 1. I take θ = 0.98.
    Figure 1 shows the resulting selection premium ratio π(x∗ ) for the two exam-
ples. Notice that π(x∗ ) is decreasing and always greater than one. The figure illus-
trates a difference that will be centrally important in the model: The exponential
distribution—and other distributions with unbounded upper support—corresponds
to a selection premium that is moderate and only gently declining as the cutoff

                                            7
                             6.0


                             5.0
  Selection premium, ʌ(x*)




                             4.0         Linear


                             3.0


                             2.0

                                         Exponential
                             1.0


                             0.0
                                   0.0            0.1       0.2           0.3       0.4        0.5   0.6
                                                        Cutoff qualificaiton probability, x*

Figure 1. Selection Premiums for Two Specifications


rises. The linear density has a much higher premium low in its support and the pre-
mium falls to its minimum value of one as the cutoff approaches the upper bound
of the support. The exponential case is more likely to generate large movements of
x∗ in response to driving forces.

3.2                          Discussion of the exponential case
In the rest of the paper, I will use the exponential case, which is highly tractable
and generates interesting results. I will refer to θ as the noise parameter—as it
approaches one, the signal contains more and more noise. At θ = 1, the signal
conveys no information at all about a job-seeker’s qualification.
     In the calibration described in a later section, I take the likelihood of qual-
ification for a random job of a random job-seeker to be α = 0.02. That is, a
job-seeker is qualified for only two percent of the match opportunities. If the job-
seeker elects to set x∗ to 0.11, for example, then 11 percent of applications for
jobs with this value of x will bear fruit. Employers will find that q(0.11) = 18
percent of applicants are qualified. An impressive amount of self-selection occurs



                                                                      8
in this example—an actual applicant is 9 times more likely to be qualified than is
one chosen at random from the entire population of job-seekers.
    The job-seeker has to consider a large number of potential jobs to achieve this
amount of selection. The probability of finding an opening with a value of x = 0.11
is
                                                  1
                                   G(0.11) =         .                         (14)
                                                 176
The job-seeker rejects 175 possibilities before finding one that has a sufficiently
promising signal, x, that is, one that is at least 0.11.

3.3 The role of the noise parameter θ
Suppose that the noise parameter θ varies along with the cutoff qualification prob-
ability x∗ , so as to satisfy the equilibrium condition equation (6) with constant
values of ν, kW , and kE . The equilibrium condition keeps the selection premium,
π, constant. To see how x∗ responds to the variations in θ, define the odds ratio

                              e−y    Prob[y 0 ≥ y|N ]
                        R=         =                  < 1.                        (15)
                              e−θy   Prob[y 0 ≥ y|Q]

For the prescribed value of the selection premium ratio, π, the ratio has the closed
form
                                       (π − 1)αθ
                              R=                    .                           (16)
                                    (1 − θπ)(1 − α)
Substitute this result back into the definition of the qualification likelihood x to
obtain
                                         1 − θπ
                                  x∗ =                                          (17)
                                        π(1 − θ)
and
                                              1 − θπ
                                q = πx∗ =            .                             (18)
                                               1−θ
Notice that x∗ and q are invariant to the unconditional qualification probability α
among all pairs (x∗ , θ) corresponding to the same selection premium, π. Notice
also that α, the overall fraction of job-seekers qualified for a given job, cannot be a
driving force of fluctuations in the labor market, because π is held constant by the
equilibrium condition equation (6).
    Figure 2 uses equation (17) to show the values of the cutoff likelihood x∗ cor-
responding to different values of the noise parameter θ, as needed to achieve a

                                          9
                         0.70


                         0.60


                         0.50
    Noise Parameter, ș




                         0.40


                         0.30


                         0.20


                         0.10


                         0.00
                             0.00   0.05            0.10          0.15             0.20   0.25
                                           Cutoff qualification probability, x *

Figure 2. Tradeoff between noise parameter and cutoff likelihood, with se-
lection premium held constant at 1.67


particular value of the selection premium, namely π = 1.67. Notice that large
changes in the cutoff correspond to relatively small changes in the noise parameter.
This property is crucial to the amplification that occurs in the model about to be
developed.


4                        Model of the Labor Market
Parts of the model comes directly from Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). I examine
the stationary state of the model, which is both the stochastic equilibrium of the
processes of matching and job loss and the stationary economic equilibrium of the
labor market. People in the model are either working or seeking jobs. They do not
consider the possibility of leaving the labor force. In addition, they do not make
any decision about how much to work once they are employed. The focus of the
paper, as in the earlier papers in this tradition, is on the margin between work and
search.


                                                           10
     Matching models generate unemployment through queuing that occurs in re-
sponse to rents that are not absorbed through pricing. Unemployment arises for
the same reason that a long line would form at a street corner if somebody gave a
$20 bill to everyone who came by the corner. In the Mortensen-Pissarides model,
the rent is the share of the surplus that a successful job-seeker receives. The job-
seeker does not incur any cost apart from the time spent waiting for an opportunity
to arise. In this model, job-seekers do incur a cost, but the cost falls short of the
full share of the surplus, so the difference between the two generates a rent that is
dissipated by waiting, as in Mortensen-Pissarides.
     I start by considering the values of job-seeking and employment. Job-seekers
achieve a value U . The value arises from the flow of unemployment compensation
and from the amenity of not working during the current spell of unemployment
together with the earnings of subsequent jobs. I denote the combined flow value of
unemployment compensation and the non-work amenity λ. All job-seekers have
the same reservation wage W . The present value of the surplus from a hire is S.
Workers and employers split the surplus in fractions of 1 − ν and ν. The applicant
pays expected application fees, a, stated as a fraction of the part of the job surplus
accruing to the worker. Upon finding a job, a worker receives an expected present
value of wage of W + (1 − a)(1 − ν)S + V , the reservation wage plus the worker’s
share of the surplus net of application costs plus the value V of the worker’s career
after the job ends. The searcher has a probability of starting a new job this period of
f , the job-finding rate. The separation rate—the per-period probability that a job
will end—is an exogenous constant s (see Hall (2005b) for evidence supporting
this proposition). The stationary condition for the unemployment value U is

            U = λ + β {f [W + (1 − a)(1 − ν)S + V ] + (1 − f )U } .               (19)

The stationary condition for V is

                              V = β [(1 − s)V + sU ] .                            (20)

The reservation wage is W = U −V , the wage that makes the job-seeker indifferent
between remaining unemployed at value U and dropping to the lower post-wage
value V by becoming employed. I subtract equation (20) from equation (19) and



                                          11
solve for the job-finding rate:

                                  [1 − β(1 − s)] W − λ
                            f=                         .                       (21)
                                    β(1 − a)(1 − ν)S

The equation shows the basic property of matching models of unemployment—the
job-finding rate reflects a choice between work and job-seeking and is higher to the
extent that the payoff to work, measured by W , is higher than the flow of benefits
and amenities, λ.
    The discount factor is β. The present value of the output produced by a worker
is
                                         1
                                                 .                              (22)
                                    1 − β(1 − s)
                                                         1
The present value of the surplus from a hire is S = 1−β(1−s)   − W.
                         ∗
   Given the value of x , the value of the surplus, S, can be recovered from either
equation (4) or (5). The value of the reservation wage, W , comes from
                                        1
                              S=                − W.                           (23)
                                   1 − β(1 − s)

The job-finding rate comes from equation (21). Finally, the unemployment rate is
the stationary probability of the two-state Markoff process,

                                           s
                                     u=       .                                (24)
                                          s+f
The resulting net surplus accruing to the job-seeker is

                                                  µ          ¶
                                    kW          β
      (1 − a)(1 − ν)S = (1 − ν)S −    ∗
                                         = 1−        (1 − ν)S.                 (25)
                                   q(x )      π(x∗ )

Recall from Sections 2 and 3 that the determinants of x∗ are the noise parameter θ,
the surplus share ν, and the two costs, kW and kE .

4.1   The possibility of hiring without evaluation
Under certain conditions, an employer could gain by foregoing evaluation for some
or all applicants. Stiglitz (1975) noted that, under some conditions, an employer
can maintain self-selection among applicants yet economize on screening cost by


                                          12
screening only a random subset of applicants. I assume that job-seekers are in-
formed about an employer’s evaluation policies. Accordingly, a job-seeker apply-
ing to an employer known to skip evaluation and to hire some or all applicants
unconditionally will set a lower cutoff signal x̂∗ than for an employer who screens
all applicants. Let the fraction of applicants who are evaluated be ψ. The expected
surplus net of testing cost accruing to the employer will be

     ½           ·                     ¸           ·                    ¸¾
                          1                        q(x̂∗ )
    ν ψq(x̂∗ )                    − W + (1 − ψ)              −W              − ψkE .
                     1 − β(1 − s)               1 − β(1 − s)
                                                                                (26)
     The employer will achieve the highest net surplus by testing all applicants if

                                     1 − q(x̂∗ )
                               ν                 W > kE ,                         (27)
                                   1 − β(1 − s)
that is, if the avoided opportunity cost from hiring unqualified workers exceeds the
testing cost as ψ rises. Note that if this condition holds at the prevailing x∗ when
all other employers are testing all applicants, it must hold at x̂∗ . I assume that the
condition does hold, so that all employers choose universal testing.


5     Calibration
As in Hall (2005a), I calibrate to a job-finding rate of 60 percent per month and
a separation rate of 3.5 percent per month, which imply an unemployment rate of
5.5 percent. As before, I take the noise parameter θ to be 0.55, the unconditional
likelihood of qualification to be α = 0.02, and the cutoff likelihood of qualification,
x∗ , to be 11 percent. I take the discount ratio to be β = 0.951/12 and the flow value
of unemployment compensation and leisure to be λ = 0.4, which is a little more
than 40 percent of the flow wage in equilibrium. I take the Nash parameter to
be ν = 0.5, so the two sides split the surplus equally. I then solve the model
for the values of the application cost, kW , the testing cost, kE , and the remaining
endogenous variables. The values of the application and evaluation costs are kW =
0.208 and kE = 0.347. These costs are about 1 and 1.5 weeks of wages.
     The criterion for evaluating every applicant, equation (27), is met by a wide
margin at the calibrated values of the parameters and endogenous variables.


                                            13
           12


           10
                          Job-seeker

           8
                   Employer
 Surplus




           6


           4


           2


           0
            0.00         0.05            0.10            0.15           0.20   0.25
                                Cutoff qualification probability, x *

Figure 3. Joint determination of surplus, S, and application cutoff, x∗

6          Properties of the model
Figure 3 shows the joint determination of the cutoff level of the productivity signal,
x∗ , and the surplus, S. It plots the two equilibrium conditions, written as

                                                    kW
                                        S=                                        (28)
                                                βx∗ (1 − ν)
and
                                                   kE
                                         S=               .                       (29)
                                                 βq(x∗ )ν
    The job-seeker curve cuts the employer curve from above. This is a standard
stability condition and requires that the selection premium be decreasing in the
cutoff likelihood. The curves correspond to the calibration to be developed shortly.
The equilibrium is fragile in the sense that the two curves have similar slopes,
so small shifts in the positions of the curves will result in large changes in the
equilibrium.
    The comparative statics of the model are straightforward. An increase in the
job-seeker’s application cost, kW , shifts the job-seeker curve upward, raises the

                                                 14
 Unemployment Rate (Percent)   12


                               10


                               8


                               6


                               4


                               2


                               0
                                0.49   0.50   0.51   0.52   0.53   0.54    0.55   0.56   0.57   0.58
                                                        Noise Parameter, ș

Figure 4. Response of unemployment to changes in the noise parameter, θ


equilibrium cutoff signal, x∗ , lowers the surplus of a job, and lowers unemploy-
ment. An increase in the employer’s evaluation cost, kE , shifts the employer curve
upward, lowers the equilibrium cutoff signal, x∗ , raises the surplus of a job, and
raises unemployment. An increase in the noise parameter, θ, shifts the employer
curve upward, lowers x∗ , raises S, and raises unemployment. If the productivity
of successful matches were considered a parameter, instead of being held at one, it
would not affect x∗ .
     Figure 4 shows the response of the unemployment rate to changes in the the
noise parameter, θ, keeping the overall likelihood that a given job-seeker is qual-
ified for a given job, α, and the other parameters constant. As θ rises, unemploy-
ment rises rapidly.
     The model tells the following story about a recession. The story rests on the
two equilibrium conditions for job-seekers and employers:

                                                     kW = βx∗ (1 − ν)S.                         (30)

                                                      kE = βx∗ π(x∗ )νS.                        (31)

                                                              15
A shock—such as the collapse of IT spending in 2001—diminishes the quality of
the information that job-seekers have about their qualifications for jobs. The im-
mediate response of employers is to cut back on recruiting, because the probability
that an applicant is qualified, q = πx, declines below the cost of evaluating the
applicant (equation (31)). Job-seekers then lower their cutoff point, x∗ , which trig-
gers a further reduction in recruiting. As unemployment rises because of the lower
job-finding rate, job-seekers cut their reservation wage, W , which raises the job
surplus, S. As x∗ falls and S rises, the market reaches a new equilibrium, where
the new values allow job-seekers to cover their application costs and employers
their evaluation costs. The process converges because the proportional effect of the
decline in x∗ is greater for job-seekers (equation (30)) than for employers (equation
(31)), because π(x∗ ) is a decreasing function. On the other hand, the proportional
effects are the same for the increase in the surplus.
    At the calibrated parameter values, an increase in θ from 0.55 to 0.56 raises
unemployment from its normal level of 5.5 percent to the recession level of 7.1
percent. The cutoff level of the qualification signal, x∗ , falls from 11 percent to
9 percent. The job surplus rises from 3.8 months of production to 4.6. Because
productivity does not change, the increase in the job surplus is entirely the result
of a decline in the reservation wage present value from 21.8 months of production
to 21.0 months. Whereas a job-seeker in normal times reviews 176 possibilities
before applying for one, the number falls to 120 in the recession, because of a
large increase in competition from other job-seekers.


7    Concluding Remarks
The static equilibrium model of this paper shows that self-selection is a key issue in
the theory of labor-market frictions. I develop a tractable framework for investigat-
ing self-selection and show that it can provide a potent amplification mechanism.
The model neither rests on fluctuations in productivity nor predicts cyclical fluctu-
ations in productivity, thus overcoming one of the main defects of other views of
unemployment volatility within the matching framework.
    The driving force in the model is the quality of information about potential
matches between job-seekers and employers. A slight decline in the quality of
information results in a cascade of effects that substantially reduce the efficiency


                                         16
of the matching process. Employers are overwhelmed by less-qualified applicants
and thus dissipate evaluation resources. Employers require a larger surplus from
a match in order to finance the larger number of evaluations need to generate one
match. The surplus available to job-seekers grows in proportion, and so does un-
employment.
    Although a decline in the quality of information about matches is a plausible
event leading to a recession, measuring the decline is uncharted territory in labor-
market research.




                                        17
References
Abraham, Katharine G. and Lawrence F. Katz, “Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral
    Shifts or Aggregate Disturbances?,” Journal of Political Economy, June 1986,
    94 (3), pp. 507–522. Part 1.

Akerlof, George A., “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Mar-
    ket Mechanism,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Aug. 1970, 84 (3),
    488–500.

Hall, Robert E., “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,”
    American Economic Review, March 2005. forthcoming.

     , “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy over
    the Past Fifty Years,” February 2005. Department of Economics, Stanford
    University. Prepared for the NBER Macro Annual Conference, April 2005.

      and Paul R. Milgrom, “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the
    Wage Bargain,” February 2005. Department of Economics, Stanford Univer-
    sity.

Lilien, David M., “Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment,” Journal of Polit-
     ical Economy, August 1982, 90 (4), 777–93.

Montgomery, James D, “Adverse Selection and Employment Cycles,” Journal of
   Labor Economics, April 1999, 17 (2), 281–97.

Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher Pissarides, “Job Creation and Job Destruction
    in the Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61 (0),
    pp. 397–415.

Shimer, Robert, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Va-
    cancies,” American Economic Review, March 2005. Forthcoming.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., “The Theory of ‘Screening,’ Education, and the Distribution of
     Income,” American Economic Review, June 1975, 65 (3), 283–300.




                                       18
