                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   SUPPLY SHOCKS, WAGE STICKINESS,
                          AND ACCOMNODATION




                           Stanley Fischer




                        Working Paper No. 1119




                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge MA 02138


                               May 1983




The research reported here is part of the NEER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author   and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1119
                                                        May 1983



                  Supply Shocks, Wage Stickiness, and Accommodation



                                       ABSTRACT



      The main issue discussed in the SUpply shock literature that followed the

 oil and food price shocks of the seventies was whether to accommodate. The

supply shock reduces the equilibrium 1eel of output, and monetary policy cannot

affect that. But in the seventies supply shocks were also followed by

recessions. The   question   is whether monetary policy can and should be used to

prevent such recessions. The paper analyzes the conditions under which a suppiy

shock will result in. recession, and the potential for monetary policy to offset

the fall in output. The basic result is that a pure supply 3hock need not result

in a recession if the money stock is held constant.    Aggregate demand effects

associated with the supply shock-—including the effects of monetary policy

attempts to fight the inflation caused by the supply shock--may cause a

recession, as also may real wage resistance by workers. The choice of polloy

response to the supply shock then turns on the same basic issues as counter—

cyclical policy in general, particularly the relative costs of inflation and

unemployment.




                                                      Stanley Fischer
                                                      Department of Economics
                                                      Massachusetts Institute of
                                                        Technology E52-280A
                                                      Cambridge, MA 02139

                                                      (617) 253—6666
                                                           April 1983



                      SUPPLY SHOCKS, WAGE STICKINESS, kND ACCO4ODATION

                                      Stanley Fischer*



         The key issue in the supply shock
                                             literature that developed after the 1973—
  74   oil   and food price shocks was whether to accormnodate.l There is of
                                                                             course
  nothing to be done about the reduction in
                                                the equilibrij level of output caused
  by the supply shock. But twice in the 1970's
                                                    supply shocks resulted in output
  falling below its potential level.

        The question discussed in the
                                        supply shock literature, and taken up here, is
  whether government policy is either
                                         responsible for or can offset the fall in the
  level of output to below its potential level. I also discuss the costs
                                                                         and
 benefits of alternative policy
                                    responses to a supply shock. It will be seen that
 the basic issues are precisely those that arise in considering activist
                                                                             policy in
 general.

       The paper opens by discussing optimal responses to a supply shock in
                                                                            a one-
 sector model; these would be observed if markets cleared at all times.
                                                                             In
 Section II I examine the behavior
                                      of output and prices when wages are slow to
 adjust to the supply shock. The key factors here are whether the
                                                                   supply shock
 requires a reduction in the real
                                  wage, and whether there is real wage resistance
by workers. In contrast to much of the
                                             recent literature, I concentrate on the
closed economy.2 The supply shock is domestic, and there is no
                                                               recourse to

*Department of Economics, M.I.T., and Research Associate, National Bureau of
Economic Research. This is a revised
                                      version of a paper with a similar title
presented at the American Economic Association
indebted to Robert Gordon for                  meetings, December 1982. I am
                              comments, and the National Science Foundation for
research support.

1For example, Gordon (1975),
                             Phelps (1978), Solow (1979), and for a good survey
Pindyck (1980).

2For open economy issues, see Marion and Svensson (1983)
therein.                                                 and the references
                                         2




foreigners to mitigate its effects.

     The main result of the paper is that supply shocks by themselves are
                                                                          and so long
unlikely to lead to unemployment if monetary policy remains passive
                           resistance by workers. It is rather the aggregate
as there is no real wage

demand effects associated with the supply 30ks_—iflClUdiflg counter_inflationary

policy responses--that are responsible for unemployment.



1. The Real Effects of a Supply Shock.
                                                                            of
     A supply shock is defined to be any disturbance that changes the level

                                                temporary,   like the 1973-74 food price
equilibrium real output. The shock may 'be
                                                                section I analyze
shock, or more long—lived, like the oil price shocks. In this
                                                                  There is
optimal responses to a supply shock in a one—sector real model.
                                              subsequently we allow for two types of
initially only one type of capital good;

capital good, one more energy efficient than the other.3
                                             constant returns to scale production
     Aggregate output is produced by a

 function

      (i) Y = F(a(p)K, b(p)L)
                                      factors. Changes in p are the supply shock.
 where a(p)and b(p) are efficiency
                                                when no confusion is likely.
 drop the functional notation for a( ) and b( )
                                             size is constant, maximizes the separable
      The representative family,t' whose

 utility function:


      (2) V0 =5U(Ct)etdt


 3Arelated model is described in Bruno and Sachs (1982).
                                           interchangeably of the decisions of the
 t'In describing the optimization, we talk                          of individual
 family or society, since in such a model the optimizing decisions
                                          foresight Dath in a competitive setting
 agents on the unique convergent perfect
                                            of resources.
 result in the socially optimal allocation
                                                3


 where

         () Ct       =        -   - 6K                 +         >
                                                           oKt
 It is assumed that capital, which depreciates at rate 6, cannot be consumed.

         The economy is initially in a steady state, with capital stock K satisfying

 the modified golden rule condition:

         (4) aF (aK*,bL) =         p   +    a

 Assume henceforth that L              1.

         Now we consider the effects of a productivity or supply shock which changes

 either a or b or both. The effects of a change in a on K* are given by:
          ôK K*
         ()              a La
 where        is the elasticity of substitution between capital and       labor   and   a   is the

 share of labor in output. Thus an increase in a will increase the steady state

 capital stock if c > a.

      Of course, an adverse supply shock reduces a. Thus the steady state capital

stock will increase in response to an adverse (capital-depleting) supply shock if

the elasticity of substitution is low (specifically if               < a). Since estimates
of   for aggregate production functions are around but not precisely 1, the

direction in which K* would move following a change in a is not clear.

     The      effects of a change in b are unambiguous:
                 *        *
              àb         b
Thus a fall in b reduces the steady state capital stock.

     It follows from (5) and (6) that equiproportionate decreases in a and b,

corresponding to Hicks neutral technical change, reduce K*. The reduction in K*

is greater the larger the elasticity of substitution.            The effects of the supply.
shock on K* are a result of savings behavior
                                                    maintaining the steady state

marginal product of capital constant.
                                                  4



    Given the change in steady state K, we now analyze the dynamics of the
                                                              In Figure 1 K is the new steady
response to changes in a or b, using Figure 1.

                                                                                     for this
state capital stock. The schedule C =             0 comes from the Euler equation

problem:


           . C.   =
                      (p+ô)   —
                                  aFi(aKt,b)

The schedule K = 0 comes from

                              —        -
     (8) Ct = F(aKt,b)            Kt       ôKt
                                             on which all of output is being
Also shown in Figure 1 is the schedule C = Y
                                                     at its maximal rate.
consumed. On C = Y the capital stock is disappearing
                                                           to the steady state if capital can
     The locus AA shows the optimal approach
                                                      than at rate 6. If K*1 is being
be eaten, that is used up more rapidly
                                                        to the left of B on schedule AA, then
approached from below, or from any point

the approach is simply to follow AA.
                                                                        AA cannot
     However, if the initial capital stock is larger than KB, then path
                                                 Y iccus until point B is
be followed. Instead society moves along the C =
                                                                       C = Y
reaches; then the locus AA is followed. In the process of moving along

 gross investment is zero and net investment is — 6K.5
                                                       investment, consumption, the real wage,
      The effects of the supply shock on
                                                 the nature of the shock. Rather than go
 and the return to capital depend on
                                                   supply shocks, I discuss in the text the
 through the full taxonomy of possible
                                                                      steady state
 responses to a Hicks-neutral supply shock, which reduces the optimal
                            differences that arise for different types of shock.
 capital stock while noting

                                             of KB? This would not be optimal
 5Why not simply scrap any capital in excess
                                   = Y and going to B, thereafter proceeding down
 because on any path starting on C
                                    movement than it is on the path where capital
 fri., consumption is higher at every
 is scrapped.
                      c=o              C= Y
C.



                                           K=o




                      9 KB             K
 Figure   1:
               Optimal_Response to a Supply Shock
                                            5



    If a and b fall in the same proportion and the steady state capital stock
                                       itself in Figure 1 at a point to the right
accordingly falls, the economy finds
                                                                            of
of K. The capital stock is reduced in the adjustment process, with the rate
                                                   of the supply shock. If the fall in
investment accordingly falling on the impact
                                                the economy may operate for some time on
the steady state capital stock is large,

the locus CY, on which there is no gross investment, and capital is being
                                                       investment is started up again,
decumuJated as rapidly as possible. Then gross
                                                                         from
though not at a rate rapid enough to prevent the aggregate capital stock

falling gradually until       is reached.

                                                 real wage falls on impact, and then
     As a result of the supply shock, the
                                                                       interest
continues to fall as capital is decumulated moving towards K. The real
                                            capital) falls as a result of the supply
rate (the marginal product of existing

shock, but then rises back towards its equilibrium level as capital is

decumulated.
                                                           depend on the extent of the
     The effects of the supply shock on consumption
                                       less than the previous level of depreciation,
fall in output. If output falls by

and if the economy for some time moves along the path C=Y in Figure 1,
                                          after the shock than it was i1iitially.
 consumption may be higher immediately
                                        decumulated, and in the new steady state is
 But consumption falls as capital is
 below   the initial level before the shock.
                                                             which will be taken as the
         In this case of Hicks—neutral technical regress,

 standard case, the supply shock reduces the steady state capital stock and

 consumption. Investment and the real wage decline on impact, along with the real

                                                also if the supply shock is Harrod
 return to capital. This pattern occurs

 neutral or labor depleting.
                                                               (Solow—neutral) and the
         However, if the supply shock is capital_depleting
                                                   and labor is low, a supply shock may
 elasticity of substitution between capital
                                                 6



 increase the steady state capital stock. As shown by (5),           this   will occur if a >

   (i.e. if the share of labor exceeds the elasticity of substitution). Given

 that estimated elasticities of substitution are around one, this is a real

 possibility. Despite the higher steady stae physical capital stock, the steady

 state output level would be lower. Following the shock investment increases and

consumption sharply decreases.

Energy-Efficient Capital:

     We now introduce two types of capital, types    1   and 2, with differing

productivities. Type1 can be thought of as energy inefficient and type 2 as

more energy efficient.

     The production function is now:

     (9) Y =             +
                             K9,b)
                 F(aK1
where, initially, a > 1

In addition

     '(10) C =      - o(K1+ K2) —            —
                                        K1

                                                              > —
                                                         IC         8K1

                                                                —
                                                                    8K
                                                         K1 > 0, K2         0.

Unless a = 1, the two types of capital will not be accumulated simultaneously.

Suppose that a initially takes the value a0 > 1. Then the modified golden rule

condition is:

     (ii)
            a0F1(a0K,b)         p + 8

    Assuming a drops from a0 > 1 to a1 < 1, in the new steady state the capital

stock will be

                    b) = p + 6
     (12)   F1(K,
                                         7



             > K depends on the elasticity of substitution, as in (5).   Thus for
Whether

• > , a    decline in the productivity of type 1 capital will lead to a smaller

steady state capital stock, where capital is measured in units of consumption

goods.
     The major difference between the two capital good and the one capital good

models is that the marginal products of existing and new capital may now differ;

correspondingly the tight link between the change in steady state capital stocks

and short run investment behavior is broken.     When a supply shock occurs,

existing capital becomes less productive, and the marginal product of existing

capital falls. But the marginal product of energy efficient capital may be

higher than the steady state interest rate. Investment in type 2 or energy

efficient capital will begin immediately. The old capital goods remain in

 servic gradually depreciating and being in the long run replaced by more

                                                   state and short run real wages
 productive or energy efficient capital. Steady

 are reduced by the supply shock.

      The other p'itterns of response discussed in the one capital good model are
                                                investment slowdown or seizure in
 also possible. Supply shocks may lead to an

 the short run, as existing capital is allowed to depreciate and the capital stock

 works down to a lower steady state level.7



 II. Wage Stickiness and Putut Behavior.
         No serious macroeconomic issues arise when the economy adjusts as smoothly

 as the neoclassical model described above. We begin macroeconomic analysis in

                                                                      as it would be
 61 do not assume fixed proportions so the capital is not scrapped
 in a vintage model.

 7The adjustment process to the supply shock in this neoclassical economy could
 also require some unemployment. For instance, if the economy were modelled as
 having two sectors, with the shock implying a shift of labor from one sector to
 the other, there might well be unemployment as labor is reallocated.
                                                   8


 this   section, locating the source of slow adjustment in wages. I assume the wage

 is sticky, being predetermined within each period. The demand for labor

 determines aggregate supply within the period; to minimize complexity aggregate

 demand is described by the quantity equation. Output and the price level are

 determined by aggregate supply and demand, and the adjustment of wages is

 responsible for the dynamics of the response of the system to the shock.

        Firms hire as much labor as they want at the going nominal wage and supply

 output, based on the constant—returns neoclassical production function

        (13)    Y = F(aK,bL)

 Taking the capital imput as fixed, the labor demand curve obtained from profit

 maximization is

        Ld (z,a,b)
                                             1               L                    F2
where z is the real wage and           =
                                             2
                                                         =
                                                             a
                                                                 and b - Lb   —
                                                                                  2
                                           bF22                                   bF22
        Substituting the labor demand curve back into the production function we

obtain
               dY - da + ac db       cx dz
        (14)
                Y    a   1-a b       1-a z
where again a is the share of labor and                the elasticity of substitution.

In the text we assume the shock is Hicks-neutral, with da/a =                 db/b     =
                                                                                           de/e and the
Hicks—neutral supply shock denoted e.8

Thus

       (14)'=(i +21-a z
                Y        1—a     e

       We   need also to relate unemployment to the level of output. Let L be the

full employment level of output. Then the unemployment rate is:


8For a Harrod-neutral shock, da/a =          0;   for a Solow-neutral shock db/b =           0.
                                                        9




                          L-L                L
                                 =1 -
       (15) u =           -
                          L                  L
From the production function we obtain:
                 dL       1 dY       1 de
       '    6'
             "
                  L       a Y a e
       Approximating (15) around the point of zero unemployment, we write:

       (17) u = — ciyt               +
                                         c2et
with   c1 = c2
                      =   1/a,   and where y is the logarithm of output and et is the

deviation of e from its initial value.9

Aggregate Supply, Demand, and Short-Run Price and Output Determination: We can

now specify the aggregate supply and demand equations. The aggregate supply

equation, based on (14)', is

                      =          +
       (18)               b1et       b2(pt_wt)
where Pt and               are the logarithms of the price level and nominal wage

respectively, and (18) is a linearization of the supply function (14)', with10

       Aggregate demand is described by the quality theory:

           (19) Pt = n't —               +
                                             Vt
Here v is a           demand shock, included to make it possible to examine the

simultaneous impact of supply and demand shocks.

           Within any period, the nominal wage is predetermined.         Thus the price level

and output are determined by (18) and (19), shown in Figure 2, by the AS and AD

curves. The initial equilibrium is at point E.


91f the shock were either Harrod or Solow neutral, we would have c1 > c2 in (17).

10With Harrod neutral technical progress, b1 = b2
                                                               =      ; with Solow neutral

 technical progress, b1 = 1,                      b =
                                   -9a--

                                                     AS'
         Pt
                                                                AS




          Pt




                              y'                           yt
Figure 2: Short Run Price ar Citput Deteimination.
                                                 10




    Now suppose there is an adverse supply shock, meaning that et in equation
                                                        and therefore has not affected the
(18) falls. If this shock is unanticipated,
                                           curve shifts up to AS', leaving the aggregate
wage rate, the aggregate supply
                                                      rises and the level of output falls, as
demand curve unaffected. The price level

we should expect.

     The change in the unemployment rate in the current period is determined by
                                                                  case:11
the nature of the shock. Using (17), we find in the Hicks neutral


     (20)
            dut
            d
                t
                        —
                            i   dyt
                                -:--   2
                    =   —
                            c1b1 +
                                      c2
                            1+b2

                    =0
     The intuition of the result in (20) is straightforward. The supply shock
                                             the same proportion as real GNP when the shock
requires the real wage to fall in

is Hicks neutral. With the nominal wage constant, and nominal aggregate demand
                                                       real output and the real wage fall in
constant through the quantity theory, both

the same proportion.
                                                   this simplest case of a Hicks neutral
Unemployment and the Supply Shock: In

 supply shock there is no change in employment in the short run, even with nominal

 wage stickiness. There are however several mechanisms that could generate

 unemployment following a supply shock.

                                                    rate will rise if the
11If the shock is Harrod neutral, the unemployment
elasticity of subsitution exceeds one and fall if the elasticity is less than the
one. The intuition is as follows. If the elasticity of subtitutiOfl is one,
share of labor is constant. The real wage should fall by exactly the same
proportion as output. Because of the form of   the quantity equation, this is
                                            of substitution exceeds one, the share
precisely what happens. If the elasticity
of labor should fall. But since the   nominal wage is fixed and prices fall in the
                                                                           is
 same proportion as output, the share of labor can fall only if less labor
 employed. There is thus unemployment. In the Solow neutral case, unemployment
 rises if the elasticity of substitution is less than one.
                                        11




      First, unemployment will occur if an adverse demand shock accompanies the

 supply shock. Such a shock may occur because of the redistribution of wealth

 associated with the shock, for instance to OPEC or farmers.'2 Alternatively, the

 demand shock may result from policy attempts to fight the rise in the price level

 caused by the supply shock. Such shifts move the AD curve in Figure 2 down to

the left, reducing output to below its full employment level.

     The use of the simplest quantity theory to model aggregate demand ignores

other demand effects that may be associated with the supply shock. For instance,

the optimizing analysis of Section I showed that the rate of investment would

typically fall following a supply shock. The propensity to consume should rise

at the same time. Given the uncertainty generated by a supply shock, it is not

clear that consumers would want to raise the propensity to consume. In such a

case there would be a reduction in nominal aggregate demand given the real

interest rate.

     UnempThyment may also occur if the supply shock has differential sectoral

effects. For instance, as noted above, labor may have to be reallocated from

energy intensive to other sectors, and the reallocation could be accompanied kby

unemployment.

     These effects may modify the basic result of equation (20), which is that

if monetary policy is passive, an adverse supply shock need not, on impact,

generate unemployment.

Dynamics and the Phillips Curve:

     In the next period the nominal wage may be higher, as workers try to recoup

for the losses due to the unanticipated inflation caused by the adverse shock.


12This is one of the assumptions by which Gordon (1975) obtains an increase in
unemployment following a supply shock.
                                                            12




This by itself tends to cause unemployment. At this point we need to develop

more fully the dynamic analysis based on a Phillips curve.

       Assume that nominal wages are set one period in advance. The logarithm of

the wage is:

                     w1 - ht lut + ai[ itt 1
                                                                      +
       (21) Wt
                 =
                                                                          a2[ptl-t2ptl]
All   coefficients       are positive. The nominal wage is set equal to last period's

wage, w1, with several adjustments. First, expectations of unemployment reduce

the nominal wage, where                        is   the unemployment rate expected at time (t—i )                to

prevail at t. (A similar notation is used throughout.) Second, to the extent

that inflation is expected, the nominal wage is increased, as reflected in the

term                        If labor is bargaining for a real wage, a1 will be equal to

1. The final term in (21) is a catch—up for real wages: if the price level was

higher than expected in period (t-i), the nominal wage for period t is increased

to compensate.

       The dynamics of response to the supply shock would be more extended and

realistic if overlappiing labor contracts were modelled. But the current

formulation (21) contains the necessary essentials: short run fixity of the

nominal wage combined with slightly longer run responses to unemployment, to

expected inflation, and to past unanticipated inflation.

       The complete model now consists of the aggregate supply equation (18), the

aggregate demand equation (19), and the Phillips curve (21)' in which (17) has

been used to substitute out for the expectation of the unemployment rate:

       (21)' Wt
                     =
                         wt_l
                                +
                                     ait_ipt-pt_il          +
                                                                 a2[pt_1-t_2pt_1
                                                                                       +
                                                                                           a31y   -
                                                                                                      a4   jet

where 83 = — hc1,                   hc2.
                  a4
       Solving for t we obtain

                                           -            -                 +
       (22) yj1+— - L(14_                      a1+a2)        LE(a1-a3)        a2L2E]
                                                                    13



                     b (1-L)
       =                          +                 +
            etr        b2               a4LE]            (mt   t)[1_L(l_ai+a2) -          a1I   +
                                                                                                    a2L2EJ
 where L is the lag operator                                             and E is an expectations operator such
                                                        (Lyt

 that LEy                         Lr            t-2t-1' etc.
      We use (22) to study the effects of an
                                                                          unanticipated permanent supply shock,
 of magnitude —1, taking place in period 1.                               Initially et was at level 0 (here we
 think of e as a logarithm), for t < 1. Then y would also be zero for t < 1,

 assuming mt and vt were zero. Now et falls to —1. Calculations give:

      (23)       y1 =       -              -    1

                                 1+b2



                                         {1+b2+b2(a2-a1 fl          + b2a
                       =    -    1+b2
                                                                             =   1    -         b2a2
                                         1+b2+b2(a-a1)                                    1+b2(1+a3-
                       -
                            y*   =
                                     X(y1_y*)                                        for t =    3,4,...

where y* =       -   a4     =-1
                      3


      X =        -              b2 a3
             1




     The
           expressions following the second equality sign in the first two lines of

(23) give the value of output for that period when the supply shock is Harrod

neutral. In this case output falls immediately by one unit (as we saw above),

which is also the steady state fall in
                                                                  output. The key question then is how the
shock affects
                      y2. In particular, if y2 < -1, the shock will cause unemployment

followed by an asymptotic return to full employment and potential output. For

b1= 1+b2
     (24) y2 < -1 <>                           > 0
                                        b2a2
                                            14




     Thus if there is any attempt by workers to catch-up for lost real wages,
                                                 =   0,   the system moves immediately to
unemployment will result. However, if a2

its new steady state level of output, without unemployment, when the supply shock

hits. Attempts to compensate for future inflation, through the term in (21)

involving a1, do not affect the smooth adjustment to a supply shock in the

of real wage resistance.
                                                                   rises back to its new
        If there is real wage resistance, then real output

steady state level at a rate determined by X in (23). The system returns to its
                                                                 and a3. Large a3
steady state more rapidly (x is smaller) the larger are b2, a1 ,

represents a powerful effect of unemployment on wages, and large b2 represents a

powerful effect of real wages on output.           The reason a large 81 increases the

speed of return to equilibrium is that there is deflation from periods 2 on as

the economy returns to equilibrium - thus a large a1 ensures the rate of wage

increase drops along with the inflation.

        Examining price level behavior in more detail, the impact of the supply
                                                                     If there is no real
shock is to raise the price level in the current period.

wage resistance, there is no further adjustment. If there is real wage

resistance, the price level will rise again in the next period. Then the price

level gradually falls back to its steady state level - above the level before the

shock - as unemployment pushes down the wage.

Demand Shocks: The supply shock may be accompanied by either a monetary policy

                             to try   to prevent     unemployment, or contractionary to
 response—accoIflmOdatifl€

          the   higher price level--or a demand shock. We accordingly examine the
 fight

 dynamics of the response of output and prices to a permanent money or demand

 shock.     Suppose m rises unexpectedly and permanently by one unit in period 1.
 Then
                                                           15



               - b2
                                l --
                                        1
       (25) y1 - 1+b                   1+b
                            2             2
                           b
                                                           -
                      r--        iL1+b2(1-a1+a2)               b2a1
                  =
                                                                                   1 -
                                                                          p2
                                1+b2(1-a1+a3)


      In
             = t-i                     t =      ,...,             t   =   1    -

           the first period, the demand shock increases output and the price level.

 In the next period, y2 may be positive or negative.

      (26)    2 > 0 <>                      +
                                (1-a1)          b2(1-2a1+a2) > 0
 If both a1 and a2 are equal to 1, the economy will return to equilibrium

 immediately following the demand shock.

      If either a1 or a2 are less than 1, the output response to the demand shock

 will be prolonged, with output remaining above the steady state level and slowly

 returning to it. The price level rises in the adjustment
                                                                                         process. Conversely,
 if there is a negative permanent demand
                                                           shock, output will fall below the full
employment level for some time                  if   either a1 or a2 are less than 1.

Summary: The analysis of monetary and demand shocks provides the second

component of the response of the economy to a supply shock. If the economy is

affected by an adverse demand shock (negative v) along with the supply shock,

output will certainly fall and unemployment rise (for a Hicks neutral shock) when

the shock hits.

     Further, the unemployment is sure to be prolonged. Note from (26) that for

an adverse demand shock not to have prolonged effects, a2 has to be equal to 1.

But from (23), if               1, the supply shock has prolonged effects.13
                      a2


13This result depends on the assumption that the nominal wage response to a fall
in the real wage is the same whether the real wage drop is caused by a supply or
a demand shock.
                                          16




                                shock--PolicY induced in an attempt to fight
    Thus an adverse demand
                                              shock—-Will ensure a recession, and
inflation or as a direct result of the supply
                                            shock. But it does mitigate the
a prolonged one, if it accompanies a supply

inflation.



iii. Policy Issues.
                                                             to respond to the supply
                                model for monetary policy
     There is scope in this
                               circumstances in which active monetary policy might be
shock. We consider three

used:
                                                                the supply shock, either
                                    be used concurrently with
        i. Monetary policy might
                                                           reduce the fall in output, or
                                  of the money supply to
 to attempt through expansion
                                      supply to fight the aggregate price level
 through a reduction in the money

 increase caused by the supply shock.
                                                                      through real wage
                                  sets off sub1equeflt unemploYment
        2. If the supply shock
                                   attempt to inflate out of the recession.
 resistance, there might be an
                                                    by an adverse demand shock,
        3.   If   the supply shock is accompanied
                                  might be used in an attempt to prevent recession.
 expansionary monetary policy
                                        that should be thought of as accommodating
        It is the third circumstance

 monetary policy.
                                               First we ignore the effects of policy
        We discuss policy in two stages.
                                                           discuss desirable patterns of
  actions on expectations
                          of future policy. Then we

                                   makers when their actions in any one episode affect
  behavior for monetary policy

  expectations about their future respofls3S.
                                                                the supply shock occurs,
  1. Dealin with the Impact of the Supply Shock. ften
                                                                   monetary policy can
  the equilibrium level of real output falls. Expansionary
                                    But there seems little purpose in such a policy
  slow the decline in output.
                                   there would not be unemployment in the new
  action, since by hypothesis
                                           17



  equilibrium, and the expansionary monetary policy raises the price level.

  Indeed, there are arguments that the money stock should be reduced rather than

 raised on the impact of the supply shock. This would be the case if there are

 costs to changing prices (Rotemberg (1982)), or if the distributional effects of

 the price rise caused by the supply shock are adverse. Whatever these costs may

 be, any attempt to fight the inflation through restrictive monetary policy will

 result in a recession——thus the issues in choosing the appropriate policy action

 here are precisely those that arise in considering anti—inflationary policy in

 general.

 2. Real Wage Resistance. Assuming the supply shock is pure (aggregate demand is

 unaffected) then a passive monetary policy will result in no prolonged recession

 unless there is real wage resistance by workers. If there is real wage

 resistance, but there is money illusion in the Phillips curve in that a1 and/or a

a2 is less than one, then as (24) shows, expansive monetary policy can be used

to offset the decline in output caused by the real wage resistance. If both a1

and a2 are equal to one, there is nothing but unemployment that will reduce the

real wage. In either case, expansionary monetary policy will reduce unemployment

only by producing a higher price level. Once again the decision whether to use

active monetary policy turns on the relative costs of inflation and

unemployment.

3.   Offsetting   Aggrepate Demand Shocks. Finally, suppose that the supply shock

is accompanied by aggregate demand disturbances that tend to produce

unemployment. Note that such disturbances would themselves tend to mitigate the

inflation caused by the supply shock. Here too the basic issue is the same:

expansive aggregate demand policy will reduce unemployment but produce more

inflation than there would otherwise have been. Whether such policy is justified

depends on the relative costs of inflation and   unemployment.
                                          13



        Side   Policies. In each circumstance in which the use of expansionary

                                    the recessiOnarY impact of a supply shock is
aggregate demand policy to offset
                                               weighting of the cost cf increased
considered above, the decision turns on a
                                                                           of
inflation against the benefit of lower unemployment. Supply side policies,
                                                                      to reduce
which a reduction in the payroll tax is the standard example, promise
                                                 2, such policies shift the aggregate
both inflation and unemployment. In Figure

supply curve down and to the right.
                                        the perfect answer to supply shocks, since
       Supply side policies thus seem
                                                   and uxiemploymeflt-cau5ed by the
they offset the two macro problems_—inflation
                                         desirable to have less inflation and less
supply shock. However, it is always
                                                                   level of
unemployment, so we need also to consider what determines the base

                                    If these instrumeflts-for instance the payroll
supply side policy instruments.
                                               benefit of raising the payroll tax is
tax——are set optimally, then the marginal
                                 raising it. Accordingly, it is unlikely that
equal to the marginal cost of
                                                                       offset the
 supply side policies can be deployed in strength and by themselves to
                                                   be necessary to use demand side
 effects of a supply shock. It will probably

 policics as well.



 IV.   Basic   Policy Issues.

       In the cases discussed above, it was assumed that the government's actions

                                     future policy actions. This convenient
 had no impact on expectations of
                                                                        it sets a
 assumption is untenable. When the Fed responds to a particular shock,
                                                                   behave in
 precedent that is likely to affect the way it is believed it will

 future episodes.
                                               shock may look desirable, there is an
        Even if accommodation of one supply
                                        the grounds that accommodation to inflationary
 argument against accommodation on
                                                                         level.
  shocks can become a habit. If so, the Fed loses control over the price
                                              19




  This in turn is likely to change the nature of private sector contracts, for

  Instance leading to more indexation which in itself will make future adaptation

  o supply shocks more difficult.

      The question here is what sort of price and wage behavior the Fed should try

  to induce. At one extreme, by running an erratic policy, the Fed could induce

  the private sector to insulate itself from monetary shocks and
                                                                          monetary policy.
 Prices and wages would, in the long run, become flexible.          But   there   do appear to
 be advantages —   difficult   to state convincingly —   to   having stability of nominal

 values. Thus it might be optimal for the Fed to have the goal of keeping the

 price level stable, following the monetary rule proposed by Henry Simons. With

 price level stability, real wage adjustment has to take place through nominal

 wage changes.

      Keynes's alternative (1936, pp. 270-271) was nominal wage stability,

 proposed as a policy rather than a description of behavior. He argued that

 monetary pulicy should aim to keep the nominal wage rising gently, with necessary

 changes in real wages being brought about by changes in the price level.

Successful stabilization of the average nominal wage is presumably self—

reinforcing, leading to sticky wage behavior as the norm.

     There is as yet no complete analysis of the appropriate choice of a monetary

standard. Choosing labor as the standard of value fits the traditional

prescription that the commodity in question be widely traded. But then so does

choosing goods in general as the standard of value. The typically long term

nature of labor contracts and    job   attachments suggests a preference for nominal

wage predictability. The analysis of this choice will turn also on the relative

ease of co—ordinating private sector responses to shocks with attractive monetary

standards.1'


Someof the issues are di3cussed in Fischer (1980).
                                      20



    Nothing said so far in this section relates particularly to supply shocks.

There is one special issue raised by the supply shocks of the last decade. That
                                          to what appears to be a new type of
is the question of the optimal response
                                                                            and
phenomenon. When neither the private nor the public sector knows the nature

consequences of a shock, responses of both are bound to be tentative. But the

government in general, and the Fed in particular. with its command over research

resources and information, is the natural leader in analyzing and carrying out

a response. Of course, the basis for its actions should be explained. But it

should take those actions that lead the private sector, with its conventional

reactions to shocks, towards equilibrium.
                                                 21



                                            References
 Bruno,   Michael. "Raw       materials, Profits, and the Productivity Slowdown,"

      National     Bureau   of   Economic Research Working Paper No. 660R, 1981

                   and   Jeffrey Sachs. "Input Price Shocks and the Slowdown in
      Economic Growh: The Case of UK Manufacturing," Review of Economic Studies,
      1982,   5,   (Special   Issue), 679—706.

 Fischer, Stanley. "On Activist Monetary Policy with Rational Expectations," in

     S. Fischer, ed., Rational Exiiectations and Economic Policy, Chicago:

     University of Chicago Press, 1980, Ch. 7.

Gordon, Robert J. "Alternative Responses of Policy to External Supply Shocks,"

     Brookings Papers on Econothic Activity, 1975, 1, 183—206.

Keynes, J.M. The General Theory of Emploent, Interest and Mone:L, London:

     Macmillan, 1936.

Marion, Nancy P. and Svensson, Lars E.O. "Structural Differences and

     Macroeconomic Adjustment to Oil Price Changes: A Three-Country Model

     Approach," March 1983, (miineo).

Phelps, Edmund S. "Commodity-Supply Shock and Full—Employment Monetary Policy,"

     Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, May 1978, 10, 206—221.

Pindyck, Robert S. "Energy Price Increases and Macroeconomic Policy," The Energy

     Journal, October 1980, 1, 1—20.

Rotemberg, Julio J. "Supply Shocks, Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy," M.I.T.,

     Energy Laboratory Working Paper, January 1982.

Sacha, Jeffrey. "Wages, Profits, and Macroeconomic Adjustment in the 1970's: A

     Comparative Study," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1979, 2, 269-

    319.

Solow, Robert M. "What to Do (Macroeconomically) When OPEC Comes," in S.

    Fischer, ed., Rational Expectations and Economic Policy, Chicago: University

    of Chicago Press, 1980, Ch. 8.
