                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DO FIRMS GO PUBLIC TO RAISE CAPITAL?

                                             Woojin Kim
                                          Michael S. Weisbach

                                          Working Paper 11197
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11197


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




Woojin Kim is a doctoral student at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Michael S. Weisbach
is the Stanley C. and Joan J. Golder Distinguished Chair in Finance at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign and a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We would like to thank
Bo Becker, Brian Henderson, Alexander Ljungqvist, Marco Pagano, Josh Pollet, and seminar participants
at the University of Illinois for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Woojin Kim and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Do Firms Go Public to Raise Capital?
Woojin Kim and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 11197
March 2005
JEL No. G3, F3

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper considers the question of whether raising capital is an important reason why firms go

public. Using a sample of 16,958 initial public offerings from 38 countries between 1990 and 2003,

we consider differences between firms that sell new, primary shares to the public, and existing

secondary shares that previously belonged to insiders. Our results suggest that the sale of primary

shares is correlated with a number of factors associated with the firm's demand for capital. In

particular, issuance of primary shares is correlated with higher increases of investment, higher

repayment of debt and increases in cash, and more subsequent capital-raising through seasoned

equity offers. Since 79% of all capital raised through IPOs in our sample is from the sale of primary

shares, we conclude that capital-raising is an important motive in the going-public decision.

Woojin Kim
340 Wohlers Hall
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820
wkim5@uiuc.edu

Michael S. Weisbach
340 Wohlers Hall
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
wesibach@uiuc.edu
        An initial public offering (IPO) is generally perceived as one of the most important milestones in

a firm’s lifecycle. It allows the firm to access the public equity markets for additional capital necessary to

fund future growth, while simultaneously providing a venue for the initial shareholders to sell their

ownership stake. From investors’ perspective, an IPO provides a popular choice for investors, although

the wisdom of investing in them has been challenged by academic evidence (see Ritter (1991)). It is no

wonder that IPOs, especially the large ones, draw so much attention from the press.

        Reflecting the importance of the going public decision, the academic literature on IPOs has been

voluminous. Yet, perhaps surprisingly, the vast majority of empirical literature has ignored the

underlying reasons why firms go public. Instead, it has focused on the underpricing, the long-run

performance, and the time-clustering of IPOs (see Jenkinson and Ljungqvist (2001) or Ritter (2003) for

surveys). Of the recent theoretical papers on the going-public decision, Chemmanur and Fulghieri (1999)

focus on the capital-raising aspect of an IPO while Zingales (1995) and Mello and Parsons (1998)

emphasize the sale of executives’ shares and eventual change of control. The extent to which these

various explanations explain actual firms’ reasons for going public is largely unexplored.

        The likely reason why there has been so little empirical work addressing the reasons for going

public is that the most straightforward way to study the issue would be to compare the characteristics of

firms that chose to go public with the firms that remained private. However, such a study would require

extensive data on private firms, which generally are not available. One paper that is able to use this

approach is Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998) (PPZ), which utilizes a database containing information

on 69 Italian firms that went public between 1982 and 1992, as well as a number of private Italian firms

that did not go public but met the listing requirements of the public exchanges during the same time

period. These authors conclude firms in their sample choose to go public not to finance future

investments and growth, but rather to rebalance their leverage and to allow the managers to liquidate their

positions.




                                                      1
        Although these findings may hold for the sample considered by PPZ, it is not obvious that their

results automatically extend to other countries and periods. For example, Mikkelson et al. (1997)

document that US IPOs are generally followed by a large growth in assets. While Mikkelson et al.

contains no explicit linkage between the firms’ growth to the capital raising involved with the IPO, this

finding is at least suggestive of the view that firms go public so that they can raise public equity capital to

finance growth. To understand the motivations behind going public, one must consider a larger sample

than that used by PPZ, preferably from a number of different countries. Unfortunately, the kind of data

on private companies that PPZ have access to is not readily available for most countries. Therefore, one

must use an alternative approach.

        One such approach is to consider cross-sectional patterns in a sample of IPOs. IPOs differ along

many dimensions; a particularly useful one for this purpose is the identity of the shares being offered to

the public for sale. Some IPOs involve primary offerings of new shares, while others consist of the

secondary sale of shares already held by insiders. A third group is made up of a combination of primary

and secondary offerings. It seems plausible that differences between primary and secondary offerings

could reflect differences in the underlying motivation of the IPO. In particular, IPOs that involve

secondary offerings are likely to be driven by a desire for liquidity by the firm’s executives, while

primary offerings are more likely to reflect a demand for capital.1 Of course these explanations are not

mutually exclusive. Any IPO, even one in which the primary motive is to raise capital, nonetheless

provides liquidity for executives and an IPO done as a secondary offering also allows the firm to raise

equity capital from public markets subsequently.

        This paper attempts to provide some insights into the underlying motives for IPOs by considering

differences between the primary, secondary and combined offerings. We test the hypothesis that primary

offerings are related to factors associated with the demand for capital, such as subsequent investment and


1
  Existing theoretical models do not seem to incorporate these differential motives simultaneously. For example,
Chemmanur and Fulghieri(1999)’s model considers sale of primary shares to fund a new investment project, while
Zingales(1995) and Mello and Parsons(1998) focus on the sale of secondary shares and does not model new
investment and production activity.


                                                        2
seasoned equity offers. The extent to which primary offerings are correlated in the data with factors

related to demand for capital measures the extent to which these offerings are motivated to raise capital.

In contrast, if secondary offerings are not associated with demand for capital by the firm, they are likely

motivated by factors that we cannot measure, such as executives’ desire for liquidity.

        First, we examine the distribution of types of shares offered at IPOs across countries using a

sample of 16,958 IPOs from 38 countries between 1990 and 2003. We find that the proportion of

secondary shares is the highest in European countries and the lowest in Asian countries excluding Japan.

The differences between countries and across regions seem economically large and potentially reflect

important differences in the economic institutions of these countries.

        We next relate the types of IPO offerings with the subsequent increases in various accounting

variables that are likely related to future investment and a firm’s financial condition. We find that

primary only offerings have the highest increases in all the variables, followed by combined offerings and

secondary only offerings. Moreover, the value of the primary offerings, normalized by assets, is

significantly correlated with increases in inventory, net property, plant and equipment (PPE), capital

expenditure and R & D expenditure up to four years after the IPO even after controlling for firm size, as

well as year, country, and industry fixed effects. In contrast, the value of the secondary offerings is

substantially less related to these variables. These findings suggest that a motivation for using primary

offerings is to raise capital, while IPOs done as secondary offerings reflect other motivations.

        We estimate the increase in a number of alternative accounting variables that represent possible

uses of the capital raised at the IPO. The largest increase is for cash holdings; for every dollar raised in

the IPO, cash holdings rise by 68.8 cents per dollar raised in the year after the IPO. This decreases to

50.0 cents over a four-year period after the IPO as the money is spent on various projects. The largest

expenditures appear to be on R&D and capital expenditures, which increase by 17.1 cents and 8.3 cents

respectively per dollar raised in the year following the IPO, and by 88.2 cents and 38.7 cents over a four-

year period. In addition, inventory rises as well (2.3 cents in the first year and 5.3 cents over a four-year

period) and long-term debt is reduced (4.2 cents in the first year and 10.4 cents over a four year period).


                                                      3
        We examine the extent to which these findings hold across geographical regions, and between

civil and common law countries. We find that firms in all countries appear to rely on IPOs to raise capital

to finance investment, although there are some differences across regions and legal regimes.

        Finally, we examine the extent to which IPO offer type is related to subsequent capital raising.

We first find that primary-only IPOs are generally followed by primary-only seasoned equity offerings

(SEOs) and secondary-only IPOs are generally followed by secondary-only SEOs. In particular, 65% of

SEOs that followed primary-only IPOs are also primary only and 64% of SEOs that followed secondary-

only IPOs are also secondary only. This finding supports the view that secondary offerings are more

related with liquidity motives. We also measure the value of capital raised following IPOs, and find that

the proportion of new capital out of total proceeds raised through SEOs is the highest for primary only

IPOs, followed by combined and secondary only IPOs. This finding holds both in a univariate setting,

and in a multivariate framework controlling for other relevant factors. These results show that both the

probability and the magnitude of subsequently raised fresh new capital following an IPO are positively

correlated with the relative proportion of primary offerings in the initial public offering. Presumably, the

IPOs done to raise capital as primary offerings are from firms with an ongoing demand for capital;

subsequent to the offering these firms are likely to reenter the equity market to raise more capital. In

contrast, when IPOs are done as secondary offerings for liquidity motives, then the firm is less likely to

have an ongoing demand for capital, so subsequent offerings are less likely to involve raising new capital.

        Overall, the results are consistent with the view that initial public offerings, when done through a

primary offering, are motivated in large part to raise capital. Firms doing primary offerings tend to have

higher increases in capital expenditures and R&D than firms doing secondary offerings. Subsequent to

the IPO, they raise more capital through SEOs than do firms doing secondary offerings. Since 79.4% of

the money raised in initial public offerings is through primary offerings, our findings suggest that demand

for capital is a primary motive for going public.

        Our results also have implications for the overall view of equity markets as a capital-raising tool.

Some authors, most notably La Porta et al. (1997) have argued that in much of the world, especially in


                                                      4
civil law countries, equity markets are not used very commonly to raise capital. Our findings suggest an

alternative conclusion; in these countries firms raise substantial quantities of equity capital through initial

public offerings. When they do so, they predominately use primary offerings, the proceeds of which are

then used to finance new investment.

          The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section I describes our data source and our sample.

Section II provides distribution of IPO offer types across the 38 countries. Section III presents the

distribution of subsequent increases in assets and expenditures for each of the 3 IPO offer types and

examines the relationship between IPO type and the increase. Section IV examines the effect of IPO offer

type on the probability and magnitude of subsequent capital raising activity. Section V is a short

conclusion.



I. Data Sources and Sample Description

A. Data Sources

          We obtain our IPO data from SDC Global New Issues Database. This database provides

information on total proceeds and the number of primary and secondary shares offered for each IPO and

SEO. WorldScope provides the accounting data for our sample IPOs. We augment WorldScope with

Standard and Poor’s Xpressfeed, which provides US and international data comparable to Compustat.

SDC has very limited coverage for non-US IPO’s prior to 1990, so we set our sample period to be from

January 1990 to December 2003.

          From all IPOs reported in SDC, we first filter out those that do not have information on total

number of shares or the composition of primary and secondary shares. We also exclude IPOs where the

total amount of proceeds is inconsistent with the offer price and the number of shares offered by more

than $5 million. A total of 2,301 IPOs were dropped using these initial filters. We then exclude the

following firms from our sample:

    (a)       All utilities (3 digit SIC's from 491 to 494) : 250 IPOs
    (b)       All financials(1 digit SIC 6) : 5,057 IPOs



                                                       5
    (c)      All privatizations : 173 IPOs.2
    (d)      All telecoms(2 digit SIC 48): 655 IPOs3
    (e)      All transition economies: 1,117 IPOs from China, Hungary and Poland
    (f)      All nations with fewer than 10 IPO's during the sample period: 89 IPOs from 32 countries

          These requirements are imposed to identify a sample of non-regulated private firms that go

public.4 After applying these filters, we end up with 16,958 IPOs in 38 countries, each occurring between

1990 and 2003.5

B. IPOs around the World

          Table I presents descriptive statistics of our global IPO sample. Panel A presents the number of

IPOs and panel B shows the total proceeds raised through IPOs for each region and year in our sample.

The U.S. is by far the largest IPO market, accounting for 27% of all IPOs and 45% of total proceeds.6

European IPOs are somewhat modest both in numbers and amount in early 1990’s, but start to pick up in

the mid 1990’s and surpass US in the number of total IPOs by late 1990’s. Asian IPOs peak in mid

1990’s and then drop significantly in 1998-99 after the financial crisis of 1997. Although Asian IPOs

comprise 37% in terms of numbers, they only account for 12% of the total proceeds, implying that Asian

IPOs are generally smaller on average than other IPOs.7




2
  The privatizations are identified from Boutchkova and Megginson (2000), Belke and Schneider (2003), and
Hoover's Online. For all IPOs which raised more than $100 million that are not identified as privatizations in the
previous two papers, we manually checked Hoover’s Online to verify whether the IPO was a privatization or not.
For those IPOs that were not identified on Hoover’s Online, we checked the company’s website if it had one as of
June 2004.
3
  Many of the telecom IPOs overlap with privatizations. When they do not, they tend to be very large joint ventures
between existing telecom giants.
4
  Cross listings such as ADR/ADS, GDR/GDS, or direct cross listings are included in the sample as long as it is
done concurrently with the domestic IPO or it is the first listing in any public exchange. Multiple issues are counted
as one IPO, and the total amount as well as the number of shares are aggregated after adjusting for differences in
offer prices.
5
  Roughly two-thirds of these IPOs do not have accounting information just prior to an IPO, partly because our
accounting data stops at 2001. We drop these IPOs in sections III and IV, but include them in section II.
6
  The amount raised through ADR/ADSs is included in the country of origin rather than in the U.S. Canadian
domestic IPOs from 1990 to 1992 are all dropped according to the initial filter, and their coverage stops at 2001 in
our dataset.
7
  Almost 60% of Asian IPOs are from India, and Indian IPOs tend to be very small. The median value of proceeds
in India is only US$ 0.7 million, compared to the global median of US$ 30 million.


                                                          6
II. Distribution of IPO offer types

        IPOs vary along a number of dimensions, an important one of which is the type of shares being

sold to the public. Firms have a choice of selling new, ‘primary’ shares, or existing, ‘secondary’ shares.

A primary offering increases the number of shares outstanding and raises capital for the firm, while

secondary offerings keep the number of shares outstanding constant and has no revenue consequences to

the firm. A third type of offering is a combination of the two, selling some new shares and some

previously-owned shares.

        Table II presents statistics on the three types of IPOs in our sample. Panel A shows the number

of IPOs that belong in each of the three categories, and panel B presents total proceeds from each type.

Panel B also separates combined offerings into primary shares and secondary shares and reports the

proceeds for each type within the combined category. Clearly, primary offerings are the most common,

comprising 76.2% of all offerings. Pure secondary offerings are relatively uncommon, making up only

1.7% of the sample, while the remaining 22.2% are combinations of primary and secondary offerings.

        Table II indicates that there are noticeable differences across countries and regions. For example,

most of the Asian IPOs offer primary shares only. Except for Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore, where

the financial markets are the most developed, primary only IPOs are well over 90% of the total IPOs in

Asia. Secondary only offerings are extremely rare in this region. Even combined offerings are not

common except in Japan and Hong Kong.

        Compared to Asian IPOs, European IPOs exhibit relatively higher percentages of secondary only

offerings, and lower percentage of primary only offerings. These differences probably reflect differences

in the institutional environment and are consistent with the high rate of secondary offerings in Europe that

has been documented elsewhere. In the PPZ sample, for example, of the 69 IPOs, only 28 were primary-

only offerings. Jenkinson and Ljungqvist (2001) report that 67% of IPOs in Portugal and 23% in

Germany were entirely secondary in the 1980s and early 1990s. In addition, Jenkinson and Ljungqvist

report that European IPOs have begun using a higher proportion of primary offerings since the early

1990s. Both the fact that Europe has traditionally had a high proportion of secondary offerings, as well as


                                                     7
the recent change towards primary offerings within Europe, suggest that perhaps the conclusions of PPZ

should be reexamined, since that study contains only 69 IPOs from one European country from the 1980s.

          We can infer the value raised from primary shares and secondary shares respectively by

separating out the proceeds from the combined category into those raised from primary shares and those

raised from secondary shares and adding them back into proceeds from primary only and secondary only

offerings. The last five columns of panel B in table II presents these calculations. Overall, 79% of the

total proceeds are fresh new capital raised through primary shares. However, there are distinct cross-

country variations. Except for Japan and Malaysia, roughly 90% or more of the total proceeds in Asian

IPOs are fresh new capital. In contrast, the proportion of fresh capital is smaller in European countries.

The lowest proportion is in France and Spain, where less than 60% of the total amount raised is from

primary shares. The U.S. falls between Europe and Asia, with 82% of capital being raised from primary

shares.



III. IPO Offer Type and Subsequent Growth

A. Univariate Analysis of Changes in Accounting Variables across IPO Offer Types

          Presumably, there are a number of reasons why firms differ in the type of shares they offer in an

IPO. The large differences across countries undoubtedly reflect institutional features of the particular

markets. Yet, in addition to these institutional features, it seems plausible that the underlying reasons for

going public will also affect the choice of what type of shares will be offered in an IPO. In particular, if a

firm chooses to go public so that its managers can sell their shares, we expect that the firm is likely to use

a secondary or combined offering. On the other hand, if it is going public to raise capital to be able to

fund investments or to rebalance its capital structure, then it likely would use a primary offering.

Our goal is to examine the view that differences in the underlying objectives of firms will lead to

differences in the types of shares being offered.

          We first compare the types of offers with changes in characteristics plausibly associated with

potential reasons for going public. We consider seven accounting variables that potentially proxy for


                                                      8
future investment and growth: total assets, inventory, net PPE, capital expenditure, R&D, cash, and

reduction in long-term debt. To minimize the impact of outliers, we focus on a logarithmic

transformation of each variable. For balance sheet items (total assets, inventory, net PPE and cash), we

calculate the log of one plus the change in each variable normalized by total assets prior to the IPO:

ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets0 ) + 1] , where V is the variable being measured, and years are normalized so that

year 0 is the fiscal year end just prior to the IPO and year t denotes number of years after year 0. For

income statement and cash flow statement items (capital expenditure, R&D and reduction in long-term

debt), we consider the log of one plus the accumulation in each variable since the IPO, normalized by

total assets prior to the IPO: ln[(∑ti =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] . As a consequence of this transformation, the

resulting distribution of each variable is more symmetric than it is without the transformation.

         Table III reports the means and medians of this normalized increase for each variable, broken

down by IPO offer type. This table computes these changes for periods between one year and four years

in length. It also presents t-statistics for comparisons of means between the primary-only and combined

groups, and between the combined and secondary-only groups.8

         Except for a few cases, increases are the largest in the primary only group, followed by the

combined group. IPOs that only offer secondary shares exhibit the lowest increases in most cases.

Moreover, these differences in increases in these variables between IPO offer types are generally

statistically significant.

         The accounting variables from Table III can be grouped into three categories, reflecting firm size

(total assets and inventory), investments (net property plant and equipment, capital expenditures, and

research and development), and financial flexibility (cash and long term debt reduction).9 The relation

between the increases of each category of variables and the type of shares offered can be interpreted

relatively easily.


8
 The bold letters in this table and in subsequent tables indicate statistical significance at less than the 5% level.
9
 Capital expenditures and reduction in long-term debt are directly taken from the cash flow statement, and reflect
cash outflows from investing and financing activities, respectively.


                                                           9
        The correlation between IPO type and the increases in the size variables (total assets and

inventory) probably reflects that primary offers are used at the fastest growing firms. Firms that are

growing the fastest probably have the greatest demand for external capital, to pay for both direct

investments and indirect investments in activities such as advertising, as well as to fund increased

working capital that could be reflected in the increases of inventories.

        While the correlation between increase in size and IPO type could come through a number of

channels, the correlation between the increases in the investment variables (net PPE, capital expenditures,

and research and development) and the type of IPO provides more direct evidence. In particular, it seems

likely that firms increasing investments most rapidly have the greatest demand for capital, and thus

choose to issue primary shares when they go public. A desire to fund investments in capital expenditures,

research and development, as well as elements of net property, plant and equipment could lead some

firms to go public. In contrast, firms that go public to allow managers to cash out through secondary

offers will have, on average, a lower demand for capital. As a result, we could observe the pattern

documented in Table III, in which primary offers are associated with higher increases in investment than

secondary offers.

        Finally, both the increases in cash holdings and cash outflows used to reduce long-term debt are

consistent with the view expressed by PPZ that firms go public to rebalance their capital structure. Firms

wanting to pay down debt or keep cash in reserve to preserve financial flexibility issue primary shares

when they go public to raise capital for this purpose. Consistent with this finding, the companies that

issue primary shares have the highest average debt to total capital ratios (0.75 vs. 0.68 for combined

offers and 0.62 for secondary offers) while after they go public, the order is reversed, the firms issuing

primary offers having the lowest debt to total capital ratios (0.37 for primary, 0.40 for combined, and 0.59

for secondary).

        In summary, the differences in normalized increases in the seven variables across different types

of IPO offerings for various horizons suggest that the firms in each group might have different




                                                     10
motivations for going public. Firms issuing primary shares appear to use the capital both to increase

investment, and to increase financial flexibility, presumably to be able to fund future investments.

        Yet, while these comparisons are suggestive, they omit at least four potentially important

considerations. First, Table II documents that type of IPO is highly correlated with the place of issue and

accounting variables are likely to be so as well, for no other reason than the fact that accounting is done

differently in different countries. Second, Jenkinson and Ljungqvist (2001) suggest that there has been a

secular trend towards primary issues at least in Europe, which should be controlled for econometrically.

Third, the univariate comparisons make no use of the quantity of equity that is issued, which certainly

could affect the use of the funds. Finally, we do not consider differences within the ‘combined’ category;

presumably a firm that issues 99% primary shares and 1% secondary is different from one that issues 99%

secondary and 1% primary. We next consider the normalized increases in our accounting variables in a

mutivariate setting, controlling for these factors.

B. Multivariate Analysis of Changes in Accounting Variables across IPO Offer Types

        To analyze the relation between IPO type and increases in the seven accounting variables, we use

a continuous rather than a discrete characterization of IPOs. This approach allows us to analyze explicitly

the relative proportion and values of secondary and primary shares. The hypothesis we test is that once

other relevant factors are controlled for, a dollar of new capital raised through a primary issue is

associated with a larger change in each accounting variable than a dollar going to managers through a

secondary issue.

        To test this hypothesis, we consider two alternative specifications. The first enters different kinds

of capital separately, to examine whether each kind of capital has a different effect on each accounting

variable. For convenience, we will refer to the proceeds from primary shares as ‘primary capital’ and

proceeds from the secondary shares as ‘secondary capital’. In particular, we estimate:

            primary capital                 secondary capital.  
Y = β 1 ln                  + 1 + β 2 ln                      + 1 + β ln[total assets ] + FE + ε   (1)
                                                                            3               0
                                                                  0  
            total assets 0                     total assets
                                               



                                                         11
where Y = ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets0 ) + 1] for V = total assets, inventory, net PPE or cash, and

            = ln[( ∑it =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] for V = capital expenditure, R&D or reduction in LT debt.

FE represents fixed effects and includes dummy variables for year, country and 2 digit SIC codes to

control for time, country and industry specific effects. Log of total assets is also included as an additional

control variable to capture any potential size related effect. We estimate this equation measuring changes

in accounting variables for varying periods of time up to four years after the IPO. In each case, each

variable is normalized by the book value of assets prior to the IPO.10

           Second, we consider a specification in which we enter the fraction of primary shares sold out of

total shares sold as an independent variable. This ratio equals one if only primary shares are offered, and

zero if only secondary shares are offered. Combined offerings have values between zero and one, with

mostly primary offerings being closer to one and mostly secondary being closer to zero. We estimate:

               primary shares offered            total proceeds 
     Y = γ1 ⋅                          + γ 2 ln                 + γ 3 ln[total assets 0 ] + FE + ξ       (2)
               total shares offered              total assets 0 

In addition to the fraction of primary shares sold, we also control for the proceeds of the IPO, scaled by

the company size, and also log of total assets as well as year, country and industry fixed effects. A finding

that the relative proportion of primary shares affects the increases in the accounting variables would

suggest that in cases where the firm issues primary shares, it does so at least partially to raise new capital.

           Specification (1) is structured to examine which of the two, the fresh capital raised or the

proceeds from the sale of secondary shares, has a larger effect on subsequent growth. Therefore, we

compare the relative magnitudes of β1 and β2 and test if the difference between the two is statistically

significantly different from zero. Specification (2) is focused directly on whether the fraction of primary

shares explains the increases in our dependent variables, once we control for the size of the IPO relative

to firm size. The value of fresh capital equals total proceeds multiplied by the relative proportion of

primary shares, and the value of secondary shares sold equals total proceeds multiplied by one minus this

10
  We exclude those IPOs where the value of the total asset prior to the IPO is less than 5% of the total proceeds
(2.9% of the sample) from the following regressions. Including these IPOs in the regressions yields similar results.


                                                              12
ratio. Thus, Specification (1) puts emphasis on combined effect of the relative proportion of primary

shares and total proceeds, whereas Specification (2) aims at picking up the pure effect of this proportion,

independent of the relative size of IPO.11

         Table IV presents estimates of these equations, but does not report the country, year, and industry

fixed effects for the sake of brevity. Panel A of Table IV, containing estimates of Specification (1),

indicates that fresh capital has a much stronger relation with the increases of all seven dependent variables

than does the proceeds from secondary shares. The effect of fresh capital on the normalized changes in

the accounting variables is positive and statistically significantly different from zero in each specification.

In contrast, the coefficient on secondary capital is substantially and statistically smaller in each

specification and is generally close to zero, although it is statistically positive in some specifications.

This effect is consistent with the capital raising motivation for the IPO, as the firms with increasing

expenditures are the ones raising primary rather than secondary capital. It also suggests that our equation

is picking up the uses of the funds and not some spurious relation arising from econometric

misspecification.

         This pattern is confirmed by the estimates of Specification (2) in Panel B of Table IV. In this

specification, we include the log of proceeds normalized by assets, as well as the fraction of primary

shares in the offering. With each choice of dependent variable, the coefficient on the relative proportion

of primary shares is positive and significantly different from zero, suggesting that primary shares are

positively related to increases in accounting variables. In addition, the coefficient on the log of proceeds

is consistently positive. The results from this panel confirm that firms increase their expenditures when

proceeds are higher in the IPO, and when fresh capital is brought into the firm.

         Comparing the coefficients for the equations representing different time horizons used in

computing the dependent variables, there is a consistent pattern. For the equations representing changes

in expenditures on inventory, PPE, capital expenditures, and R&D, the coefficients on primary capital

11
  We have also estimated these equations including firm age as another independent variable with similar results.
This variable is only available for approximately 1/3 of the sample, so we choose to report the results without this
variable in the equation.


                                                          13
(from Panel A) and on proceeds (from Panel B) are all increasing over time. This pattern suggests that

the capital raised is not used all at once but rather partially saved and used in the future. Consistent with

this pattern is the fact that the corresponding coefficients on changes in cash holdings have the opposite

pattern in each table. These coefficients decrease with the time horizon of the dependent variables,

suggesting that firms initially hold the capital as cash and pay it down over time.

         A useful way to compare the effects of new cash across different uses is to calculate from each

equation the change in the accounting variable implied from a dollar increase in new capital. This value

provides a consistent way of comparing the relative importance of alternative uses of the cash raised.12

We present the results of this calculation in Panel A of Table IV.13 For the total assets variable, the

implied changes are all close to 1, which is not surprising since the book value of assets mechanically

increases dollar for dollar whenever new capital is raised. Nonetheless, the fact that the implied change in

assets for a dollar raised is close to a dollar suggests that the specification we use is picking up real rather

than spurious effects.

         For the other variables, the implied change per dollar raised is largest for the change in cash

holdings. In year 1, firms hold 68.8 cents in cash for every dollar they raise, decreasing over time to 50

cents. The implied fraction spent on inventory, net PPE, capital expenditures, R&D, and debt reduction

all increases over time. This effect is likely due to firms spending cash acquired in the IPO over a several

year time period, as well as to firms that raise primary capital being more likely to raise subsequent

capital in the years following the IPO.

         This calculation also provides insights into the relative use of the funds raised in the IPO. In the

first year after the IPO, it implies that for every dollar raised, R&D increases by 17.1 cents, capital
12
   The calculations are based on a median-sized firm in 1996 in US with 2 digit SIC 73 (business services). For
example, dollar changes in inventory for t = 1 is calculated as follows: Median primary capital is 24, median
secondary capital is 0, and median total assets prior to IPO are 24.453. (All units are in $US mil). Using these inputs
together with coefficients from table IV yields -0.00083 as the predicted value of the log transformation, implying a
predicted change of -0.0203 in inventory. Then we add one to median primary capital and repeat the above
procedure, which results in a predicted change of 0.00251 in inventory. The difference in the two predicted changes
represents the dollar changes in inventory for 1 unit increase in primary capital, which is given by 0.02281.
13
   We restrict this calculation to Specification (1) because to do so in Specification (2) would be complicated by the
fact that an extra dollar of primary capital would affect both the relative proportion of primary shares and total
proceeds.


                                                          14
expenditures by 8.3 cents, net PPE by 9.3 cents, inventory by 2.3 cents, and debt is reduced by 4.2 cents.

These numbers rise over time, so that over a four-year period, for each dollar raised in the IPO, R&D rises

by 88.2 cents, capital expenditures by 38.7 cents, PPE by 24.8 cents, inventory by 5.3 cents, and debt is

reduced by 10.4 cents. The relative use of the funds seems clear; by far the largest fraction of money

raised in the IPO is used to fund R&D and capital expenditures. A much smaller fraction is used to

increase inventories and reduce debt.

        Raising capital to fund future growth has been suggested in the literature as an important reason

for going public. We interpret the results in this section as supporting this hypothesis for most IPOs,

since the majority of new capital (79%), is from the sale of primary shares. As the proportion of primary

shares increases, IPOs appear to be mainly aimed at raising capital to fund future growth. The largest

uses of the funding appear to be R&D and capital expenditures. On the other hand, as the proportion of

secondary shares increases, the motive for funding future investment diminishes. We conjecture that in

this case the major motive might be something else, such as eventually selling out the company or

obtaining liquidity and diversification.

C. International Differences in Capital-Raising at IPOs

Differences across Regions.

        The results just presented suggest that firms around the world issue more primary shares when

they have a demand for capital. However, there are well-known differences across countries in terms of

how their firms raise capital, their reliance on equity vs. debt markets, and even the types of shares

offered in an IPO (see Table II). It is plausible that the underlying reasons for IPOs could differ across

regions given the wide variation observed in the institutional structure of financial markets.

        To examine whether the underlying reasons for IPOs differ across regions, we break the sample

into subsamples based on regions. To ensure sufficient data, we focus on three broad regions. We group

North American companies (US and Canada) into one region, European companies into a second, and

Asian companies into a third.




                                                     15
         For each region, we reestimate Specification (1) from Table IV. We present the results for four

of the dependent variables for each of the four time-periods for each region in Panels A-C of Table V.14

Panel A contains the results for the U.S. and Canada, Panel B for Europe, and Panel C for Asia.

         The results for the U.S. and Canada closely mirror those for the entire sample. In each case, the

coefficients for primary capital are positive and statistically larger than both zero and the coefficient on

secondary capital. The coefficients on change in cash holdings decline with time period length, while the

coefficients on R&D, capital expenditures, and debt reduction increase with the time period. The

magnitudes of the effects are similar to the entire sample as well. The change in cash holdings per dollar

raised declines from 72.2 cents to 46.5 cents, R&D increases from 15.4 cents to 87.2 cents, capital

expenditures increase from 7.9 cents to 39.4 cents, and debt reduction increases from 4.5 cents to 10.2

cents.

         The estimates for Europe are similar to those reported for the entire sample except that there is no

evidence that firms use their new capital to reduce debt in Europe. The magnitude of the effect for R&D

and capital expenditures again is increasing with the time horizon, although it seems to be of a smaller

magnitude to the entire sample and to the North American subsample.15 The effect for cash holdings is

also similar except that, unlike for the entire sample and the North American subsample, it increases when

a four-year horizon is used.

         The estimates for Asia are based on substantially smaller samples than for North America and

Europe due to data availability. Thus, statistical significance is not as consistent and the patterns of

coefficients’ sizes are less clear. Nonetheless, it is evident that in Asia as well, firms that go public using

primary offerings increase their expenditures on items reflected in the accounting variables we choose,

while there is essentially no effect from capital raised through secondary offerings. Interestingly, Asian


14
   We have estimated these equations for each region using the other three dependent variables presented in Table
IV, as well as for all seven dependent variables using Specification (2). We omit these results to conserve on space.
The results are similar to those reported.
15
   We test the cross equation restriction that coefficients for the primary capital are the same in both regions,
allowing for differences in constant terms, and find that the effects are significantly larger in US and Canada for the
first two years, but not for longer periods than two years.


                                                          16
firms show dramatic increases in capital expenditures and the effect on R&D is close to zero, which may

reflect the characteristics of the industrialization process in the manufacturing sector of this region. Thus,

it appears that in all regions, raising capital is an important reason why firms go public.

Common vs. Civil Law.

        Another possibility is that international differences in capital-raising are not due to geographic

differences, but rather due to differences in legal systems. In a well-known paper, La Porta et al. (1997)

suggest that countries with a legal system based on common law protect their shareholders well and their

companies are more likely to finance investments through equity. In contrast, companies in countries

with a legal system based on civil law are more likely to finance investment with debt, since shareholders

are less well-protected and it is more difficult to raise equity. This argument would suggest that when

IPOs do occur in civil law countries, the motive is more often to provide liquidity for executives, while in

common law countries, the motive would be more often to raise capital.

        To examine this possibility, we reestimate our model pooling firms by the legal system in which

they operate. In Panel D of Table V, we present estimates of Equation (1) for common law firms, while

in Panel E of Table V, we present corresponding estimates for Civil Law firms.

        Comparing the two panels, it is evident that there are many more observations from Common

Law countries than from Civil Law countries because of the large number of IPOs in the U.S., and for the

availability of data for more firms in the U.S. and in the U.K. Yet, it appears from Panel E that when

Civil Law firms go public, they do so to raise capital as well. The coefficients on change in cash, R&D,

and capital expenditures are all positive, although of a smaller magnitude than for common law countries.

But still, they have the same temporal pattern; the change in cash for each dollar raised decreases with the

time horizon while the change in R&D and capital expenditures per dollar raised increases with the time

horizon. The one difference between the equations in the two panels is that there is evidence that

common law firms reduce debt with the cash they raise but civil law firms do not.

        We test the cross-equation restriction that the coefficient on fresh capital is the same for common

law firms as for civil law firms, allowing each legal regime to have a different constant term. We find that


                                                      17
we can reject the hypothesis that they are equal at the 5% level for slightly less than half of the equations,

especially for R&D and cash holdings.16

           It is commonly argued that a major difference between common law and civil law firms is that

common law firms are more reliant on equity markets for financing than are civil law firms. Perhaps this

claim is true for firms that are already public. The fact that more firms do go public in common law

countries than in civil law countries is consistent with this view. However, our findings suggest that

when civil law firms do go public, they do so to raise capital in a similar manner to common law firms.



IV. IPO Offer Type and Subsequent Equity Offerings

           We have argued that in a cross-section of IPOs, firms’ reasons for going public should be

reflected in the identity of shares they sell to the public. Consistent with this argument are previous

results showing that firms issuing primary shares have larger increase in a number of variables such as

capital expenditures and research and development. An additional prediction of this argument is that

firms choosing to issue primary shares, which presumably have higher demand for capital than firms

issuing secondary shares, will raise more capital in other ways than firms issuing secondary shares. We

do not have data on bank loans for our sample and firms issuing an IPO typically do not have access to

the public debt markets immediately after going public. Therefore, we focus our analysis on the question

of whether firms that have IPOs reenter the public equity market and raise capital through a seasoned

equity offer following the IPO.

A. Univariate Tests

           Table VI presents the total proceeds and fresh capital raised through SEOs during the two years

following an IPO for each of the three IPO offer types, as well as for the entire sample. The total

proceeds and fresh capital from original IPOs are also provided for comparison. The last seven columns

show the number of SEOs by SEO offer type and also by IPO offer type.



16
     For inventory, common law countries exhibit smaller coefficients than civil law countries.


                                                           18
        Conditional on there being an SEO within two years of an IPO, the proportion of fresh capital out

of total proceeds raised at SEOs is the lowest when the original IPO offering is secondary. Only 6% of

the total proceeds from SEOs are fresh capital if the original IPO offer is secondary only. Out of 56 SEOs

that followed the secondary-only IPOs, 64% of them again offered only secondary shares, strongly

suggesting that the original IPO was indeed motivated by intentions to eventually sell out. In contrast,

for primary-only IPOs, fresh capital raised at the SEO stage accounts for 56% of the total proceeds. Out

of 2,386 SEOs that followed the primary-only IPO, 65% of them again offered primary shares only,

implying that original IPO was motivated by demand for capital rather than to obtain liquidity.

        Overall, there is a clear pattern to these data. Firms in general are more likely to issue secondary

shares at an SEO than at an IPO. However, firms that issue primary shares at the IPO are much more

likely to issue them again at the SEO. This finding is consistent with the argument that firms that issue

primary shares have a higher demand for capital than those issuing secondary shares, suggesting that

these firms go public at least in part to facilitate capital raising.

B. Multivariate Tests

        We next consider the relation between IPO offer type and subsequent equity offerings in a

multivariate context. To do so, we consider specifications similar to those estimated in Table IV, except

that the dependent variable reflects subsequent capital raising. We report results using both

Specifications (1) and (2), and for the entire sample and also for the subsample of combined offerings. As

in the equations reported in Table IV, all equations include fixed effects capturing year effects, country

effects and industry effects.

        In Panel A-1 of Table VII, we estimate the probability of raising new capital through an SEO in

the two years following the IPO. Our dependent variable equals one if the firm raises new capital through

an SEO in the two years following the IPO, and zero otherwise. Because this dependent variable is

dichotomous, we estimate this equation by logit. Second, in Panel A-2 of Table VII, we estimate the

quantity of new capital raised in the two years following the IPO normalized by the total asset. This

variable is censored at zero, so we estimate the equation using Tobit. Finally, in Panel A-3, the dependent


                                                        19
variable is the number of SEOs that raised new capital within 2 years of an IPO. This variable is also

censored, so we also estimate this equation by Tobit.

        In Panel B of Table VII, we test the hypothesis that as more secondary shares are offered at IPOs,

the subsequent SEOs will also tend to sell more secondary shares. Specifically, we replace the dependent

variables in Panels A-1, A-2 and A-3 with the probability of an at least partially secondary SEO (B-1), the

secondary value raised in an SEO (B-2), and the number of at least partially secondary SEOs (B-3). Here,

we expect the opposite pattern from that of Panel A; in particular, negative or insignificant coefficients

for the value of the new capital raised at the IPO, but significantly positive coefficient for value of

secondary shares sold at the IPO. Similarly, we also expect the coefficient for the relative proportion of

primary shares to be significantly negative.

        Our estimates in Panel A-1 indicate that the probability of raising new equity capital subsequent

to an IPO is significantly positively correlated with the new capital raised at IPO for combined offerings,

although the coefficient is insignificant when we use all 3 types of IPOs in the regression. In

specification (2) however, the coefficients for relative proportion of primary shares are significantly

positive when all 3 IPO types are used as well as when only the combined IPOs are used.

        The tobit estimates in Panel A-2 exhibit similar and clearer results. Here, we find that the

magnitude of the new capital raised subsequent to an IPO is significantly positively related to the quantity

of fresh capital raised at the IPO, as well as to the proportion of primary offerings at IPO. Panel A-3,

where the dependent variable is the number of SEOs that raised new capital, contains similar results.

        Panels B-1, B-2, and B-3 present estimates of similar equations to those in Panels A-1, A-2 and

A-3, except that the dependent variables are the number and proceeds of secondary shares from SEOs

rather than the number and proceeds of new capital raising SEOs. The estimates in these panels indicate

that the number of secondary offerings at the SEO stage and the quantity of secondary capital raised in

these offerings is generally positively related to the sale of secondary shares in the original IPO.

        Overall, the multivariate analysis suggests that as the relative proportion of new capital raised in

the IPO increases, the probability, value of capital raised, and the frequency of subsequent offerings


                                                      20
raising new capital through an SEO all increase. In contrast, when the original IPO involves secondary

shares, follow up offerings also are more likely to involve offerings of secondary shares. These results

are also consistent with earlier arguments that demand for capital is an important determinant of the type

of shares offered in an IPO. When the IPO offers primary shares, as in the majority of IPOs, there

appears to be a relatively high demand for capital. This finding is consistent with capital raising being an

important determinant of the going-public decision for these firms.



V. Conclusion

        Initial public offerings are one of the most visible and most studied events in finance. Yet, the

basic question of why firms go public has received astonishingly little attention from the empirical

literature. We provide some evidence on this question, using a sample of 16,958 IPOs from 38 countries.

Our approach is to recognize that IPOs differ in the type of shares they offer to the public. Some IPOs

sell exclusively new, ‘primary’ shares, others sell exclusively ‘secondary’ shares held by insiders, while a

third type sells a combination of the two. By comparing the types of IPOs, we are able to provide insight

into how the motives for going public vary across types.

        We first document some basic facts about the relative proportion of primary and secondary shares

offered at the IPO. While firms in most countries issue a majority of primary shares, the proportion varies

noticeably across countries, being lowest in European countries and the highest in Asian countries other

than Japan.

        Next, we test whether the choice of type of shares to issue can explain the differences in

normalized increases across firms in a number of accounting variables that are likely to proxy for future

growth and investment. Using both univariate and multivariate tests, we find that the amount of primary

offerings are significantly correlated with increases in inventory, net property, plant and equipment (PPE),

capital expenditures and R & D expenditures up to 4 years after the IPO, whereas the amount of

secondary offerings have little or no explanatory power. The largest expenditures are on R&D and capital

expenditures. We also find that primary offerings are more likely than secondary offerings to lead to

                                                     21
reductions in debt levels and increases in cash, which presumably ease potential financial constraints

facing the firms.

        Companies appear to save much of the cash raised and pay it out over a several year period. For

each dollar raised, about 69 cents is kept as cash in the first year, declining to 50 cents in year four.

Expenditures rise over time; R&D expenditures increase by 17 cents per dollar raised in the first year,

increasing to 88 cents in year four. This relation between capital acquired in the IPO and subsequent

expenditures holds in different regions of the world, and in countries with both common and civil law.

        Finally, we examine the effect of IPO offer type on subsequent equity capital-raising activities.

Again using both univariate and multivariate tests, we find that the probability and the magnitude of

subsequently raised fresh capital through an SEO within two years of an IPO are positively correlated

with the proportion of primary offerings.

        Our conclusion is that firms offering primary shares appear to be associated with a higher demand

for capital than firms offering secondary shares to the public. Since most IPOs offer at least some

primary shares and primary shares represent 79% of the value of the shares sold to the public, this

suggests that capital-raising is an important motive for going public. We emphasize that this conclusion

is counter to the received wisdom of the profession, which argues that raising capital is not an important

reason for going public (see Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998)).

        The ability of equity markets to provide financing for firms outside the U.S. and the U.K. has

been widely questioned (see La Porta et al. (1997)). Yet, we find that primary offerings are the

predominate form of IPO in most of the world, and primary offerings appear to be correlated with a

number of factors measuring the demand for capital. These findings are at least suggestive of the idea

that firms around the world do in fact use equity markets to raise capital for investment. The extent to

which they do so, and the factors that determine across countries the differences in equity markets are

important issues not analyzed here, and of course would be good topics for future research.




                                                       22
                                                References



Belke, Ansgar and Friedrich Schneider, 2003, Privatization in Austria: Some Theoretical Reasons and
        First Results about the Privatization Proceeds, Privatization Experiences in the EU-Part II,
        November 1-2, CESifo, Villa La Collina, Cadenabbia/Italy.
Boutchkova, Maria K. and William L. Megginson, 2000, Privatization and the Rise of Global Capital
        Markets, Financial Management Winter 2000, 31-76
Chemmanur, Thomas J. and Paolo Fulghieri, 1999, A Theory of the Going Public Decision, Review of
        Financial Studies 12, 249-279
Jenkinson, Tim and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2001, Going Public: The Theory and Evindence on How
        Companies Raise Equity Finance, 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, Legal
        Determinants of External Finance, Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150
Mello, A. S. and J. E. Parsons, 1998, Going Public and the Ownership Structure of the Firm, Journal of
        Financial Economics 49, 79-109
Mikkelson, Wayne H., Megan Partch, and Ken Shah, 1997, Ownership and operating performance of
        companies that go public, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 281-308.
Pagano, Marco, Panetta, Fabio, and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Why Do Companies Go Public? An Empirical
        Analysis, Journal of Finance 53, 27-64.
Ritter, Jay, 1991, The long-run performance of initial public offerings, Journal of Finance, 46, 3-27.
Ritter, Jay, 2003, Investment banking and security issuance, in Handbook of the Economics of Finance,
        edited by Constantinides, Harris and Stulz, North-Holland: Amsterdam.
Zingales, Luigi, 1995, Insider Ownership and the Decision to Go Public, Review of Economic Studies 62,
        425-448




                                                    23
                                                  Table I
                                     Sample Descriptive Statistics
This table presents the descriptive statistics for the sample. Panel A presents number of IPOs and Panel B
shows the total proceeds raised through IPOs across different regions in the sample. The last row in each
panel shows the percentages. The sample period is from 1990 to 2003.

                                          Panel A: Number of IPOs
        Asia                  Australia      Cont’l
Year (ex Japan)      Japan     & NZ          Europe     UK      Latin Am        US      Canada    Total
1990        67           3           4             13                            152         3      242
1991       317          55           4             28       2          6         299         2      713
1992       534          17          26             26      15          9         410         4    1,041
1993       717          83          58             45      17         17         523      169     1,629
1994     1,172         135          92             77      90         33         445      161     2,205
1995     1,090         166          27             91      47          6         461      126     2,014
1996       899         139          51           128     143          15         668      198     2,241
1997       223         131          57           200     121          11         449      202     1,394
1998        84          76          26           242       60          3         247      131       869
1999       135          95          84           369       32          3         395       88     1,201
2000       322         189        126            396     168           6         313      102     1,622
2001       209         142          45           110       70          3          70       30       679
2002       221         109          55             53      51          1          64         1      555
2003       254         106          73             23      42          3          51         1      553

Total      6,244     1,446         728         1,801          858      116     4,547     1,218   16,958
 %          36.8       8.5         4.3          10.6          5.1      0.7      26.8       7.2    100.0

                       Panel B: Total Amount of Proceeds (US$ mil) raised at IPOs
           Asia               Australia   Cont’l
Year    (ex Japan)   Japan      & NZ      Europe      UK     Latin Am       US          Canada    Total
1990        1,193       832          23        448                          4,245           70     6,811
1991        3,001     3,657        196       1,522      201       587     10,506            43    19,711
1992        3,821       396      1,533         774    1,278       509     16,471            71    24,853
1993        4,524     3,606        909       3,366      567     1,663     19,600         2,916    37,151
1994        9,436     6,298      2,433       4,252    4,323     2,100     15,005         2,114    45,961
1995        7,822     7,385      1,206     10,786     2,318       717     21,844           886    52,964
1996        6,262     5,435      1,165       9,903    5,467       944     32,688         1,691    63,555
1997        7,845     2,174      1,094     10,955     5,566     1,157     23,693         2,717    55,201
1998        1,645     2,148        209     15,093     5,328         44    19,341         1,278    45,086
1999        7,129     5,152      1,226     25,893     3,853       383     42,751           438    86,824
2000        5,123    10,854      1,336     34,847     6,534       692     32,866         1,283    93,534
2001        5,920     4,180        453       5,578    1,769     1,813     22,265           531    42,509
2002        4,794     2,204        506       3,084    3,539       122     11,813             1    26,063
2003        4,418     4,221      2,221         254    2,856         81      6,734            1    20,785

Total     72,932     58,543     14,509       126,754        43,598   10,812   279,822   14,038   621,009
 %          11.7        9.4        2.3          20.4           7.0      1.7      45.1      2.3     100.0


                                                       24
                                                Table II
                                   Distribution of IPO Offer Types
This table presents the distribution of IPO offer types across the countries in our sample. An IPO is
characterized as primary only, secondary only or combined offering, according to the type(s) of shares
being sold. Panel A presents the number of IPOs and Panel B shows the total proceeds. The percentages
are reported in parentheses. The sample period is from 1990 to 2003.

                                     Panel A: Number of IPOs
Region      Nation           Primary only       Secondary only          Combined         Total issues
                            Number      %      number      %         number    %          number
Asia     Hong Kong             432 (81.1)           2     (0.4)          99   (18.6)          533
         India               3,582 (97.7)          53     (1.4)          30    (0.8)        3,665
         Indonesia             148 (98.7)           1     (0.7)           1    (0.7)          150
         Malaysia              388 (93.3)           7     (1.7)          21    (5.0)          416
         Pakistan              177 (99.4)           1     (0.6)                               178
         Philippines            57 (95.0)                                 3      (5.0)          60
         Singapore             275 (89.9)           3     (1.0)          28      (9.2)        306
         South Korea           280 (99.6)                                 1      (0.4)        281
         Taiwan                454 (99.3)           2     (0.4)           1      (0.2)        457
         Thailand              197 (99.5)                                 1      (0.5)        198
         Japan                 196 (13.6)           9     (0.6)       1,241     (85.8)      1,446
Pacific  Australia             602 (87.6)          20     (2.9)          65      (9.5)        687
         New Zealand            35 (85.4)           2     (4.9)           4      (9.8)          41
Europe   Austria                28 (71.8)           2     (5.1)           9     (23.1)          39
         Belgium                29 (64.4)           1     (2.2)          15     (33.3)          45
         Denmark                31 (64.6)           2     (4.2)          15     (31.3)          48
         Finland                29 (60.4)           4     (8.3)          15     (31.3)          48
         France                387 (78.7)          37     (7.5)          68     (13.8)        492
         Germany               256 (65.0)           7     (1.8)         131     (33.2)        394
         Greece                126 (96.9)                                 4      (3.1)        130
         Ireland                18 (72.0)                                 7     (28.0)          25
         Israel                 77 (77.8)                                22     (22.2)          99
         Italy                  68 (54.8)          10     (8.1)          46     (37.1)        124
         Netherlands            36 (46.2)           6     (7.7)          36     (46.2)          78
         Norway                 73 (92.4)                                 6      (7.6)          79
         Portugal                7 (70.0)           3    (30.0)                                 10
         Spain                  21 (60.0)           8    (22.9)           6     (17.1)          35
         Sweden                 53 (58.2)          11    (12.1)          27     (29.7)          91
         Switzerland            26 (50.0)           8    (15.4)          18     (34.6)          52
         UK                    751 (87.5)           9     (1.0)          98     (11.4)        858
         Turkey                 11 (91.7)           1     (8.3)                                 12
Latin Am Argentina               6 (46.2)           4    (30.8)           3     (23.1)          13
         Bermuda                14 (73.7)                                 5     (26.3)          19
         Brazil                 10 (66.7)           2    (13.3)           3     (20.0)          15
         Chile                  14 (87.5)           1     (6.3)           1      (6.3)          16
         Mexico                 29 (54.7)           4     (7.5)          20     (37.7)          53
North Am Canada                897 (73.6)           9     (0.7)         312     (25.6)      1,218
         US                  3,096 (68.1)          53     (1.2)       1,398     (30.7)      4,547
            Total            12,916    (76.2)       282      (1.7)    3,760     (22.2)      16,958


                                                  25
Table II  Continued
                                                      Panel B: Total Amount of Proceeds (US$ mil)
Region   Nation            Primary        Secondary          Combined (primary & secondary) offerings              Total          Total       Total
                        only offerings   only offerings      primary        secondary      combined total         Primary       Secondary    issues
                       amount %          amount %          amount %       amount %           amount %         amount %        amount %      amount
Asia     Hong Kong      11,121 (85.7)         63 (0.5)      1,240 (9.6)      551 (4.2)        1,791 (13.8)     12,361 (95.3)     614 (4.7) 12,976
         India           6,479 (94.0)         93 (1.3)        147 (2.1)      171 (2.5)          318 (4.6)       6,626 (96.2)     264 (3.8)     6,889
         Indonesia       5,418 (90.6)       155 (2.6)         343 (5.7)        66 (1.1)         410 (6.8)       5,762 (96.3)     222 (3.7)     5,983
         Malaysia        3,294 (74.7)       631 (14.3)        241 (5.5)      244 (5.5)          485 (11.0)      3,534 (80.2)     875 (19.8)    4,409
         Pakistan          628 (88.2)         84 (11.8)                                                           628 (88.2)      84 (11.8)      711
         Philippines     1,723 (94.5)                           66 (3.6)       35 (1.9)         101 (5.5)       1,790 (98.1)      35 (1.9)     1,824
         Singapore       4,756 (87.7)       303 (5.6)         271 (5.0)        94 (1.7)         365 (6.7)       5,027 (92.7)     397 (7.3)     5,424
         South Korea    18,550 (99.8)                           10 (0.1)       24 (0.1)           35 (0.2)     18,560 (99.9)      24 (0.1) 18,585
         Taiwan         11,421 (99.5)         53 (0.5)           4 (0.0)        1 (0.0)            5 (0.0)     11,425 (99.5)      54 (0.5) 11,479
         Thailand        4,648 (99.9)                            4 (0.1)        1 (0.0)            4 (0.1)      4,651 (100.0)      1 (0.0)     4,652
         Japan           6,937 (11.9)       246 (0.4) 31,253 (53.4) 20,106 (34.3)            51,359 (87.7)     38,191 (65.2) 20,352 (34.8) 58,543
Pacific  Australia       9,846 (73.8)     1,477 (11.1)         647 (4.9) 1,370 (10.3)         2,018 (15.1)     10,493 (78.7)   2,848 (21.3) 13,341
         New Zealand       811 (69.4)       128 (11.0)          39 (3.3)      190 (16.3)        229 (19.6)        850 (72.7)     319 (27.3)    1,168
Europe   Austria         1,140 (57.5)       417 (21.0)         229 (11.6)     197 (9.9)         426 (21.5)      1,370 (69.1)     614 (30.9)    1,984
         Belgium         3,345 (58.8)     1,610 (28.3)        445 (7.8)       289 (5.1)         734 (12.9)      3,790 (66.6)   1,899 (33.4)    5,689
         Denmark         1,323 (49.9)         88 (3.3)        457 (17.2)      786 (29.6)      1,243 (46.8)      1,780 (67.1)     874 (32.9)    2,654
         Finland           960 (41.7)       366 (15.9)        491 (21.3)      484 (21.0)        976 (42.4)      1,452 (63.1)     850 (36.9)    2,302
         France          7,890 (46.3)     3,069 (18.0)      1,478 (8.7) 4,588 (26.9)          6,066 (35.6)      9,368 (55.0)   7,656 (45.0) 17,025
         Germany        16,851 (51.8)       917 (2.8)       5,736 (17.6) 9,029 (27.8)        14,765 (45.4)     22,587 (69.4)   9,946 (30.6) 32,533
         Greece          3,057 (97.3)                           57 (1.8)       29 (0.9)           86 (2.7)      3,114 (99.1)      29 (0.9)     3,143
         Ireland           456 (45.9)                         362 (36.5)      175 (17.6)        537 (54.1)        818 (82.4)     175 (17.6)      993
         Israel          1,912 (66.0)                          704 (24.3)     282 (9.7)         986 (34.0)      2,615 (90.3)     282 (9.7)     2,898
         Italy           4,173 (43.7)     1,621 (17.0)      2,076 (21.7) 1,685 (17.6)         3,761 (39.4)      6,248 (65.4)   3,307 (34.6)    9,555
         Netherlands     5,484 (39.3)     2,197 (15.7)      3,790 (27.1) 2,500 (17.9)         6,290 (45.0)      9,274 (66.4)   4,697 (33.6) 13,971
         Norway          1,794 (71.0)                         554 (21.9)      180 (7.1)         734 (29.0)      2,348 (92.9)     180 (7.1)     2,528
         Portugal          583 (72.5)       221 (27.5)                                                            583 (72.5)     221 (27.5)      805
         Spain           3,208 (41.3)     2,984 (38.4)        609 (7.8)       964 (12.4)      1,573 (20.3)      3,817 (49.1)   3,949 (50.9)    7,765
         Sweden          7,378 (74.2)       710 (7.1)         893 (9.0)       962 (9.7)       1,854 (18.7)      8,271 (83.2)   1,672 (16.8)    9,943
         Switzerland     8,240 (65.5)     1,960 (15.6)         914 (7.3) 1,469 (11.7)         2,382 (18.9)      9,154 (72.8)   3,429 (27.2) 12,583
         UK             24,697 (56.6)     2,637 (6.0)       8,705 (20.0) 7,558 (17.3)        16,264 (37.3)     33,403 (76.6) 10,196 (23.4) 43,598
         Turkey            359 (93.0)         27 (7.0)                                                            359 (93.0)      27 (7.0)       385
Latin Am Argentina         346 (44.1)         84 (10.7)        251 (32.0)     103 (13.1)        354 (45.2)        597 (76.2)     187 (23.8)      783
         Bermuda         2,518 (82.2)                         230 (7.5)       314 (10.3)        544 (17.8)      2,748 (89.7)     314 (10.3)    3,062
         Brazil            538 (38.1)       212 (15.0)         312 (22.1)     349 (24.7)        661 (46.8)        850 (60.2)     562 (39.8)    1,412
         Chile           1,365 (90.6)          6 (0.4)        117 (7.8)        19 (1.2)         135 (9.0)       1,482 (98.4)      24 (1.6)     1,506
         Mexico          2,942 (72.7)       124 (3.1)         505 (12.5)      477 (11.8)        982 (24.3)      3,447 (85.1)     602 (14.9)    4,049
North Am Canada         10,348 (73.7)          2 (0.0)      2,982 (21.2)      706 (5.0)       3,688 (26.3)     13,330 (95.0)     708 (5.0) 14,038
         US            174,576 (62.4)    20,039 (7.2) 55,891 (20.0) 29,315 (10.5)            85,207 (30.5)   230,468 (82.4) 49,354 (17.6) 279,822
         Total         371,115 (59.8)    42,526 (6.8) 122,054 (19.7) 85,314 (13.7) 207,368 (33.4)            493,169 (79.4) 127,840 (20.6) 621,009


                                                                        26
                                                          Table III
     Average Normalized Increases in Assets and Expenditures Following IPOs, by Offer Type
This table presents the mean and median increases in assets and expenditures following an IPO. Increase
in assets (total assets, inventory, net PPE, cash) is defined as
 ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets 0 ) + 1] , and increase in expenditures (CAPEX, R&D, reduction in long term
                           ∑
                               t
debt) is defined as ln[(       i =1
                                      Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] , where 0 denotes the fiscal year end just prior to the
IPO and t denotes number of years after year 0. t-statistics for comparisons of means between primary
only and combined, and between combined and secondary only group are also provided. Bold letters
indicate statistical significance at less than 5%. The sample period for this table is from 1990 to 2001.
                                N                       Mean                                 Median
                  Total      IPO offer type        IPO offer type          t-stat         IPO offer type
                           prim sec comb prim            sec comb prim v comb prim sec comb
     V         t           only only -ined only only -ined comb v sec only only -ined

∆Total       1   5,475     3,441 105 1,929               0.94      0.16   0.69   11.37     8.55   0.73    0.11   0.53
Assets       2   4,678     2,910 90 1,678                1.13      0.35   0.93    7.14     7.17   0.93    0.29   0.79
             3   3,664     2,242 74 1,348                1.21      0.58   1.09    3.66     4.96   1.04    0.49   0.95
             4   2,845     1,728 58 1,059                1.27      0.68   1.19    2.16     4.15   1.11    0.60   1.07

∆Inventory 1     5,329     3,340 100 1,889               0.07      0.03   0.06    3.28     2.12   0.01    0.01   0.01
           2     4,529     2,813 86 1,630                0.15      0.06   0.13    3.43     2.78   0.04    0.01   0.03
           3     3,551     2,176 72 1,303                0.22      0.08   0.17    3.79     2.70   0.07    0.03   0.05
           4     2,750     1,678 52 1,020                0.27      0.12   0.22    3.13     2.09   0.10    0.03   0.07

∆Net PPE     1   5,453     3,426 104 1,923               0.17      0.05   0.12    7.09     3.40   0.07    0.02   0.05
             2   4,658     2,897 89 1,672                0.34      0.12   0.26    5.87     3.80   0.18    0.05   0.15
             3   3,644     2,228 74 1,342                0.44      0.20   0.37    3.65     3.19   0.25    0.14   0.23
             4   2,826     1,715 58 1,053                0.51      0.27   0.44    2.88     2.58   0.30    0.18   0.29

∑CAPEX       1   5,021     3,286          96 1,639       0.19      0.09   0.16    3.92     3.47   0.11    0.06   0.10
             2   4,227     2,751          83 1,393       0.40      0.17   0.37    2.60     4.94   0.26    0.13   0.26
             3   3,266     2,098          68 1,100       0.56      0.29   0.54    0.88     4.60   0.39    0.22   0.42
             4   2,512     1,605          53   854       0.69      0.40   0.69   -0.12     4.09   0.51    0.31   0.56

∑R&D         1   2,789 1,822              38     929     0.31      0.04   0.19    9.25     3.11   0.19    0.02   0.14
             2   2,373 1,525              35     813     0.63      0.10   0.40    9.20     3.66   0.48    0.05   0.31
             3   1,868 1,154              33     681     0.82      0.16   0.60    6.34     3.03   0.65    0.09   0.47
             4   1,453   862              27     564     0.96      0.23   0.78    3.93     2.44   0.80    0.12   0.67

∆Cash        1   5,458     3,430 104 1,924               0.64      0.04   0.45    9.77     7.43   0.34    0.01   0.21
             2   4,664     2,902 89 1,673                0.56      0.06   0.44    5.70     5.78   0.22    0.01   0.17
             3   3,651     2,234 74 1,343                0.50      0.12   0.45    1.98     4.25   0.14    0.02   0.15
             4   2,834     1,722 58 1,054                0.48      0.13   0.46    0.71     3.68   0.13    0.02   0.15

∑LT Debt     1   4,215     2,801          65 1,349       0.20      0.11   0.21   -0.57     2.81   0.07    0.03   0.09
Reduction    2   3,526     2,311          54 1,161       0.31      0.18   0.29    1.42     2.17   0.16    0.08   0.16
             3   2,779     1,777          45   957       0.45      0.27   0.40    2.40     1.73   0.25    0.13   0.24
             4   2,194     1,377          35   782       0.58      0.35   0.50    2.99     1.46   0.35    0.21   0.32


                                                              27
                                                               Table IV
         The Effect of IPO Offer Type on Subsequent Increases in Assets and Expenditures
The dependent variable for asset-based variables (total assets, inventory, net PPE, cash) is Y =
ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets0 ) + 1] , and for expenditures (CAPEX, R&D, reduction in long term debt) is Y =
ln[( ∑it =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] . In panel A, the independent variables are primary capital, secondary
capital, both of which are normalized by total assets, and log[total assets] . In panel B, they are proportion
of primary shares out of total shares, total proceeds over total assets, and log[total assets]. All
regressions include year, country, and industry (2 digit SIC) fixed effects (not reported). p-values are
from testing β1 = β2. Dollar changes are the implied change in the variable considered (∆Total Assets,
etc.) when new capital is increased by $1 (for a median-sized firm in 1996 in the U.S. with 2 digit SIC 73:
business services) Bold letters indicate statistical significance at 5%, using heteroscedasticity-consistent
standard errors. The sample period for this table is from 1990 to 2001.
                         primary capital                secondary capital.  
 Panel A: Y = β 1 ln                     + 1 + β 2 ln                      + 1 + β ln[total assets ] + FE + ε
                                                           total assets 0  
                                                                                           3               0
                         total assets 0                                        
                                         primary capital         secondary capital 
                                     ln                 +1   ln                   +1
                                         total asset 0           total asset 0          ln[asset]    p-value
        V           t        N         β1          t-stat        β2   t-stat               β3     t-stat β1= β2 $change     R2
 ∆Total Asset       1      5,475     0.951         63.20        0.180 8.66                  0.00 0.42 0.000 0.951          0.90
                    2      4,678     0.857         34.08        0.265 7.53                 -0.01 -1.73 0.000 1.107         0.81
                    3      3,664     0.737         18.34        0.369 6.93                 -0.02 -2.07 0.000 1.131         0.74
                    4      2,845     0.709         13.88        0.376 5.18                 -0.03 -2.16 0.000 1.234         0.72
 ∆Inventory         1      5,329     0.046           6.59 0.001                 0.13       -0.01   -5.57   0.000   0.023   0.30
                    2      4,529     0.076           6.13 -0.003               -0.20       -0.02   -7.95   0.000   0.038   0.39
                    3      3,551     0.092           5.22 0.006                 0.27       -0.03   -7.26   0.004   0.049   0.41
                    4      2,750     0.098           4.13 0.023                 0.71       -0.04   -6.72   0.075   0.053   0.44
 ∆Net PPE           1      5,453     0.166         14.38        0.000           0.02       0.00     1.16   0.000   0.093   0.42
                    2      4,658     0.300         16.14        0.050           2.42       0.00     0.21   0.000   0.187   0.53
                    3      3,644     0.300         11.59        0.083           2.58       0.00    -0.37   0.000   0.210   0.54
                    4      2,826     0.332          8.78        0.081           1.73       0.00    -0.05   0.000   0.248   0.53
 ∑CAPEX             1      5,021     0.145         14.81        0.017           1.60       0.00     0.46   0.000   0.083   0.54
                    2      4,227     0.304         18.37        0.073           3.84       0.00     0.67   0.000   0.202   0.65
                    3      3,266     0.374         15.44        0.097           3.30       0.00     0.60   0.000   0.302   0.69
                    4      2,512     0.417         11.47        0.138           3.32       0.00    -0.08   0.000   0.387   0.71
 ∑R&D               1      2,789     0.281         21.21        0.004           0.25       0.01    1.45    0.000   0.171   0.74
                    2      2,373     0.519         22.80        0.022           0.83       0.01    1.51    0.000   0.399   0.82
                    3      1,868     0.642         18.76        0.067           1.71       0.01    1.14    0.000   0.636   0.83
                    4      1,453     0.699         14.58        0.109           1.98       0.00    0.06    0.000   0.882   0.84
 ∆Cash              1      5,458     0.880         54.13        0.177           8.13       0.02    5.40    0.000   0.688   0.85
                    2      4,664     0.744         32.50        0.213           6.59       0.04    6.07    0.000   0.578   0.69
                    3      3,651     0.661         19.38        0.293           6.88       0.03    4.34    0.000   0.522   0.58
                    4      2,834     0.604         13.48        0.279           5.34       0.02    1.77    0.000   0.500   0.53
 ∑LT Debt           1      4,215     0.067           4.80      -0.019          -0.99       0.02    5.56    0.000   0.042   0.40
  Reduction         2      3,526     0.082           4.14      -0.055          -1.93       0.02    3.84    0.000   0.056   0.45
                    3      2,779     0.082           3.02      -0.136          -3.08       0.02    2.34    0.000   0.068   0.48
                    4      2,194     0.111           2.87      -0.214          -3.61       0.02    1.51    0.000   0.104   0.51


                                                                     28
Table IV  Continued
                    primary shares offered            total proceeds 
Panel B: Y = γ 1 ⋅                          + γ 2 ln                 + γ 3 ln[total assets 0 ] + FE + ξ
                    total shares offered              total assets 0 
                                              primary shares              total proceeds 
                                                                        ln 
                                             
                                              total shares 
                                                              
                                                                            total asset 
                                                                                                ln[asset]
       V           t          N              γ1         t-stat          γ2            t-stat     γ3     t-stat   R2
  ∆Total
  Asset            1        5,475          0.401 12.55                 0.400          34.34     -0.030   -5.01   0.85
                   2        4,678          0.336 8.02                  0.406          27.37     -0.022   -2.55   0.79
                   3        3,664          0.236 4.32                  0.379          18.82     -0.014   -1.17   0.74
                   4        2,845          0.187 2.73                  0.372          14.98     -0.017   -1.04   0.71

  ∆Inventory       1        5,329          0.023          3.26         0.022            7.23    -0.010   -5.63   0.29
                   2        4,529          0.048          3.79         0.038            7.34    -0.024   -6.93   0.39
                   3        3,551          0.058          3.03         0.046            6.16    -0.032   -6.08   0.41
                   4        2,750          0.047          1.74         0.051            5.20    -0.041   -5.67   0.44

  ∆Net PPE         1        5,453          0.093          7.24         0.068          13.22     -0.002   -0.61   0.40
                   2        4,658          0.131          5.92         0.135          15.31     -0.005   -1.00   0.52
                   3        3,644          0.128          4.25         0.146          12.12     -0.003   -0.38   0.53
                   4        2,826          0.122          2.94         0.164           9.74      0.001    0.11   0.53

  ∑CAPEX           1        5,021          0.064          5.13         0.065          13.43     -0.002   -0.86   0.52
                   2        4,227          0.118          5.56         0.149          16.17      0.000    0.03   0.63
                   3        3,266          0.156          5.13         0.187          14.12      0.004    0.54   0.68
                   4        2,512          0.133          3.20         0.216          11.73      0.003    0.27   0.70

  ∑R&D             1        2,789          0.115          5.63         0.129          16.75     -0.006   -1.25   0.70
                   2        2,373          0.260          6.57         0.254          16.55     -0.003   -0.30   0.79
                   3        1,868          0.313          5.48         0.329          14.70      0.003    0.24   0.81
                   4        1,453          0.303          4.06         0.366          12.26     -0.008   -0.45   0.82

  ∆Cash            1        5,458          0.308 10.83                 0.351          32.97     -0.017   -3.05   0.77
                   2        4,664          0.247 7.39                  0.316          25.45      0.011    1.52   0.64
                   3        3,651          0.178 4.59                  0.288          18.28      0.015    1.65   0.54
                   4        2,834          0.157 3.27                  0.260          13.69      0.002    0.14   0.49

  ∑LT Debt   1              4,215          0.101          5.10         0.038            5.45    0.025    5.79    0.40
   Reduction 2              3,526          0.149          5.02         0.037            3.36    0.023    3.40    0.45
             3              2,779          0.235          5.20         0.027            1.78    0.019    1.83    0.48
             4              2,194          0.306          4.91         0.029            1.39    0.013    0.88    0.50



                                                                  29
                                                           Table V

           The Effect of IPO Offer Type on Subsequent increases in Assets and Expenditures:
                                          Regional Analysis

The independent variables are primary capital and secondary capital normalized by total assets. The
dependent variable for asset-based variables (total assets, inventory, net PPE, cash) is Y =
ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets0 ) + 1] , and for expenditures (CAPEX, R&D, reduction in long term debt) is Y =
ln[( ∑it =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] . Panel A shows results for US & Canada, and Panels B and C represent
Europe and Asia respectively. The results by legal origin are presented in Panels D(common) and E
(civil). All regressions include year, country, and industry (2 digit SIC) fixed effects (not reported). p-
values are from testing β1 = β2. Dollar changes are the implied change in the variable considered (∆Total
Assets, etc.) when new capital is increased by $1 (for a median-sized firm in 1996 with 2 digit SIC 73:
business services. The reference countries are US for US and Canada, France for Europe, and Japan for
Asia) Bold letters indicate statistical significance at 5%, using heteroscedasticity-consistent standard
errors. The sample period for this table is from 1990 to 2001.

Panel A: US and Canada

                                    primary capital         secondary capital 
                                ln                 +1   ln                   +1
                                    total asset 0           total asset 0         ln[asset]       p-value
       V          t      N        β1          t-stat         β2         t-stat        β3     t-stat   β1= β2 $change   R2


 ∑CAPEX           1   3,406     0.166         13.63        0.012           0.84       0.01    2.27     0.000 0.079     0.58
                  2   3,038     0.353         16.78        0.056           2.27       0.02    3.03     0.000 0.201     0.68
                  3   2,468     0.436         14.54        0.080           2.29       0.03    2.80     0.000 0.309     0.70
                  4   1,955     0.472         10.73        0.116           2.49       0.03    1.72     0.000 0.394     0.71


 ∑R&D             1   2,307     0.294         20.30        0.002           0.13       0.01    1.84     0.000 0.154     0.75
                  2   2,052     0.539         23.10        0.020           0.67       0.02    2.40     0.000 0.372     0.82
                  3   1,631     0.680         20.08        0.065           1.56       0.03    2.61     0.000 0.618     0.84
                  4   1,264     0.740         16.00        0.105           1.82       0.02    1.21     0.000 0.872     0.84


 ∆Cash            1   3,439     0.945         47.95        0.148           5.18       0.04    6.91     0.000 0.722     0.88
                  2   3,087     0.812         27.67        0.256           5.95       0.07    7.38     0.000 0.593     0.72
                  3   2,524     0.720         16.74        0.308           5.79       0.06    5.19     0.000 0.519     0.59
                  4   2,012     0.628         11.47        0.325           5.09       0.04    2.76     0.001 0.465     0.54


 ∑LT Debt         1   3,394     0.087           4.93 -0.055               -2.29       0.03    5.14     0.000 0.045     0.42
   Reduction      2   3,004     0.109           4.66 -0.103               -3.04       0.03    4.37     0.000 0.062     0.46
                  3   2,422     0.105           3.47 -0.162               -3.40       0.03    2.74     0.000 0.072     0.48
                  4   1,901     0.132           3.01 -0.228               -3.52       0.03    1.64     0.000 0.102     0.51



                                                                30
                                            Table V  Continued

Panel B: Europe
                                primary capital         secondary capital 
                            ln                 +1   ln                   +1
                                total asset 0           total asset 0          ln[asset]    p-value
        V       t    N        β1          t-stat         β2         t-stat        β3     t-stat β1= β2 $change     R2
∑CAPEX          1   1,151    0.092          4.68       0.029           1.56       -0.01   -1.61   0.025   0.056    0.46
                2    900     0.160          5.91       0.085           2.92       -0.02   -2.87   0.064   0.114    0.61
                3    611     0.195          4.13       0.130           2.17       -0.04   -3.61   0.346   0.170    0.69
                4    401     0.324          4.03       0.199           2.09       -0.06   -3.12   0.290   0.308    0.77
∑R&D            1    270     0.210          6.03       0.049           1.41        0.00   -0.46   0.001   0.133    0.71
                2    177     0.413          6.53       0.139           1.87       -0.02   -1.13   0.009   0.384    0.86
                3    125     0.467          3.82       0.024           0.20       -0.09   -3.00   0.011   0.632    0.87
                4     94     0.489          2.43       0.177           0.74       -0.16   -2.48   0.310   0.876    0.89
∆Cash           1   1,243    0.708 21.43               0.247           6.84       -0.01   -1.12   0.000   0.541    0.81
                2    987     0.543 11.44               0.169           3.37       -0.02   -1.49   0.000   0.419    0.65
                3    682     0.498 6.75                0.278           3.22       -0.01   -0.49   0.017   0.425    0.59
                4    450     0.601 5.66                0.081           0.94       -0.03   -1.77   0.000   0.623    0.59
∑LT Debt        1    536     0.030 1.58 0.041                          1.26        0.02    3.73   0.762    0.016   0.40
 Reduction      2    352    -0.009 -0.34 0.066                         1.26        0.01    1.19   0.184   -0.006   0.52
                3    241     0.020 0.32 0.044                          0.46       -0.01   -0.60   0.846    0.014   0.57
                4    193     0.046 0.48 -0.057                        -0.53        0.00   -0.16   0.506    0.039   0.64

Panel C: Asia
                                primary capital         secondary capital 
                            ln                 +1   ln                   +1
                                total asset 0           total asset 0          ln[asset]    p-value
        V       t    N        β1         t-stat          β2         t-stat        β3     t-stat β1= β2 $change     R2
∑CAPEX          1    355     0.152          2.20      -0.063          -1.17        0.00    0.80   0.058   0.142    0.64
                2    221     0.550          4.28      -0.042          -0.21       -0.01   -0.75   0.046   0.563    0.76
                3    143     0.826          3.09      -0.351          -1.09       -0.03   -1.58   0.028   0.950    0.85
                4    119     1.223          2.77      -0.627          -1.15       -0.06   -1.51   0.039   1.534    0.85
∑R&D            1    178     0.023 0.89 -0.027                        -0.73       0.00    -1.59   0.300    0.021   0.58
                2    130    -0.001 -0.08 0.087                         1.38       0.00    -0.48   0.201   -0.001   0.69
                3    105     0.010 0.36 0.243                          1.70       0.00    -0.66   0.141    0.009   0.75
                4     89    -0.014 -0.36 0.572                         2.02       0.00     0.00   0.065   -0.014   0.78
∆Cash           1    667     0.763          6.65 -0.058               -0.45        0.00    0.63   0.000   0.718    0.76
                2    522     0.509          3.87 0.025                 0.11        0.00   -0.32   0.102   0.506    0.53
                3    401     0.562          3.38 -0.066               -0.26       -0.01   -0.64   0.069   0.571    0.56
                4    334     0.444          2.60 0.186                 0.99       -0.02   -2.17   0.398   0.442    0.58
∑LT Debt        1    180     0.095          2.10 -0.114               -1.39       0.00    -0.30   0.046   0.085    0.52
 Reduction      2    107     0.192          2.90 -0.166               -1.20       0.00     0.16   0.043   0.176    0.73
                3     75     0.234          1.27 -0.235               -1.01       0.01     0.35   0.241   0.214    0.82
                4     67     0.693          2.16 0.095                 0.19       0.05     1.43   0.232   0.577    0.83


                                                            31
                                              Table V  Continued

Panel D: Common Legal Origin
                                  primary capital         secondary capital 
                              ln                 +1   ln                   +1
                                  total asset 0           total asset 0          ln[asset]    p-value
        V       t    N          β1          t-stat         β2         t-stat        β3     t-stat β1= β2 $change     R2
∑CAPEX         1    3,916      0.157        14.12        0.010           0.77       0.01    1.72    0.000   0.078    0.57
               2    3,382      0.338        17.44        0.066           2.84       0.01    2.26    0.000   0.198    0.67
               3    2,708      0.413        14.76        0.087           2.51       0.02    1.97    0.000   0.298    0.70
               4    2,143      0.453        11.07        0.118           2.53       0.01    1.00    0.000   0.381    0.71
∑R&D           1    2,506      0.290        21.42        0.003           0.15       0.01    1.74    0.000   0.156    0.75
               2    2,175      0.533        24.13        0.020           0.69       0.02    2.30    0.000   0.376    0.82
               3    1,717      0.677        20.84        0.057           1.40       0.03    2.56    0.000   0.629    0.84
               4    1,329      0.741        16.55        0.094           1.68       0.02    1.14    0.000   0.880    0.84
∆Cash          1    3,960      0.910        48.77        0.160           5.70       0.03    5.58    0.000   0.698    0.86
               2    3,448      0.778        28.87        0.238           5.83       0.05    6.44    0.000   0.570    0.71
               3    2,789      0.707        17.68        0.300           5.97       0.05    4.76    0.000   0.515    0.60
               4    2,227      0.635        12.46        0.296           4.99       0.03    2.59    0.000   0.482    0.54
∑LT Debt       1    3,782      0.077          5.00      -0.027          -1.26       0.03    5.64    0.000   0.041    0.41
 Reduction     2    3,239      0.095          4.48      -0.073          -2.34       0.03    4.12    0.000   0.056    0.46
               3    2,575      0.092          3.20      -0.149          -3.28       0.03    2.50    0.000   0.066    0.48
               4    2,024      0.120          2.89      -0.215          -3.52       0.02    1.45    0.000   0.096    0.51

Panel E: Civil Legal Origin
                                  primary capital         secondary capital 
                              ln                 +1   ln                   +1
                                  total asset 0           total asset 0          ln[asset]    p-value
        V       t    N          β1         t-stat          β2         t-stat        β3     t-stat β1= β2 $change     R2
∑CAPEX         1    1,105      0.105          4.71       0.026           1.31       -0.01   -1.54   0.012   0.086    0.44
               2     845       0.146          4.80       0.072           2.31       -0.03   -3.67   0.076   0.142    0.60
               3     558       0.159          3.07       0.067           1.20       -0.05   -3.97   0.135   0.172    0.69
               4     369       0.217          2.61       0.167           1.93       -0.06   -3.34   0.652   0.251    0.76
∑R&D           1     283       0.133          4.11       0.016           0.44       -0.02   -2.39   0.002   0.109    0.71
               2     198       0.307          3.59       0.136           1.30       -0.04   -2.08   0.139   0.260    0.82
               3     151       0.265          1.79       0.057           0.24       -0.08   -3.11   0.316   0.269    0.82
               4     124       0.315          1.49       0.510           1.39       -0.13   -2.73   0.515   0.367    0.83
∆Cash          1    1,498      0.712 21.38               0.227           6.90       -0.01   -1.39   0.000   0.646    0.83
               2    1,216      0.533 11.51               0.146           2.93       -0.02   -2.59   0.000   0.528    0.63
               3     862       0.363 6.22                0.214           2.25       -0.02   -1.96   0.090   0.382    0.52
               4     607       0.342 5.79                0.087           0.84       -0.04   -3.48   0.011   0.377    0.47
∑LT Debt       1     433       0.021 1.04 -0.012                        -0.56        0.01    1.46   0.288    0.017   0.49
 Reduction     2     287      -0.006 -0.20 0.021                         0.35        0.00   -0.33   0.707   -0.005   0.58
               3     204       0.123 1.63 0.104                          0.61       -0.01   -0.36   0.906    0.098   0.66
               4     170       0.025 0.24 -0.262                        -1.22        0.00    0.04   0.112    0.024   0.69


                                                              32
                                                                 Table VI
                                     Subsequent Equity Offerings following IPOs by IPO Offer Type

This table presents the total proceeds and new capital raised through SEOs within 2 years of an IPO. The table reports the amount separately
for each of the 3 IPO types. The total proceeds and new capital from IPOs are also provided for comparison. The last 7 columns show the
number of SEOs by SEO offer type and also by IPO offer type. The sample period is from 1990 to 2003.

                      IPOs                                                           SEOs within 2 years
     IPO            Total      New                   Total     New                              Number of SEOs by offer type

    Offer         amount      capital               amount    capital                Total     primary only secondary only      combined
                                         B/A                              D/C
    Type           (A)          (B)                   (C)      (D)                    (N)      (Np)     Np/N     (Ns)   Ns/N     (Nc) Nc/N


   primary
                   371,115   371,115    100.0%     136,714      76,406 55.9%          2,386   1,542     65%     320      13%      524   22%
     only


  secondary
                    42,526       -        0.0%      13,496         810    6.0%           56      15     27%       36     64%        5    9%
     only



  combined         207,368   122,054     58.9%      85,025      32,981 38.8%            983     312     32%     252      26%      419   43%



     Total         621,009   493,169     79.4%     235,235    110,197 46.8%           3,425   1,869     55%     608      18%      948   28%




                                                                     33
                                                       Table VII
               The Effect of IPO Offer Type on Subsequent Issuances of Equity
This table presents logit and Tobit results measuring the effect of IPO offer type on subsequent
issuances of equity. The independent variables are the same as in table IV. The dependent
variable for Panel A-1 takes value 1 if there is at least 1 new capital raising activity within 2 years
of an IPO, and 0 otherwise. In Panel A-2, the dependent variable is the amount of new capital
raised within 2 years normalized by total assets, and in Panel A-3, the number of SEOs that raised
new capital. Panels B-1, B-2, and B-3 correspond to Panels A-1, A-2 and A-3, where new capital
is replaced with sale of secondary shares at SEOs. All regressions include year, country, and
industry (2 digit SIC) fixed effects (not reported). p-values are from testing β1 = β2. Bold letters
indicate statistical significance at less than 5%. Logit uses heteroscedasticity consistent standard
errors. The sample period for this table is from 1990 to 2001.

           Panel A-1(logit): Probability of Raising Fresh Capital within 2 years of an IPO
                                            Explanatory Variables
                                    primary capital         secondary capital 
                                ln                 +1   ln                   +1
                                    total asset 0           total asset 0            ln[asset]    p-value Pseudo
 IPO type              N          β1           t-stat        β2               t-stat     β3    t-stat β1=β2     R2
 all 3 types         5,797      0.045          0.56         0.031              0.25    0.061 2.18 0.926        0.07
 combined only       2,024      0.437          2.67        -0.212             -0.99    0.057 1.05 0.035        0.06
                                   primary shares                total proceeds 
                                   total shares              ln                 
                                                                 total asset         ln[asset]
 all 3 types         5,797      0.552           3.21       0.007               0.16    0.064 2.24             0.07
 combined only       2,024      1.098           3.37       0.143               1.77    0.075 1.29             0.06
              Panel A-2(tobit): Amount of Fresh Capital raised within 2 year of an IPO
                                    primary capital         secondary capital 
                                ln                 +1   ln                   +1
                                    total asset 0           total asset 0            ln[asset]    p-value Pseudo
                       N          β1           t-stat       β2                t-stat     β3    t-stat β1=β2     R2
 all 3 types         5,797      0.335          4.70        0.132               1.19    0.039 1.46 0.122        0.06
 combined only       2,024      0.596          4.52        0.013               0.08    0.032 0.70 0.015        0.07
                                   primary shares                total proceeds 
                                   total shares              ln                 
                                                                 total asset         ln[asset]
 all 3 types         5,797      0.547           3.29       0.151               3.70    0.038 1.31             0.06
 combined only       2,024      0.715           2.71       0.248               3.77    0.026 0.54             0.07
            Panel A-3(tobit): Number of SEOs with Fresh Capital within 2 year of an IPO
                                    primary capital         secondary capital 
                                ln                 +1   ln                   +1
                                    total asset 0           total asset 0            ln[asset]    p-value Pseudo
                       N         β1            t-stat        β2               t-stat     β3    t-stat β1=β2     R2
 all 3 types         5,797     -0.007          -0.08        0.000              0.00    0.059 2.03 0.962        0.06
 combined only       2,024     0.320           2.08        -0.122             -0.66    0.063 1.21 0.115        0.06
                                   primary shares                total proceeds 
                                   total shares              ln                 
                                                                 total asset         ln[asset]
 all 3 types         5,797      0.530           3.02       -0.032             -0.75    0.055 1.78             0.06
 combined only       2,024      0.830           2.79        0.115              1.57    0.078 1.44             0.06




                                                          34
                                    Table VII  Continued

      Panel B-1(logit): Probability of Selling Secondary Shares within 2 years of an IPO
                                                 Explanatory Variables
                              primary capital          secondary capital 
                          ln                 +1    ln                   +1
                              total asset 0            total asset 0           ln[asset]    p-value Pseudo
IPO type         N          β1           t-stat        β2              t-stat     β3     t-stat β1=β2     R2
all 3 types   5,797       0.263          2.94         0.763             6.28     0.348 11.29 0.001 0.10
combined only 2,024       0.322          1.89         0.320             1.57     0.293 5.19 0.995 0.08

                             primary shares               total proceeds 
                             total shares             ln                 
                                                          total asset          ln[asset]
all 3 types   5,797       -0.576          -3.44       0.310              6.20    0.412 12.15            0.10
combined only 2,024       -0.058          -0.19       0.331              3.96    0.350 5.69             0.08

        Panel B-2(Tobit): Amount of Secondary Shares sold within 2 year of an IPO
                              primary capital          secondary capital 
                          ln                 +1    ln                   +1
                              total asset 0            total asset 0           ln[asset]    p-value Pseudo
                 N          β1           t-stat         β2             t-stat     β3     t-stat β1=β2     R2
all 3 types   5,797       0.399          5.71          0.721             7.46    0.267 10.10 0.006 0.09
combined only 2,024       0.528          4.37          0.409             2.88    0.222 5.32 0.580 0.09

                             primary shares               total proceeds 
                             total shares             ln                 
                                                          total asset          ln[asset]
all 3 types   5,797       -0.360          -2.67       0.353              8.60    0.321 11.07            0.09
combined only 2,024       -0.107          -0.47       0.405              6.53    0.243 5.51             0.09

    Panel B-3(Tobit): Number of SEOs selling Secondary Shares within 2 year of an IPO
                              primary capital          secondary capital 
                          ln                 +1    ln                   +1
                              total asset 0            total asset 0           ln[asset]    p-value Pseudo
                 N          β1           t-stat         β2             t-stat     β3     t-stat β1=β2     R2
all 3 types   5,797       0.185          2.25          0.654             5.71    0.330 10.90 0.001 0.08
combined only 2,024       0.204          1.43          0.307             1.83    0.273 5.76 0.684 0.07

                             primary shares               total proceeds 
                             total shares             ln                 
                                                          total asset          ln[asset]
all 3 types   5,797       -0.468          -3.05        0.254             5.49    0.388 11.72            0.09
combined only 2,024       -0.175          -0.67        0.250             3.60    0.308 6.17             0.08




                                                      35
