                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE IMF IN A WORLD OF PRIVATE CAPITAL MARKETS

                                          Barry Eichengreen
                                           Kenneth Kletzer
                                            Ashoka Mody

                                         Working Paper 11198
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11198


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




The authors are with the University of California, Berkeley; the University of California, Santa Cruz; and
the International Monetary Fund, respectively. The views expressed are those of the authors and should not
be attributed to the IMF or any other organization. We are grateful to Enrica Detragiache, Raghuram Rajan,
and an anonymous referee for helpful comments and to Adrian de la Garza for carefully assembling a
complex data set. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Barry Eichengreen, Kenneth Kletzer, and Ashoka Mody. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The IMF in a World of Private Capital Markets
Barry Eichengreen, Kenneth Kletzer, and Ashoka Mody
NBER Working Paper No. 11198
March 2005
JEL No. F0, F2

                                          ABSTRACT

The IMF attempts to stabilize private capital flows to emerging markets by providing public

monitoring and emergency finance. In analyzing its role we contrast cases where banks and

bondholders do the lending. Banks have a natural advantage in monitoring and creditor

coordination, while bonds have superior risk sharing characteristics. Consistent with this

assumption, banks reduce spreads as they obtain more information through repeat transactions

with borrowers. By comparison, repeat borrowing has little influence in bond markets, where

publicly-available information dominates. But spreads on bonds are lower when they are issued

in conjunction with IMF-supported programs, as if the existence of a program conveyed positive

information to bondholders. The influence of IMF monitoring in bond markets is especially

pronounced for countries vulnerable to liquidity crises.

Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu

Kenneth Kletzer
Department of Economics
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA
kkletzer@cats.ucsc.edu

Ashoka Mody
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20433
amody@imf.org
1. Introduction

         Catalyzing private capital flows to emerging markets has been an objective of the

International Monetary Fund since at least the 1990s.2 The Fund provides public

monitoring services and negotiates programs that enable borrowers to reveal their

commitment to sound macroeconomic policies. In addition, its own lending may stabilize

capital flows by providing bridge finance for creditworthy countries experiencing

liquidity crises, the resolution of which may be difficult to coordinate for atomistic

lenders.

         In this paper we seek to better understand the roles of IMF monitoring and

lending and provide new evidence of their effects. We analyze the impact of IMF-

supported programs on market access and the cost of funds, building on three insights.

•        First, if banks engage in monitoring as part of their normal operation, then IMF

         monitoring should have a relatively limited impact when bank syndicates do the

         lending.

•        Second, private capital flows should be particularly sensitive to the magnitude of

         IMF financial commitments when the likelihood of debt restructuring is high.

•        Third, precautionary programs are a mechanism through which governments can

         use their relationship with the IMF to signal their commitment to strong policies.

         Differences in the impact of precautionary and regular IMF programs should

         therefore be useful for distinguishing between the Fund’s monitoring and lending

         roles.




2
    See for example IMF (1999).
                                             2


       Our analysis is based on more than 6,700 loan transactions between emerging

market borrowers and international bank syndicates and some 3,500 new bond issues

placed between 1991 and 2002. We analyze the frequency of transactions and the spreads

charged. Among the explanatory variables are (a) a measure of repeat borrowing that

proxies for creditor learning about borrower characteristics and (b) the existence and size

of IMF programs. Because we analyze individual transactions rather than aggregate

capital flows or other macroeconomic conditions, our findings are less susceptible to

causality running from the outcome to the decision to initiate an IMF program.3

       Important differences between bank loans and bond issues have been documented

in the domestic context.4 Banks act as delegated monitors on behalf of investors who

cannot easily observe and discipline borrowers (Diamond 1984). The information they

acquire can be used to limit the use of funds and in pricing loans. In contrast, individual

bondholders lack the incentive to incur the costs of securing expensive private

information about borrowers. Instead, public information—for example, the information

assembled by credit rating agencies—dominates the market for debt securities.

       Securitized debt instruments, on the other hand, have superior risk-sharing

characteristics. Credit risk can be diversified away, in part, by spreading individual loans

across investors and enabling them to hold diversified portfolios. Banks cannot engage in

this practice to the same extent without eroding their incentive to invest in dedicated




3
  High-frequency data also allow us to capture the timing of programs more precisely than
is possible in aggregate studies using annual data to analyze the influence of IMF
programs.
4
  This difference between bank and capital markets has been well documented in the
domestic US context (see, for example, Fama 1985 and James 1987).
                                              3


monitoring technologies. This tradeoff is a way of understanding why lending takes place

through both banks and bond markets.

       Banks can also more easily coordinate in response to default and restructuring.

They are relatively few in number and contractual arrangements such as sharing clauses

reduce the incentive to hold out. The advantages of creditor coordination may make it

even more profitable for banks to monitor borrowers, as we explain below. Thus, it is not

necessary to assume that banks have intrinsically superior monitoring ability; they may

simply have more incentive to invest in gathering and using relevant information.

       Eichengreen and Mody (1998) find that spreads on syndicated loans fall with the

number of loans extended to a borrower. An interpretation is that contact through repeat

borrowing informs creditors about borrower characteristics, reducing uncertainty and risk

premia. That earlier paper did not also consider repeat borrowing in bond markets. We do

so here, hypothesizing that this effect is stronger for bank loans than bonds because

coordination allows banks to make better use of any information thereby gleaned.

       The other potential monitor is the IMF.5 By putting a program in place, the Fund

may be able to acquire information not also available to the private sector or acquire it at

lower cost. Indeed, the Fund may convey information to the markets when it does not

have superior monitoring technology. Negotiating an IMF program may simply be a way

for a government to signal its type.6 Imagine that the standard conditions attached to



5
  As posited by Tirole (2002), Mody and Saravia (2003) and Bordo, Mody, and Oomes
(2004).
6
  Bordo, Mody, and Oomes (2004) have argued that the IMF’s monitoring role does not
imply that the Fund has better information than the market. As such, the Fund adds value
not through the mere signaling of new information. Rather, the Fund can monitor
commitment to a policy program (see also Mody and Saravia 2003). In practice it is
difficult to distinguish if it is content of the program or the monitoring that is relevant.
                                             4


Fund programs are easier to satisfy for either economic or political reasons by

governments truly committed to strong policies and that violating that conditionality has

significant costs. Then a country with strong policies will be more likely to sign up for a

program, signaling its type and lowering its spreads.

       A special case in point is when an IMF lending arrangement is converted into a

precautionary program.7 A country then volunteers to not draw on IMF resources while

still allowing itself to be subjected to Fund monitoring and conditionality.8 The Fund’s

monitoring should be particularly important for bond markets not inhabited by a small

number of large investors (banks) prepared to individually invest in ascertaining the

government’s type. At the same time, IMF lending, by reducing the probability of

default, could nullify the creditor coordination advantage of banks.

       Consistent with these hypotheses, we find that repeat borrowing is more important

in reducing the costs of borrowing from bank syndicates than bond markets. In contrast,

public monitoring through IMF programs has a larger impact on spreads in markets

dominated by bonds than bank loans, again consistent with our priors. But the IMF’s

presence and lending have different effects on countries in different situations. For

countries with external debt/GDP ratios below 60 per cent range, it is the IMF’s presence,

as distinct from its lending, that matters for bond market access. We interpret this as

consistent with arguments emphasizing the Fund’s monitoring and signaling roles. As


However, because we do observe that programs (with widely varying conditionality)
reduce bond interest rate spreads, it is possible to argue that the monitoring that
accompanies the core conditionality in all IMF programs helps creditors gain confidence
in the likelihood of reduced policy variability.
7
  For more discussion of the channels through which IMF programs can influence
international capital flows, see Cottarelli and Giannini (2002) and Bordo, Mody, and
Oomes (2004).
8
  Although the financial support can still become available should the need arise.
                                             5


debt rises from there, IMF presence is still associated with lower spreads but to a

diminishing extent. The impact of IMF presence disappears when debt reaches 70

percent of GDP. Moreover, there is little evidence in this high debt range that additional

IMF lending reduces spreads and enhances market access. For countries in this range,

neither IMF presence nor IMF lending significantly enhances market access. Evidently,

countries with such high debts have deep structural problems that must be solved before

IMF intervention can catalyze external finance. Only programs that turn precautionary –

that is, where the outlook improves sufficiently that the country can voluntarily choose to

stop drawing on Fund resources – have a significant negative impact on borrowing costs

at high debt levels. This finding is again consistent with our arguments regarding country

signaling and IMF monitoring.

       The next section develops the theoretical background to these issues. The two

sections following that then provide evidence on differences in international lending

through bank loans and bond markets. We then analyze the factors that go into the

decision to borrow and the further choice between loans and bonds. The results confirm

that IMF programs do more to facilitate bond issuance than bank lending. Finally, we

document the importance for the pricing of loans and bonds of private monitoring in bank

lending and of public monitoring through IMF programs in bond markets.



2. Theoretical Background

       Our theoretical discussion focuses on sovereign default, renegotiation, and

endogenous problems of liquidity in highlighting the IMF’s monitoring and creditor-

coordination roles. Our point of departure, following Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Bulow
                                              6


and Rogoff (1989), and Kletzer and Wright (2000), is that lenders and borrowers take

into account the risk of default when agreeing to the terms of a debt contract. Changes in

this risk will therefore be reflected in the volume of debt and interest rates. Our

discussion is also informed by Tirole’s (2002) exposition of dual and common agency

problems in the context of international financial contracts. As Tirole notes, the

government may become an agent even when the debt contract is between private

borrowers and lenders, since government actions bear on a private debtor’s ability to

repay. Private debt can have sovereign risk as a result of explicit or implicit government

guarantees and/or a debtor’s recourse to domestic legal protection. We therefore assume

that the envelope of resources and government policies determines the ability and

willingness of the government and private creditors to repay.9

       The logic of our argument can be summarized as follows. First, country

fundamentals and government policies determine the ability and willingness of the

government and private creditors to service their debts. This implies that the probability

of default rises only after a threshold level of debt is reached, at which point access to

credit markets weakens and spreads on new loans begin to rise.10 Second, in the presence

of asymmetric information about borrower preferences, the ability of creditors to monitor

debtors and make use of information will influence market behavior and outcomes.

Creditor monitoring matters when debt restructuring can occur—in other words, it

matters for countries with high debt levels and low credit ratings. A monitoring



9
  Even if a private borrower derives no protection from its home government’s
sovereignty, the analytics apply to any debtor that faces bounded penalties for defaulting.
10
   For low debt levels, an increase in debt may indicate improving fundamentals and thus
result in narrower spreads, as suggested by Pattillo et al (2003).
                                                  7


advantage can arise not just when some creditors are better informed than others but also

when some creditors more readily respond to common information.11

       An implication is that creditors with a monitoring advantage will tend to lend in

markets where the return to monitoring is high, and conversely. When banks have a

monitoring advantage, information about the debtor’s policy preferences will affect terms

on bank loans and bonds. IMF programs can also reveal and provide confidence in debtor

government policies, reducing the common agency problem, but providing information

can also reduce the advantage of private monitoring. Monitoring differences will also

affect returns to learning about the debtor.

       To further develop these points, we utilize a simple framework in which the

debtor’s resources are stochastic and all debt claims have the same maturity and priority.

The debtor is willing to repay a maximal amount, V(y), in expected present value, in

equilibrium. V(y) is the value of repaying in a forward-looking equilibrium that takes

account of opportunities to renegotiate debt in the future. It is increasing in the

fundamental, y. For strong fundamentals, y, or low levels of debt, V(y) exceeds D, and

the debtor will repay. If, however, the outstanding debt, D, exceeds V(y), then the debtor

is unwilling to meet its obligations and will seek to renegotiate.

       When borrowing and repayment are repeated over time, the debtor’s willingness

to pay can be written as

                                                         1
(1)                            V ( y t ) = w( y t ) +        EtVt +1 ,
                                                        1+ r


11
  For example, banks can have a comparative advantage in creditor coordination in the
context of debt renegotiation (when there are advantages to getting all creditors to take
the same position). They may also be in a relatively favorable position to arrange
concerted lending and thus control strategic uncertainty that can cause liquidity crises.
                                                       8


where w( y t ) indicates the debtor’s equilibrium willingness to service debt today. An

interpretation is that w( y t ) represents the debtor’s liquid resources and Vt +1 measures

solvency. Under perfect information, current debt service obligations that cannot be met

by the debtor ( Dt > V ( y t ) ) will be rolled over into new loans, while debts that will not be

repaid in present value will be renegotiated.

        The expected net return to creditors is given by

(2)               ERt = E (Vt : V ( y t ) ≤ Dt ) Pr (V ( y t ) ≤ Dt ) + Dt Pr (V ( y t ) > Dt ) − (1 + r )Dt ,

where r is the return on alternative investments. The interest rate spread will be the

difference between ERt / Dt and (1+r). This spread is increasing with the level of debt for

positive probabilities that V ( y t ) is less than Dt . When the level of debt is low, this

probability can be zero, in which case the spread does not rise with indebtedness. But as

indebtedness rises further, the probability of default becomes positive, as does the risk

premium. Models of debt renegotiation with perfect information thus imply that spreads

will not increase with debt at low debt-to-GDP ratios but that they will start rising at an

accelerating rate after the debt-to-GDP ratio passes a critical threshold. This is

corroborated by our empirical work, below.

        To motivate the role of monitoring, it is necessary to introduce information

asymmetries. Assume that the debtor’s willingness to pay is known by others with

uncertainty. Specifically, suppose that lenders only know the distribution of the debtor’s

                                                           [             ]
willingness to pay, V ( y t ) , within an interval, V ( y t ),V ( y t ) . For simplicity, the

distribution can be taken as uniform around a mean equal to V ( y t ) . The debtor can offer

repayment, Vˆ ( y t ) , less than its true willingness to repay. Consistent with standard
                                                   9


analyses, the equilibrium offer accepted by lenders yields repayment, Vˆ ( y t ) , equal to the

debtor’s actual willingness to pay when this equals its minimum value, V ( y t ) . For larger

realizations of V ( y t ) , the debtor will transfer less than its true willingness to pay and

realize a positive surplus given by the difference, V ( yt ) − Vˆ ( y t ) .

         The debtor pays in full if Vˆ ( y t ) ≥ Dt . Because actual repayments are less than the

debtor’s true capacity, the probability of default is higher and creditors’ expected returns

are lower when information is asymmetric.

          Creditors can extract more surplus if monitoring helps them to become better

informed about the debtor’s future policy actions. Monitoring increases willingness to

pay, raising returns in the event of renegotiation and reducing the probability that

renegotiation occurs. If lenders learn about the characteristics of borrowers from repeat

lending, as appears to be the case from the evidence reported below, then spreads should

fall with repeat transactions. Similarly, if the IMF has an advantage in monitoring the

policy actions of the debtor, then agreement to establish an IMF program should reduce

spreads and increase debt issuance for a debtor with a positive probability of having to

renegotiate.

         Our empirical analysis in Section 5 below points to differences in the impact of

repeat lending and IMF programs on bank loans and bond spreads.12 An explanation

consistent with our findings is that banks and bondholders have different monitoring

abilities. Banks will cater to smaller, less well established borrowers, since they

presumably possess a superior monitoring technology. Bondholders will focus on large,

12
     See Section 5 below.
                                             10

well-known borrowers.13 The private information revealed by clients to their banks will

then make more precise the bankers’ views of their capacity to repay. On the other hand,

if banks have a monitoring advantage over bondholders, then an improvement in public

information resulting from an IMF program could reduce (or in the limit remove) that

informational advantage, reducing bond spreads and encouraging bond issuance relative

to bank loans.

       With asymmetric information, the adoption of an IMF program can reveal

information to capital markets about country policies and willingness to pay. This does

not hinge on the assumption that the IMF has superior ability to collect or interpret data;

the Fund may simply have the ability to commit to actions to which private investors

cannot or will not commit.14 To the extent that the IMF has a superior ability to commit

or objectives that differ from those of private investors, adoption of a Fund program can

also reveal information about the debtor country. In turn this allows the government to

signal its intentions.15 For example, the conditionality associated with an IMF loan might

be less onerous for governments for which policy reforms are less costly, thus making it

incentive compatible for such governments to sign up with the Fund in order to signal its

type. Countries with stronger policies or a greater will to enact policy reform are thus

able to reveal this information by negotiating a Fund agreement. Of course, adopting a




13
   See Petersen and Rajan (1994, 1995) for U.S. evidence consistent with this pattern.
14
   It should be possible to model the IMF as endogenously gaining a monitoring
advantage through its ability to commit to lend only in a crisis in a repeated game. The
approach of self-enforcing equilibrium taken by Kletzer and Wright (2000) in the
sovereign debt context could be used to model de facto IMF seniority and why countries
might meet IMF conditionality.
15
   Marchesi and Thomas 1999 offer a model in which Fund conditionality serves as a
screening device.
                                               11

program may also reveal poor fundamentals, and not just a superior capacity to enact

policy reforms, resulting in an overall ambiguous impact on spreads.

       IMF programs sometimes turn precautionary: borrowing stops, but the

government continues paying a commitment fee that gives it the option to resume

borrowing. By turning a program precautionary, the debtor country government can thus

reveal that it has a diminished need for official finance but a continuing commitment to

prudent policies. This good news should be reflected in a reduction in spreads on both

bank loans and bonds.

       Debt restructuring can also give rise to differences between banks and

bondholders if the members of a bank syndicate can more easily coordinate their actions.

Recall that equation (1) separates current willingness to pay into the sum of current

resources available for repayment w( y t ) and discounted expected future willingness to

pay. If coordination failures prevent bondholders from restructuring debts quickly, then

banks can move first and secure a larger share of the pie. They can do so even when all

creditors have identical information and learn at the same time that the debt is

unsustainable. Recall that

                                                     1
(3)                     Dt = Bt + Lt > w( y t ) +        EtVt +1 ,
                                                    1+ r

where Bt and Lt are outstanding bonds and bank debt, respectively. Banks can

reschedule their loans and avoid immediate default by reducing repayments currently due

while at the same time increasing future repayments by rolling over their loans at higher

interest rates. Subsequent renegotiations incorporating equal sharing between

bondholders and bank lenders will then divide the settlement amount between banks and
                                                  12

bondholders on the basis of the new bank share of the total debt. To illustrate, let the

banks reschedule an amount ∆Lt of current debt repayments so that

(4)                              w( y t ) = r b Bt + r l Lt − ∆Lt ,

where r b Bt and r l Lt are interest payments due on bonds and loans, respectively. The

banks then increase loans in period t+1, Lt +1 , by an amount r '∆Lt . The banks’ share of

future repayments rises to

                                       Lt +1 + ∆Lt
(5)                                                    Vt +1 .
                                   Bt +1 + Lt +1 + ∆Lt

Since the increase in the value of bank claims comes out of the expected returns to

bondholders in the event that current total debt is unsustainable, the interest rate r 'can

then be chosen to maximize the increase in expected returns,

                                            Bt +1 ∆Lt
(6)                     Et                                         V     − (1 + r )∆Lt .
                             (Bt +1 + Lt +1 + ∆Lt )(Bt +1 + Lt +1 ) t +1
If the banks can reschedule a sufficient share of their debt, they can eliminate their

current expected loss at the expense of bondholders. This strategic advantage contrasts

with a simple principal-agent model in which improved monitoring by banks raises the

probability of repayment and returns to banks and bondholders alike.16

       The banks’ strategic advantage can be reduced or eliminated by the presence of a

more senior official-sector creditor. Since the first-mover advantage arises from the

prospect of default, it can be reduced by availability of official support under an IMF

program, assuming that such funding reduces the risk of renegotiation. Absent
16
  The sharing of negotiated repayments here contrasts with the assumptions of Bolton
and Jeanne (2003) that bonds are not renegotiable but bank loans are and separate
penalties apply in selective defaults.
                                              13

differences in bank and bond markets, the basic model of sovereign debt renegotiation

with asymmetric information would imply that IMF monitoring and financial resources

lead to equivalent reductions in bond and bank loan interest spreads.17 Similarly, if IMF

conditionality improves fundamentals and growth prospects, then both bond and bank

lending should increase. However, if banks have a monitoring advantage and can better

manage creditor coordination and debt restructuring problems, as assumed here, then

IMF monitoring that reveals debtor characteristics and IMF lending that reduces the

likelihood of default will benefit bondholders more than banks.

       Finally, we consider the role of liquidity crises, adapting the model of Morris and

Shin (2003).18 In their model, the fundamental has a distribution that is public

knowledge, but each lender in a continuum receives a privately observed noisy signal of

its realization in the current period.19 In this setting, private information can generate

coordination failures and produce liquidity crises even when debt is sustainable.

       We reinterpret their model by distinguishing between banks and bondholders,

assuming that banks coordinate whereas bondholders do not. If V ( y t ) exceeds total debt

but the country’s current liquid resources fall short of current net payments due, then a

liquidity crisis is possible. When debtor liquidity falls below a critical level, bondholders

facing uncertainty about one another’s actions will be unwilling to purchase new bond

17
   Gai and Vause 2003 present a model in which the IMF acts as a delegated monitor
motivated by private creditor coordination failures. Our emphasis on asymmetric private
abilities to coordinate is different.
18
   Similar models by Rochet and Vives (2001) and Corsetti, Dasgupta, Morris and Shin
(2001) also take a global games approach to catalytic finance. Chui, Gai and Haldane
(2002) also discuss the policy implications of sovereign liquidity crises.
19
   Morris and Shin also distinguish short-term debt that amortizes in the current period
from other debt.
                                              14

issues to replace amortizing debt.20 This may give rise to an incipient crisis. That crisis

may be prevented, however, if bank syndicates replace the maturing bonds with

additional bank loans.

         Banks are able to do this, in principle, because they can coordinate among

themselves. Suppose that banks observe both a private signal drawn from the same

distribution as that of bondholders and the failure of the debtor to place new bond issues.

They can then halt a liquidity-driven crisis by replacing the maturing bonds with news

loans. They can move after bondholders exit and have an incentive to do so in order to

avoid unnecessary defaults on their long-term loans. Such models thus imply that bank

loans and bond issues should be negatively correlated if crises are caused by illiquidity.

         Two further implications follow. First, a deterioration in market liquidity or

increased uncertainty that reduces bond issuance can be mitigated by the presence of

bank lending, since banks have an incentive to fill the gap. Second, the IMF, as lender in

a liquidity crisis, can help to avoid costly default and renegotiation.21 Assume that

potential purchasers of bonds are as poorly informed about what banks will do as they are

about what other bondholders will do. Banks move on the basis of private information

and the reluctance of bondholders to reenter the market. But both bondholders and banks

should be able to anticipate the IMF’s strategy when a program is in place. Then the

existence of an IMF program should raise bond issuance relative to bank lending for

countries susceptible to liquidity-driven crises. We examine this proposition empirically

below.



20
   Morris and Shin (2003) detail the determination of the critical level of liquidity. For
our interpretation, we leave out additive debtor effort in their model.
21
   Jeanne (2001) among others discusses the lender of last resort role of the IMF.
                                            15




3. The Setting

       Although international lending through bond markets was prominent in the late

19th and early 20th centuries, from the 1960s through the 1980s private credit flows to

developing and emerging economies took place mainly through banks. Lending via bond

markets was about 10 percent of bank lending in the 1970s and early 1980s (Edwards

1986). This changed following the debt crises of the 1980: between 1991 and 2002, credit

obtained via banks and bonds was of about the same order of magnitude, just under $700

billion through each channel (Table 1).22

       Differences persisted, however, in the characteristics of the typical bank loan and

bond. To show this, for each loan and bond in our data set we extracted the initial price,

the initial maturity, the amount, and the currency of denomination. Borrowers are

distinguished as sovereign, non-sovereign but public sector, and private sector.23 On

average, bank loans are more numerous and smaller. Between 1991 and 2002, Loanware

reports 6,747 Libor-based syndicated loan transactions; during the same period,

Bondware reports the issuance of just over 3700 bonds.24 On average, a bond issue was

about 70 percent larger than a loan transaction.



22
   While we include all bonds issued in our analysis, we restrict the sample of loans to
those that were priced based on Libor. These form the vast majority of international
syndicated loans, both in terms of numbers and in the amount borrowed. By limiting the
loans to those priced off Libor, we believe that more precise estimates of loan pricing
become possible.
23
   We use these distinctions to also construct an estimate of the numbers that did not
borrow. Thus, for a given country in a given quarter, the absence of borrowing by the
sovereign implied that the sovereign had either forgone the opportunity to borrow or had
not had access to international funds. Similarly, we identify country-quarters where no
public (non-sovereign) and private borrowing occurred. For more on this, see below.
24
   Of which spreads are available for about 3500
                                              16

       We construct a measure of repeat borrowing, R, separately for bank and bond

borrowing. Starting with January 1, 1991, the measure takes the value 1 the first time a

borrower enters into an international debt contract. With each subsequent instance of

borrowing we then increment the value of R by one. The results show that repeat

borrowing is more common in bond markets, where the median number of borrowings

over the period 1991 to 2002 is 3 (the 75th percentile is 8 and the 90th percentile is 27); for

banks, the median is 2 (the 75th percentile is 4 and the 90th percentile is 8). Thus,

compared with banks, which allow a diverse set of clients to episodically borrow, the

bond market caters to borrowers with name recognition who return frequently.

       Relative to bank loans, bonds were more likely to be issued when the issuing

country had an IMF-supported program. About 22 percent of loans were contracted when

a country had a Fund program in place (Table 2). In contrast, just over a third of bonds

were issued in the presence of a program. To put the point another way, when countries

were under an IMF program they were about as likely to borrow through a loan or a

bond, but a loan was more than twice as likely when there was no program.

       While IMF programs appear to shift borrowing toward bonds, this shift does not

occur uniformly. Table 2 shows that countries with external-debt-to-GDP ratios below 30

percent had few bond or loan transactions while under IMF programs. When the debt-

ratio was between 30 and 40 percent, more borrowing occurred under IMF programs,

especially through bonds; however, the number of credit contracts was still higher in

countries without, rather than with, IMF programs. Countries with debt/GDP ratios in the

40-60 per cent range play an important role in our analysis. In this category, the

distribution of credit contracts between program and no program is more even: indeed,
                                              17

more bonds are issued under a program than when there is no program. Finally, when

external debt exceeds 60 percent of GDP, countries once again limit their international

borrowing. When they do borrow, loans and bonds are equally prevalent.



4. Patterns of Borrowing

          In this section, we analyze the borrowing decision and the choice between bank

loans and bonds. The first probit equation (Table 3) estimates the correlates of borrowing

by sovereign, non-sovereign/public, and private entities in each country-quarter. The

second equation reports the likelihood of bond issuance rather than a bank transaction.

Throughout we report the change in the probability for an infinitesimal change in each

independent, continuous variable at its mean and the discrete change in the probability for

dummy variables. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering since the number of

borrowing transactions varies from country to country.25 Explanatory variables include

issuer characteristics (in this regression, the borrower type, with sovereign as the omitted

category), global variables (U.S. growth, the swap rate, EMBI volatility), and a vector of

country characteristics.26

          Among the global variables, U.S. growth appears to facilitate borrowing,

especially by bond issuers in the medium-debt range (with a debt/GDP ratio between 40

and 60 percent). An interpretation is that global growth acts as collateral that supports

additional borrowing. If the average monthly growth of U.S. industrial production rises




25
     This same correction for clustering is made throughout.
26
     More detail on variable definitions and sources can be found in the appendix, below.
                                              18

from its mean of 0.3 percent to 0.4 percent, the probability of borrowing increases by just

over one percent.27

       Higher volatility of J.P. Morgan’s Emerging Market Bond Index, reflecting

greater uncertainty about pricing, is associated with reduced borrowing. If daily volatility

increases from its monthly mean of 2 per cent to 3 per cent, the probability of borrowing

declines by 1½ to 2 percent.

       Higher bond-market volatility also lowers the frequency of bond issuance relative

to bank loans by borrowers from countries with debt/GDP ratios below 60 percent.28 A

one percentage point increase in daily volatility reduces the likelihood of bond issuance

relative to a bank transaction by 2½-4 percent. An interpretation is that sort-run liquidity

concerns and financial market disorder are more likely to generate strategic uncertainty

among bondholders, who may then withdraw to the sidelines on the fear that others are

doing the same. In contrast, banks, which are better able to coordinate among

themselves, are more likely to continue lending.29

       Improved credit quality (proxied by Institutional Investor credit ratings, which

run from a low of 0 to a high of 100) allows for more borrowing both from banks and on

bond markets. The importance of the credit rating increases when the external-debt/GDP

ratio exceeds 40 percent. An increase in rating by 10 points from a mean of 52 strongly




27
   The measure of US growth used in the regressions is the average of monthly growth
rates in the quarter in which the transaction occurred.
28
   Where debt ratios are higher, such compositional shifts are not statistically significant.
29
   The Korean crisis in 1997-8, and other similar episodes, remind us that there may be
limits to such coordination. But an important fact about the Korean crisis is that, in the
end, the banks did roll over their loans, albeit at high interest rates. See for example
Goldstein (1998).
                                              19

raises the likelihood of borrowing with no apparent shift in its composition.30 An

interpretation is that whereas ratings influence the willingness of lenders to lend, a

country’s demand for foreign exchange determines how much it wishes to borrow. Thus,

a higher ratio of debt service to exports increases the demand for external resources,

thereby raising the likelihood of international borrowing, provided that the debt/GDP

ratio is below 60 percent. Interestingly, as the debt/GDP ratio rises, the demand for

external borrowing is increasingly met through loans. Similarly, when countries face

higher export volatility, they are less likely to borrow abroad; in particularly, they are

especially prone to reduce their borrowing on bond markets.

        Bond issues tend also to be larger and longer in term. Whereas the average

maturity of loans in our sample is 4½ years (the median is just over 3 years), that for

bonds is 6¼ years (with a median of 5 years).31

        IMF programs have limited influence on aggregate borrowing by countries at low

debt levels, as already suggested by Table 2. Presumably structural problems that limit

the ability to borrow also cause countries to seek Fund assistance. Table 3 suggests,

however, that such borrowers are more likely to issue bonds than borrow from banks. In

the medium-debt range, a Fund program raises the probability of borrowing by 14 per

cent. At high debt levels, the influence of IMF programs remains positive, although the

effect is not statistically significant.

        We also distinguish precautionary programs. A first case is where IMF programs

are designated as precautionary at outset. Country authorities declare that they do not

30
   The likelihood of borrowing rises by between 16 and 25 percent
31
  A borrower wishing to increase the length of maturity from the average from the
average bank loan to the average bond maturity is about 3.5 percent (1.75*0.02) more
likely to issue a bond.
                                             20

intend to draw on resources made available.32 Borrowing via both loans and bonds is

lower in such cases, but mainly for countries in the intermediate debt range. There is thus

some suggestion in the data that countries choosing to approach the Fund for

precautionary reasons also behave conservatively in their borrowing from banks and on

bond markets.

        A second case is when programs turn precautionary. In this instance the member

stops drawing on resources available through the program but continues to pay the

commitment fee to retain access. Aggregate borrowing does not appear to be affected by

such arrangements.33



5. The Pricing of Loans and Bonds

        To analyze pricing, we use the model developed by Eichengreen and Mody (2000,

2001) and extended by Mody and Saravia (2003). The spreads equation is linear of the

form:

              log (spread) = X + u1                                         (1)

where the dependent variable is the logarithm of the spread; X is a vector of issue, issuer,

and period characteristics; and u1 is a random error. X contains a dummy variable for the

existence of an IMF program, program characteristics if any, and interactions between the

program and country characteristics.34 Since the spread will be observed only when there




32
   This declaration is not binding, as noted above.
33
   Although borrowers from countries with high debt/GDP ratios appear to be less likely
to issue bonds.
34
   As discussed below.
                                             21

is a decision to borrow and lend, we correct for sample selection. Assume that spreads are

observed when a latent variable B crosses a threshold B' defined by:

               B' = Z + u2                                                  (2)

where Z is the vector of variables that determines the desire of borrowers to borrow and

the willingness of lenders to lend (and will also contain the IMF program variables and

their interactions). u2 is a second error term. We assume that: u1 ~ N(0, ), u2 ~ N(0,1), and

corr (u1 , u2 ) = . This is a sample selection model à la Heckman (1979). Equations (1)

and (2) can be estimated simultaneously by maximum likelihood.

         Estimating the determinants of market access requires information on

nonborrowers. As noted above, for each country we consider three categories of issuers:

sovereign, other public, and private. For each quarter and country where one of these

issuers did not come to the market, we record a zero, and where they did we record a

one.35

         We use our measure of repeat borrowing, R, to proxy for private monitoring. It is

likely that the incremental information declines as R rises. Moreover, since R is

correlated with the number of debt obligations outstanding, a larger value of R may also

create greater coordination problems in the event of restructuring.36




35
   Leung and Yu (1996) note that the estimation does not require the variables in the
selection equation and the spread equation to be different but rather that the variables not
be concentrated in a small range and that truncated observations (no bond issuance) not
dominate. We do include in the selection equation (the probit), the ratio of debt service to
exports, which appears to influence the issuance decision but not the determination of
spreads.
36
   In the regressions, we use the log of R, which has a distribution that is much closer to
normal than the (skewed) distribution of R. We also allow all coefficients—and not just
the variables of immediate interest, R and the IMF program dummy—to vary by debt
category.
                                              22

       The IMF dummy appears in both the selection and spreads equations. In contrast,

R appears only in the spreads equation. Other variables in the selection equation are the

global and country variables from Table 3. In addition, transaction-specific variables such

as the maturity and amount of the credit transaction and dummy variables for the

currency of issue and production sector of issuer (not shown to conserve space) are

included in the spreads equation.37 Results are in Table 4.

       U.S. growth is associated with lower spreads and raises the likelihood of

borrowing through banks and bond markets. This is again consistent with the idea that

stronger global growth and export opportunities act as collateral for emerging markets.

These effects are especially important for the middle debt group: an increase in monthly

growth rate of 0.1 percent (a 1.2 percent increase in annual growth) reduces loan spreads

in the mid-debt range by 2 per cent and bond spreads in that same range by about 4 per

cent. Increases in issuance probabilities are somewhat smaller.

       Among the global variables, an increase in EMBI volatility has a particularly

important quantitative effect on bond issuance when a country’s debt-to-GDP ratio is

below 60 per cent. If daily volatility rises by one per cent (at the daily mean of 2 per

cent), bond issuances fall by between 5 and 7 per cent (in that same debt range).

Improved credit ratings raise the probability of borrowing while lowering spreads,

consistent with the idea that their main effect is to increase investors’ willingness to lend.

A 10-point improvement in the Institutional Investor rating has a large impact on spreads

(with the largest effect in the mid-debt range, 32 per cent for loans and 48 per cent for

bonds). For borrowers from countries with debt/GDP ratios below 60 per cent, improved

37
  For a more extended discussion of the joint interpretation of the selection and spreads
equation, see Eichengreen and Mody (2000).
                                            23

credit ratings have a relatively small impact on bank lending, suggesting that public

rating information, while relevant to access in both markets, is less valuable for bank

decision making under normal circumstances.

       Our main result is that repeat borrowing reduces spreads on syndicated loans,

while IMF programs reduce spreads in bond markets. The coefficient on the log of repeat

bank borrowing is negative, significant and larger than the corresponding coefficient for

bond markets. This is true for each of the three debt/GDP categories. The effects in the

loan market are large. A second loan reduces spreads by about 10 per cent.38 A third loan

has a spread about 6 per cent lower than the second loan, after which the impact declines

to low levels. In bond markets, in contrast, only lightly indebted countries gain from

repeat borrowing.

       IMF programs, on the other hand, reduce spreads and enhance access mainly in

bond markets. This effect is most evident in medium-debt countries with debt/GDP

ratios in the 40-60 per cent range.39 Bond issuance by countries in this category is about

13 per cent higher when there is a Fund program and spreads are 40 per cent lower.

Evidently, bondholders become more willing to lend to such countries following the

negotiation of a Fund program. IMF programs also facilitate bank borrowing by countries

in this medium-debt range, but the impact on spreads is insignificant.

       Finally, as noted in Table 2, in the low-debt range (especially when the debt/GDP

ratio is below 30 per cent), countries with IMF programs borrow little. Countries with




38
   A coefficient on the log of repeated borrowing of 0.14 times the difference between log
2 and log 1, 0.69.
39
   This finding of a strong impact of Fund programs for bond market access is also a
central result in Mody and Saravia (2003).
                                              24

modest debts that nonetheless negotiate IMF programs appear to have unobserved

characteristics that raise rather than lower spreads.40

       In sum, repeat transactions have a significant effect mainly on bank borrowing,

while IMF programs improve the terms of access to a greater extent for bonds.



6. Extensions

       We now explore further the robustness of these results, varying the cutoff points,

considering the size of IMF programs, and distinguishing private and public borrowers.

       We first ask whether the results are sensitive to cut-off points for the debt/GDP

ratio. Table 5 reports results for overlapping debt/GDP ratios, starting with the 10 to 30

per cent range and then raising the end points by 10 percentage points over 6 intervals.41

Panel A, for loans, confirms the value of repeat borrowing which is significant in all 6

intervals. Comparison with the corresponding coefficients in Panel B shows that the

value of repeat borrowing is greater for loans than for bonds in every debt category.

Panel A also confirms that IMF programs do not reduce spreads significantly and are

associated with higher spreads until the debt/GDP ratio is between 40 and 50 per cent.

However, once the debt/GDP ratio exceeds 50 per cent, IMF programs are associated

with a higher frequency of borrowing from banks with no apparent adverse effect on

spreads.




40
  Even more for loans than bonds.
41
  Ending with the 60 to 80 per cent range. We exclude the low and high ends of the
debt/GDP spectrum where outliers tend to drive the results. Thus, for example, some of
the transition countries had very low levels of debt in the mid-1990s, which may not have
been an accurate reflection of their external obligations.
                                              25

         Panel B confirms that repeated bond issuance lowers spreads only in the 10-30

per cent debt/GDP range and has limited value thereafter, in fact raising spreads as if a

multiplicity of bonds creates coordination problems. The contrasting importance of IMF

programs is also evident. At the low end of the debt/GDP range, there is a tendency for

Fund programs to be neutral or to reduce spreads modestly, but the effect strengthens

noticeably as the debt/GDP ratio approaches 40-60 per cent. Beyond that, the influence of

IMF programs on spreads falls. Fund programs are also associated with more bond

issuance. This effect is strongest when indebtedness is between 20 and 60 per cent of

GDP.42

         In Table 6 we examine the influence of the size of IMF programs.43 We interact

the IMF program dummy with the country’s debt/GDP ratio and normalize the amount of

IMF lending by the country’s external debt. For bonds, all the action is in the

intermediate debt category where, as above, IMF programs have their major impact on

spreads. The results in Table 6 thus reinforce the earlier finding that higher debt/GDP

levels reduce the impact of IMF programs on bond markets. At the same time, the

amount of lending does not influence spreads. These results are consistent with the

Fund’s value as a monitor rather than a provider of liquidity that prevents the occurrence

of a financial crisis on account of strategic uncertainty among creditors.

         In the market for bank loans, the larger is IMF assistance the higher are spreads in

the two low-debt categories at least. Thus, while availability of additional IMF resources




42
  These results support those obtained by Mody and Saravia (2003).
43
  Based on the findings reported in Tables 4 and 5 we again allow for the effect of
programs and repeat borrowing to vary by the level of indebtedness. But to avoid
excessively detailed results, we return to presenting results by three debt categories.
                                              26

allows for additional borrowing, it is as if the creditor coordination advantage is

eliminated.44

       In Table 7 we again consider precautionary programs. For bank loans and to a

lesser extent for bonds, programs that are precautionary at outset reduce both issuance

and spreads, as if countries entering such programs are more cautious in seeking access to

private markets.45 Spreads show a tendency to decline, as if lenders wish to acquire more

of their debt because their credit quality is perceived favorably.

       But programs that turn precautionary tend not to have an impact on the frequency

of either bank loans or bond issuance. However, they do have a spread-reducing effect.

This is largest for countries in the high-debt zone. In this range borrowers both from

banks and on the bond market enjoy lower spreads, although the impact is larger in bond

markets. Thus, when a country is coming off a period during which it has relied on

official finance, a continued precautionary relationship with the Fund appears to enhance

market access. That the relationship rather than the amount lent is what matters supports

the idea of a Fund monitoring/country signaling function.46

       Finally, Table 8 considers whether the market access of private borrowers is

differentially affected by the existence of an IMF program. In fact, repeat borrowing

reduces spreads more strongly for bank loans than bonds irrespective of whether the

borrower is a private- or public-sector entity. But the effect is larger for private sector




44
   However, in the medium-debt range, the adverse effects of increasing debt levels from
40 to 60 percent of GDP are mitigated by the presence of an IMF program.
45
   Recall that this was what was suggested by our earlier analysis.
46
   That this function is important also to bank lenders when a country is in the high-debt
range suggests that bank monitoring may not be enough when there is a high risk of
insolvency.
                                              27

borrowers.47 Less is publicly known about private borrowers. Their repeat borrowing

therefore provides particularly valuable information in the syndicated loan market. In the

bond market, in contrast, better-known private borrowers gain little from repeat

borrowing. In fact, public borrowers face rising spreads as they borrow more,

presumably reflecting the dominance of coordination effects over information gains.

       The stronger influence of IMF programs when borrowing occurs through the bond

market survives splitting the sample. Again, private borrowers gain the most. The

principal action is still in the intermediate debt category. In addition, the effects for

private borrowers are substantially stronger than those for public borrowers. A Fund

program reduces bond spreads for private borrowers from countries in this intermediate

debt zone by 47 per cent while raising the probability of bond issuance by 27 per cent.48



7. Conclusions

       Bank loans and bonds are alternative ways of transferring capital to emerging

markets. The growth of global bond markets is of course one of the signal features of the

last 15 years of international financial history. Transacting through bond markets has

advantages for investors, notably greater scope for diversifying country risk. Given the

advance of securitization across a broad front, it is therefore important to observe that

bank finance continues to play an important role in international financial markets. Bank

loans are easier to access for borrowers new to such markets, since banks have a




47
   Thus, a second loan reduces the spreads charged private bank borrowers by about 13
percent, while public borrowers achieve, on average, a 7 percent spread reduction.
48
   The direction of influence is the same for public issuers, but the size and statistical
significance of the outcome is weaker.
                                               28

comparative advantage in bridging information asymmetries. Banks’ intermediation

technologies are also better suited to providing small loans.

        We show in this paper how the ability of banks to bridge information asymmetries

is supported by repeat borrowing. As borrowers return for credit, they reveal information

about themselves, reducing uncertainty and incurring a lower risk premium on their

loans. Since the issuers of bonds are better known, the value of information obtained

through repeat issuance is less. Indeed, to the extent that it results in a proliferation of

separate bond issues, repeat borrowing may in fact increase the risk premium, reflecting

the greater difficulty of coordinating the holders of different issues in the event of debt-

servicing difficulties.

        These observations have obvious relevance to arguments about IMF monitoring

and surveillance. Our results suggest that IMF monitoring and surveillance matter more

in bond markets. This role for the IMF has the largest impact when debts reach 40 per

cent of GDP and countries are therefore vulnerable to liquidity shocks. However, as debts

continue rising from there, the impact of monitoring declines. There being relatively little

uncertainty about the nature of the problem, lenders now care mainly about whether the

IMF is providing real resources that help to keep debt service current. But as debt and

insolvency risk grow still higher, even significant amounts of additional official finance

may not make a difference. At that point, what matters most is when programs turn

precautionary, signaling that conditions have improved sufficiently that the country no

longer requires financial assistance.

        The approach taken here points to the importance of distinguishing international

capital flows by instrument and intermediary. Macroeconomic analyses lumping together
                                           29

bank loans and bonds tend to neglect important differences between these market

segments stemming from the nature of the information environment, the monitoring

technology, and the scope for creditor coordination. We have shown in this paper that

these distinctions are important for understanding the impact of IMF programs. We

would conjecture that they are equally important for understanding a variety of other

issues in international finance.
                                           30


References

Bolton, Patrick and Olivier Jeanne, 2003, “Structuring and Restructuring Sovereign Debt:
       The Role of Seniority,” Unpublished.

Bordo, Michael, Ashoka Mody, and Nienke Oomes, 2004, “Keeping Capital Flowing:
       The Role of the IMF,” Unpublished.

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff, 1989, “A Constant Recontracting Model of
      Sovereign Debt,” Journal of Political Economy 97, pp.155-178.

Chui, Michael, Prasanna Gai and Andrew Haldane, 2002, “Sovereign Liquidity Crises:
        Analytics and Implications for Public Policy,” Journal of Banking and Finance,
       26, pp. 519-546.

Corsetti, G., A. Dasgupta, S. Morris and H.S. Shin, 2001, “Does One Soros Make a
       Difference? A Theory of Currency Crises with Large and Small Traders,” Review
       of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Cottarelli, Carlo, and Curzio Giannini, 2002, “Bedfellows, Hostages, or Perfect
       Strangers? Global Capital Markets and the Catalytic Effect of IMF Crisis
       Lending,” IMF Working Paper No. 02/193 (Washington: International Monetary
       Fund).

Diamond, Douglas, 1984, “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” Review
      of Economic Studies 51: 393-414.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, 1981, “Debt with Potential Repudiation,” Review of
        Economic Studies 48, pp.289-309.

Edwards, Sebastian, 1986, “The Pricing of Bonds and Bank Loans in International
      Markets: An Empirical Analysis of Developing Countries’ Foreign Borrowing,”
      European Economic Review 30 (3): 565-589.

Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody, 1998, “Lending booms, reserves, and the
      sustainability of short-term debt: inferences from the pricing of syndicated loans,”
      Journal of Development Economics 63 (1): 5-44.

Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody, 2000, “What Explains Changing Spreads on
      Emerging Market Debt?” In Sebastian Edwards, ed., Capital Flows and The
      Emerging Economies: Theories, Evidence, and Controversies (Chicago: The
      University of Chicago Press).
                                           31

Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody, 2001, “Bail-Ins, Bail-Outs, and Borrowing
      Costs,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 47, pp.155–87.

Eichengreen, Barry, Kenneth Kletzer and Ashoka Mody, 2004, “Crisis Resolution: Next
      Steps,” Brookings Trade Forum 2003, Washington, DC: The Brookings
      Institution, pp. 279-352.

Fama, Eugene, 1985, “What’s Different about Banks?” Journal of Monetary Economics
      15: 29-36.

Gai, Prasanna and Nicholas Vause, 2003, “Sovereign Debt Workouts with the IMF as
       Delegated Monitor – A Common Agency Approach,” Bank of England Working
       Paper no. 187.

Goldstein, Morris, 1998, The Asian Financial Crisis, Washington, D.C.: Institute of
       International Economics.

Heckman, James, 1979, “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica,
     Vol. 47, pp.153–161.

International Monetary Fund, 1999, “Involving the Private Sector in Forestalling and
        Resolving Financial Crises,” (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
        Available via Internet. http://imf.org.

James, Christopher, 1987, “Some Evidence on the Uniqueness of Banks,” Journal of
       Financial Intermediation 19: 217-235.

Jeanne, Olivier, 2001, “Sovereign Debt Crises and the International Financial
       Architecture, IMF working paper. (unpublished).

Kletzer, Kenneth, 2003, “Sovereign Bond Restructuring: Collective Action Clauses and
       Official Crisis Intervention.” Paper for Bank of England conference, “The Role of
       the Official and Private Sectors in Resolving International Financial Crises,” July
       23 and 24, 2002, revised.

Kletzer, Kenneth and B. D. Wright, 2000, “Sovereign Debt as Intertemporal Barter,”
       American Economic Review 90, pp. 621-639.

Leung, S. F., and S. Yu, 1996, “On the Choice between Sample Selection and Two-Part
       Models,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 72, pp. 197–229.

Marchesi, Silvia and Jonathan Thomas, 1999, “IMF Conditionality as a Screening
      Device,” Economic Journal, 109, pp. 111-125.
                                           32

Mody, Ashoka and Diego Saravia, 2003, “Catalyzing Capital Flows: Do IMF-Supported
      Programs Work as Commitment Devices?” IMF Working Paper WP/03/100,
      Washington D.C.

Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin, 2003, “Catalytic Finance: When Does It Work?”
       Yale University, Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 1400, February.

Pattillo, Catherine, Helene Poirson and Luca Ricci, 2004, “Through What Channels Does
        External Debt Affect Growth?” Brookings Trade Forum 2003, Washington, DC:
        The Brookings Institution, pp. 229-277.

Penalver, Adrian, 2004, “How Can the IMF Catalyse Private Capital Flows? A Model,”
       Bank of England Working Paper no. 215.

Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram Rajan, 1994, “The Benefits of Lending
       Relationships: Evidence from Small Business Data,” Journal of Finance 49: 3-37.

Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram Rajan, 1995, “The Effect of Credit Market
       Competition on Lending Relationships,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110:
       407-443.

Reinhart, Carmen, Kenneth S. Rogoff, and Miguel A. Savastano, 2003, “Debt
       Intolerance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (Spring): 1-74.

Rochet, Jean-Charles and Xavier Vives, 2002, “Coordination Failures and the Lender of
       Last Resort: Was Bagehot Right After All?” CEPR Discussion Paper no. 323.,

Tirole, Jean, 2002, Financial Crises, Liquidity and the International Financial System,
        Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
                                  33



         Table 1: Trends in International Bond and Bank Lending

                                                  Aggregate Value of Transactions
            Number of Transactions                        (US$ billions)
Year     Bonds         Loans            Total        Bonds        Loans         Total
1991        81           209              290           10           24           34
1992       177           252              429           21           18           39
1993       357           376              733           45           27           73
1994       307           508              815           39           40           79
1995       369           750            1,119           48           56          104
1996       522         1,066            1,588           81           83          164
1997       555         1,248            1,803          100          125          225
1998       234           550              784           52           62          114
1999       334           402              736           65           47          113
2000       284           532              816           59           81          141
2001       290           470              760           78           62          140
2002       219           384              603           63           44          107
 Total    3,729        6,747           10,476           661         669        1,331
                                          34

           Table 2: Number of Transactions, by Debt Category and IMF Program

Type of Credit                       Debt/GDP Range (0-30 percent)
                              No Program                   IMF Program
None                             1,301                          389
Bonds                            1,244                           57
Loans                            2,606                           99

                                    Debt/GDP Range (30-40 percent)
                              No Program                   IMF Program
None                              501                           190
Bonds                             680                           453
Loans                            1375                           240
                                     Debt/GDP Range (40-60 percent)
                              No Program                      IMF Program
None                              670                             500
Bonds                             380                             595
Loans                             999                             775
                                 Debt/GDP Range (more than 60 percent)
                              No Program                      IMF Program
None                              471                             679
Bonds                             151                             169
Loans                             309                             344
                                                Full Sample
                              No Program                      IMF Program
None                             2,949                           1,758
Bonds                            2,455                           1,274
Loans                            5,289                           1,458
                                                    35

           Table 3: The Decision to Borrow and the Choice between Bonds and Loans

                               (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)              (5)         (6)
                             Debt/GDP<=0.40          0.40<Debt/GDP<=0.60              Debt/GDP>0.60
                          To         Bond           To         Bond versus      To borrow    Bond
                          borrow or versus          borrow or loan              or not to    versus loan
                          not to     loan           not to                      borrow
                          borrow                    borrow
lamount                                 0.103                     0.095                             0.130
                                       [2.38]*                  [5.78]**                          [6.45]**
maturity                                0.020                     0.021                             0.020
                                       [2.48]*                  [3.46]**                          [3.99]**
US Industrial Growth         2.242     -2.405         11.433      4.283             5.643          23.516
                             [1.29]     [0.69]        [2.07]*     [0.82]            [0.87]         [2.44]*
Log of Swap Rate            -0.062     -0.170         -0.051     -0.023            -0.135          -0.303
                            [2.10]*     [1.40]         [0.83]     [0.42]            [1.33]        [3.77]**
EMBI volatility             -1.367     -3.757         -1.478     -2.449            -2.021          -0.984
                           [3.68]**   [4.67]**         [1.85]    [2.46]*            [1.82]          [0.88]
Credit Rating                0.005     -0.002          0.016      0.002             0.025          -0.001
                           [3.00]**     [0.39]       [3.60]**     [0.56]          [5.31]**          [0.28]
Debt/GDP                     0.332     -0.430         -1.094     -0.739            -0.207          -0.113
                             [1.44]     [1.51]        [2.15]*     [1.57]            [0.70]          [0.34]
Debt Service/Exports         0.682      0.509          0.416      0.284             0.164          -0.770
                           [5.17]**   [2.89]**        [2.21]*   [2.70]**            [0.44]        [3.38]**
Real GDP growth              0.639     -5.670          3.174      1.330             0.880           2.058
                             [0.49]     [1.70]         [1.81]     [0.50]            [0.26]          [0.72]
Export Volatility           -0.309     -0.663         -0.974     -0.252             0.133           0.011
                            [2.56]*     [1.90]       [3.20]**     [1.33]            [0.71]          [0.12]
Short-term/Total Debt       -0.163     -0.099          0.331      0.035            -0.387          -0.165
                             [1.17]     [0.43]         [1.05]     [0.14]            [1.06]          [0.57]
Reserves/Imports            -0.011      0.035          0.009     -0.027             0.043           0.106
                             [0.67]     [0.92]         [0.29]     [0.64]            [1.00]        [3.81]**
Reserves/ST Debt            -0.016     -0.029         -0.014     -0.008            -0.075          -0.013
                             [1.72]     [1.34]         [1.44]     [0.54]           [2.07]*          [0.36]
Private Credit/GDP           0.071      0.071         -0.044      0.009            -0.068          -0.097
                           [3.44]**    [2.19]*         [0.67]     [0.23]            [1.02]          [1.96]
Public Issuer                0.218     -0.393          0.104     -0.316             0.100          -0.477
                           [4.90]**   [4.90]**         [1.91]   [6.64]**            [1.42]        [5.24]**
Private Issuer               0.424     -0.457          0.312     -0.514             0.303          -0.688
                           [6.80]**   [5.07]**       [5.87]**   [7.17]**          [3.66]**        [4.44]**
IMF Program                  0.027      0.290          0.141     -0.024             0.084          -0.008
                             [0.54]   [3.29]**       [3.45]**     [0.36]            [1.02]          [0.14]
Precautionary               -0.069     -0.073         -0.184      0.131            -0.047          -0.061
                             [1.08]     [0.32]        [1.97]*     [1.50]            [0.23]          [0.72]
Turned Precautionary        -0.007     -0.011          0.032      0.153             0.135          -0.196
                             [0.13]     [0.06]         [0.50]     [1.68]            [0.72]        [4.44]**
Pseudo R-squared              0.20       0.44           0.33       0.24              0.29            0.42
Observations                  8505       6681           3874       2721              1976            965

The values reported represent the probability for an infinitesimal change in each independent, continuous
variable (at its mean) and the discrete change in the probability for dummy variables. Robust z statistics
(based on country clusters) in brackets, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

.
                                                36

                             Table 4: Pricing of Loans and Bonds

                            (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)
                                     Loans                           Bonds
Debt/GDP range             Low       Medium      High      Low       Medium      High
                                                  Spread Equation
Log of Amount              -0.105     -0.095     -0.084      0.033     0.000     -0.001
                          [8.24]**   [2.91]**   [3.10]**    [1.04]    [0.01]      [0.02]
Maturity                    0.040      0.008      0.012      0.014     0.008      0.012
                          [5.34]**     [0.86]    [0.62]   [2.98]**    [1.02]     [2.00]*
US Industrial Growth       -6.521    -17.801     -8.075    -11.756   -36.014     -3.713
                            [0.92]    [2.08]*    [0.63]     [1.23]   [3.06]**     [0.21]
Log of Swap Rate            0.258      0.005      0.263      0.246     0.263     -0.060
                          [4.24]**     [0.06]    [1.40]   [3.51]**    [1.91]      [0.32]
EMBI volatility            -1.521     -0.202      3.481     -0.995     7.180     -0.303
                          [2.73]**     [0.12]    [1.63]     [0.60]    [1.53]      [0.12]
Credit Rating              -0.017     -0.032     -0.022     -0.034    -0.048     -0.018
                          [4.07]**   [2.81]**   [2.70]** [10.31]**   [5.00]**     [0.92]
Debt/GDP                   -0.472     -0.821      0.222      0.097     0.675      4.157
                            [1.22]     [0.84]    [0.50]     [0.19]    [0.60]    [2.60]**
Real GDP growth            -6.479    -11.443     -5.028    -10.008    -9.887     -4.641
                           [2.36]*   [3.04]**    [0.97]   [3.05]**   [2.99]**     [1.53]
Export Volatility          -0.336     -0.702      0.137     -0.218     0.678     -0.161
                            [0.54]     [1.83]    [0.99]     [0.48]    [0.54]      [1.60]
Short-term/Total Debt      -0.214      0.267      0.252     -0.038    -0.851      0.574
                            [1.17]     [0.47]    [0.81]     [0.19]    [1.20]      [1.54]
Reserves/Imports            0.006      0.059     -0.050      0.018     0.074      0.038
                            [0.25]     [0.98]    [0.75]     [0.67]    [1.85]      [0.74]
Private Credit/GDP         -0.007      0.047     -0.037      0.033    -0.060     -0.260
                            [0.16]     [0.78]    [0.55]     [0.84]    [0.57]     [2.23]*
Public Issuer               0.086     -0.291      0.197     -0.095     0.247      0.090
                            [0.42]     [0.95]    [0.58]     [0.98]    [1.85]      [0.42]
Private Issuer              0.198     -0.162      0.267      0.195     0.520      0.599
                            [0.87]     [0.37]    [0.63]    [2.25]*   [3.34]**     [1.62]
IMF Program                 0.368     -0.041     -0.093      0.092    -0.392     -0.033
                          [3.38]**     [0.27]    [1.12]     [1.57]   [2.74]**     [0.34]
Log of Repeat Borrowing    -0.139     -0.149     -0.142     -0.038     0.047      0.015
                          [4.27]**   [3.10]**   [4.84]**   [2.56]*    [1.54]      [0.45]
                                                      37



                Table 4: Pricing of Loans and Bonds (continued: selection equation)

                                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)

                                                   Loans                                   Bonds
Debt/GDP range                        Low        Medium          High          Low       Medium            High
                                                               Selection Equation
US Industrial Growth                  7.547        14.170         2.577      2.772        13.310           13.009
                                     [2.40]*       [2.11]*        [0.38]     [0.69]        [1.58]          [2.54]*
Log of Swap Rate                     -0.081        -0.141        -0.066     -0.165        -0.080           -0.240
                                      [1.23]        [1.41]        [0.80]   [2.67]**        [0.99]         [4.28]**
EMBI volatility                      -0.467        -0.061        -1.810     -6.506        -4.992           -1.425
                                      [0.78]        [0.05]       [2.05]*   [5.81]**      [3.92]**           [1.28]
Credit Rating                         0.011         0.018         0.016      0.008         0.017            0.015
                                     [2.45]*      [3.09]**      [3.88]**    [2.17]*      [3.05]**         [5.19]**
Debt/GDP                              0.671        -1.441        -0.056      0.203        -1.470            0.831
                                      [1.42]       [2.17]*        [0.22]     [0.44]        [1.96]         [2.62]**
Debt Service/Exports                  0.575         0.277         0.157      1.543         0.643           -0.090
                                    [3.35]**        [1.46]        [0.47]   [6.25]**      [2.66]**           [0.55]
Real GDP growth                       2.389         4.716         1.714     -0.281         3.829            1.239
                                      [0.71]        [1.82]        [0.51]     [0.17]        [1.21]           [0.50]
Export Volatility                    -0.752        -1.257         0.072     -0.585        -1.097           -0.008
                                     [2.16]*      [3.08]**        [0.48]    [2.14]*       [2.18]*           [0.09]
Short-term/Total Debt                -0.323         0.380        -0.141     -0.303         0.286           -0.308
                                      [1.23]        [0.85]        [0.40]     [0.94]        [0.79]           [1.87]
Reserves/Imports                     -0.018        -0.004         0.007     -0.046        -0.009            0.034
                                      [0.63]        [0.12]        [0.22]     [1.01]        [0.16]           [1.34]
Reserves/Short-term Debt             -0.034        -0.025        -0.065     -0.044        -0.035           -0.056
                                      [1.91]       [1.97]*        [1.76]     [1.74]        [1.89]         [3.40]**
Private Credit/GDP                    0.104        -0.017         0.019      0.164        -0.016           -0.066
                                      [1.89]        [0.20]        [0.42]   [5.88]**        [0.26]           [1.54]
IMF Program                          -0.077         0.115         0.090      0.168         0.132            0.041
                                      [0.76]        [1.61]        [1.23]    [2.23]*        [1.96]           [1.44]
Public Issuer                         0.591         0.414         0.560      0.211        -0.142           -0.159
                                    [9.51]**      [6.35]**      [8.60]**     [1.76]        [1.76]          [2.50]*
Private Issuer                        0.811         0.713         0.670      0.365        -0.010           -0.107
                                   [11.43]**      [9.77]**     [13.07]** [2.97]**          [0.13]           [1.38]
Lambda                               -0.032         0.054         0.081     -0.044        -0.657            0.145
                                      [0.35]        [0.15]        [0.52]     [0.60]      [3.20] **          [0.44]
No. of Transactions                    4278          1771           648       2220          899               281

Observations                          6389          3102         1783         4510         2351            1310


Robust z statistics, based on country clusters, in brackets, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

Note: Among issuer types, sovereign is the omitted category. The spreads equation also has dummy
variables for sector of issuer (e.g., manufacturing, services, finance) interacted with issuer type (public,
private). Also included are dummy variables for currency of issue and, for bond markets, a dummy variable
for fixed rather than a floating rate of interest. In the selection equation, the values reported represent the
probability for an infinitesimal change in each independent, continuous variable (at its mean) and the
discrete change in the probability for dummy variables.
                                              38

            Table 5A: Loans: Impact of IMF Programs and Repeat Borrowing

                           (1)        (2)            (3)      (4)          (5)          (6)
Debt Range               10-30      20-40          30-50    40-60        50-70         60-80
(% of GDP)
                                Spread Equation
IMF Program              0.561      0.230     0.272          -0.041       -0.091       -0.081
                       [3.06]** [2.25]* [3.53]**             [0.27]       [0.70]       [0.88]
Repeat Borrowing        -0.174     -0.090    -0.058          -0.149       -0.159       -0.146
                       [4.89]** [3.05]** [2.77]**           [3.10]**     [3.99]**     [5.15]**
                               Selection Equation
IMF Program            0.120     0.045      0.041           0.115        0.162        0.135
                       [1.30]    [0.51]     [0.48]          [1.61]       [1.99]*      [1.55]

No. of Transactions       1908       2598           2426      1771         1355         571

Observations              2960       4066           3804      3102         2647         1471


            Table 5B: Bonds: Impact of IMF Programs and Repeat Borrowing

                           (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)           (5)        (6)
Debt Range               10-30       20-40          30-50     40-60         50-70       60-80
(% of GDP)
                                  Spread Equation
IMF Program                0.034      -0.000    -0.043         -0.392        -0.252     -0.023
                          [0.26]      [0.01]     [0.55]       [2.74]**       [1.86]     [0.20]
Repeat Borrowing          -0.067      -0.022    -0.004          0.047        0.067       0.013
                         [2.92]**     [1.50]     [0.28]        [1.54]       [2.31]*     [0.39]
                                 Selection Equation
IMF Program                0.153       0.250     0.221         0.132        0.045       0.048
                          [1.78]     [2.90]** [2.92]**         [1.96]       [1.05]      [1.51]

No. of Transactions        789         1653          1539        899         580         272

Observations               1911        3227          3038       2351         1973       1212

Robust z statistics, based on country clusters, in brackets, * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%. Other variables included in these regressions are those listed in Table 4,
including those referred to in the footnote to that Table. In the selection equation, the
values reported represent the probability for an infinitesimal change in each independent,
continuous variable (at its mean) and the discrete change in the probability for dummy
variables.
                                             39

                   Table 6: Does the Amount of IMF Lending Matter?

                                (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
                                          Loans                           Bonds
Debt/GDP range                 Low       Medium      High        Low      Medium      High
                                                    Spread Equation
IMF Program                  0.689      1.623    -0.122   0.270           -2.469     -1.052
                             [1.15]     [3.74]** [0.15]   [0.65]          [2.04]*    [0.87]
IMF*Debt/GDP                 -1.550     -3.818   -0.039   -0.737          4.354      1.393
                             [0.86]     [3.98]** [0.03]   [0.59]          [1.81]     [0.79]
IMF Amount/Debt              2.941      6.922    1.801    1.343           -2.401     1.846
                             [2.76]**   [5.05]** [0.82]   [1.64]          [0.99]     [1.13]
Log of Repeat Borrowing      -0.143     -0.139   -0.146   -0.040          0.051      0.018
                             [4.48]**   [3.27]** [4.83]** [2.64]**        [1.76]     [0.55]
                                                 Spread Equation
IMF Program                  -0.063     0.141    0.226    -0.237          0.941      0.409
                             [0.20]     [0.29]   [0.48]   [0.83]          [2.28]*    [1.04]
IMF*Debt/GDP                 -0.106     -0.371   -0.210   1.245           -2.991     -0.689
                             [0.12]     [0.38]   [0.35]   [1.38]          [2.50]*    [1.11]
IMF Amount/Debt              0.386      4.357    0.033    0.376           3.047      1.205
                             [0.32]     [3.03]** [0.02]   [0.34]          [1.34]     [1.27]

Number of Transactions         4278       1771       648         2220       899        281
Observations                   6389       3102       1783        4510       2351      1483


Robust z statistics, based on country clusters, in brackets, * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%. Other variables included in these regressions are those listed in Table 4,
including those referred to in the footnote to that Table. In the selection equation, the
values reported represent the probability for an infinitesimal change in each independent,
continuous variable (at its mean) and the discrete change in the probability for dummy
variables.
                                                40

                       Table 7A: Bank Loans: Is Precaution Valuable?

                          (1)          (2)              (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
Debt Range              10-30       20-40            30-50      40-60      50-70       60-80
(% of GDP)
                                   Spread Equation
IMF Program               0.587        0.291           0.299      0.086      0.151      0.206
                        [2.92]**     [2.95]**        [3.15]**     [0.59]     [0.94]    [2.07]*
Precautionary            -0.372       -0.533          -0.125     -0.348     -0.470     -0.477
  Program                [1.10]       [2.12]*         [0.85]     [2.02]*    [2.39]*   [2.79]**
Turned Precautionary                  -0.075          -0.022     -0.097     -0.264     -0.350
  Program                              [0.36]         [0.15]      [0.77]    [2.55]*    [2.44]*
Repeat Borrowing         -0.174       -0.091          -0.059     -0.164     -0.186     -0.144
                        [4.89]**     [3.17]**        [2.72]**   [3.39]**   [4.90]**   [5.23]**
                                   Selection Equation
IMF Program               0.166       0.093            0.086      0.196      0.250     0.149
                         [1.88]      [0.92]           [0.88]    [2.69]**   [2.71]**   [2.16]*
Precautionary            -0.341      -0.172           -0.200     -0.272     -0.310    -0.177
  Program                [1.68]      [1.16]           [1.30]     [2.32]*    [2.07]*    [1.16]
Turned Precautionary                 -0.117           -0.055     -0.015      0.026     0.165
  Program                            [0.65]           [0.61]      [0.18]     [0.18]    [0.84]

No. of Transactions      1908         2598             2426       1771       1355       571
Observations             2960         4066             3804       3102       2647      1471

                           Table 7B: Bonds: Is Precaution Valuable?
                          (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)
Debt Range               10-30       20-40         30-50        40-60       50-70      60-80
(% of GDP)
                                   Spread Equation
IMF Program               0.053       0.043            0.014     -0.282      0.013      0.148
                         [0.37]       [0.81]           [0.17]    [2.50]*     [0.08]     [1.36]
Precautionary            -0.198      -0.077           -0.153     -0.140     -0.283     -0.372
  Program                [0.96]       [0.28]           [1.31]     [0.98]     [0.82]   [3.20]**
Turned Precautionary                 -0.131           -0.130     -0.267     -0.622     -0.331
  Program                            [2.33]*          [2.36]*     [1.60]    [2.01]*    [2.12]*
Repeat Borrowing         -0.068      -0.023           -0.005      0.049      0.065      0.007
                        [2.98]**      [1.66]           [0.37]     [1.74]    [2.32]*     [0.24]
                                   Selection Equation
IMF Program               0.248       0.238            0.233      0.112      0.065    0.065
                        [2.63]**     [2.48]*         [2.88]**    [1.99]*    [0.94]    [1.45]
Precautionary            -0.324      -0.290           -0.155     -0.067     -0.115    -0.064
  Program               [2.93]**     [2.03]*          [1.75]      [0.62]    [1.06]    [0.65]
Turned Precautionary                  0.138            0.033      0.161      0.064    -0.003
  Program                             [1.52]          [0.32]      [1.25]    [0.47]    [0.03]

No. of Transactions      789          1653             1539       899        580        272
Observations             1911         3227             3038       2351       1973      1212
                                                      41

Robust z statistics, based on country clusters, in brackets, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Other
variables included in these regressions are those listed in Table 4, including those referred to in the footnote
to that Table. In the selection equation, the values reported represent the probability for an infinitesimal
change in each independent, continuous variable (at its mean) and the discrete change in the probability for
dummy variables.
                                               42

     Table 8: Do Private Borrowers Benefit More than Public Borrowers From IMF
                                     Programs?

                                      A: Private Borrowers

                                (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
                                            Loans                         Bonds
Debt/GDP range                 Low         Medium     High       Low      Medium      High
                                                     Spread Equation
IMF Program                    0.245   -0.116   -0.114   0.096    -0.466 -0.031
                              [2.25]*  [0.56]   [1.19]   [1.62] [2.85]** [0.13]
Log of Repeat Borrowing        -0.133  -0.179   -0.179   -0.098   -0.034 -0.103
                             [4.14]** [2.93]** [7.08]** [4.52]** [1.33]   [1.50]
                                               Spread Equation
IMF Program                  -0.044   0.091    0.130    0.200    0.266   -0.018
                             [0.77]   [2.01]* [1.46]    [2.71]** [2.51]* [0.65]

Number of Transactions
Observations                   3315         1672       784       2109       890        452

                                      B: Public Borrowers

                                (1)          (2)      (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)
                                           Loans                          Bonds
Debt/GDP range                 Low        Medium     High       Low      Medium       High
                                                     Spread Equation
IMF Program                   0.599        -0.065    -0.038  0.118   -0.153   0.018
                             [5.12]**      [0.50]    [0.26]  [1.34]  [1.55]   [0.22]
Log of Repeat Borrowing       -0.138       -0.109    -0.075  -0.014  0.099    0.083
                             [4.38]**     [2.10]*    [1.10]  [0.61] [2.67]** [4.82]**
                                                    Spread Equation
IMF Program                  -0.053       0.054     0.045   0.085   0.075    0.072
                             [0.49]       [0.85]    [1.19]  [1.35]  [1.16]   [2.37]*

Number of Transactions
Observations                   3074         1430      999      2401       1461        858

Robust z statistics, based on country clusters, in brackets, * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%. Other variables included in these regressions are those listed in Table 4,
including those referred to in the footnote to that Table. In the selection equation, the
values reported represent the probability for an infinitesimal change in each independent,
continuous variable (at its mean) and the discrete change in the probability for dummy
variables.
                                             43



                                      Data Appendix

Bond characteristics

The bond dataset, obtained from Loanware and Bondware covers the period 1991 to 2002
and includes: (1) launch spreads over risk free rates (in basis points, where one basis
point is one-hundredth of a percentage point); (2) the amount of the issue (millions of
US$); (3) the maturity in years; (4) whether the borrower was a sovereign, other public
sector entity, or private debtor; (5) currency of issue; (6) whether the bond had a fixed or
floating rate; (7) borrower’s industrial sector: manufacturing, financial services, utility or
infrastructure, other services, or government (where government, in this case, refers to
subsovereign entities and central banks, which could not be classified in the other four
industrial sectors).

Global variables

(1) United States industrial production growth rate: average of month-month growth rate
over a quarter. (2) United States ten-year swap spread. (3) Emerging Market Bond Index:
standard deviation of difference in log of daily spreads.

Country Characteristics

Variable              (Billions)         Periodicity        Source              Series
Total external debt   US$                Annual             WEO                 D
(EDT)
Gross national        US$                Annual             WEO                 NGDPD
product (GNP,
current prices)
Gross domestic        National           Annual             WEO                 NGDP
product (GDPNC,
current prices)
Gross domestic        National           Annual             WEO                 NGDP_R
product (GDP90,
1990 prices)
Total debt service    US$                Annual             WEO                 DS
(TDS)
Exports (XGS)         US$                Annual             WEO                 BX
Exports (X)           US$                Monthly            IFS                 M#c|70__dzf
Reserves              US$                Quarterly          IFS                 q#c|_1l_dzf
(RESIMF)
Imports (IMP)         US$                Quarterly          IFS                 q#c|71__dzf
Domestic bank         National           Quarterly          IFS                 q#c|32d__zf
credit
(CLM_PVT)1
Short-term bank       US$                semi-annual        BIS
debt (BISSHT)2
                                            44

Total bank debt     US$                semi-annual        BIS
(BISTOT)3
Credit rating       Scale              semi-annual        Institutional
(CRTG)                                                    Investor

Constructed Variables

Debt/GNP                                     EDT/GNP
Debt service/exports                         TDS/XGS
GDP/growth                                   0.25*ln[GDP90_t/GDP90_{t-1}]
Standard deviation of export growth          Standard deviation of monthly growth rates
                                             of exports (over six months)
Reserves/imports                             RESIMF/IMP
Reserves/GNP                                 RESIMF/GNP
Reserves/short-term debt                     RESIMF/BISSHT
Short-term debt/total debt                   BISSHT/BISTOT
Domestic credit/GDP                          CLM_PVT/(GDPNC/4)

  Sources: International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (WEO) and
International Financial Statistics (IFS);IMF program data from the IMF’s Executive
Board Documents and Staff Estimates; World Bank’s World Debt Tables (WDT) and
Global Development Finance (GDF); Bank of International Settlements’ The Maturity,
Sectoral, and Nationality Distribution of International Bank Lending. Credit ratings were
obtained from Institutional Investor's Country Credit Ratings. Missing data for some
countries was completed using the US State Department'   s Annual Country reports on
Economic Policy and Trade Practices (which are available on the internet from
http:www.state.gov/www/issues/economic/trade_reports/). U.S. industrial production was
obtained from the Federal Reserve and Swap rates and EMBI from Bloomberg.
1
  Credit to private sector.
2
  Cross-border bank claims in all currencies and local claims in nonlocal currencies of
maturity up to and including one year.
3
  Total consolidated cross-border claims in all currencies and local claims in nonlocal
currencies.
