NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SLOW PASSTHROUGH AROUND THE WORLD:
A NEW IMPORT FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES?
Jeffrey A. Frankel
David C. Parsley
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 11199
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11199
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

The authors would like to thank Charles Engel, Linda Goldberg, and participants at seminars at the IMF and
Federal Reserve Board for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Jeffrey A. Frankel, David C. Parsley, and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Slow Passthrough Around the World: A New Import for Developing Countries?
Jeffrey A. Frankel, David C. Parsley, and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 11199
March 2005
JEL No. F3, F4
ABSTRACT
Developing countries traditionally exhibit passthrough of exchange rate changes that is greater and
more rapid than high-income countries, but have experienced a rapid downward trend in recent years
in the degree of short-run passthrough, and in the adjustment speed. As a consequence, slow and
incomplete passthrough is no longer exclusively a luxury of industrial countries. Using a new data
set

prices of eight narrowly defined brand commodities, observed in 76 countries

we find

empirical support for some of the factors that have been hypothesized in the literature, but not for
others. Significant determinants of the passthrough coefficient include per capita incomes, bilateral
distance, tariffs, country size, wages, long-term inflation, and long-term exchange rate variability.
Some of these factors changed during the 1990s. Part (and only part) of the downward trend in
passthrough to imported goods prices, and in turn to competitors’ prices and the CPI, can be
explained by changes in the monetary environment. Real wages also work to reduce passthrough to
competitors’ prices and the CPI, confirming the hypothesized role of distribution and retail costs in
pricing to market. Rising distribution costs, due perhaps to the Balassa-Samuelson-Baumol effect,
could contribute to the decline in the passthrough coefficient in some developing countries.
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
David C. Parsley
Owen School of Management
401 21st Avenue, South
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37203
david.parsley@vanderbilt.edu

Shang-Jin Wei
International Monetary Fund
Room 10-700
19th Street, N
Washington, DC 20433
and NBER
swei@imf.org

Introduction
The phenomenon of slow or incomplete passthrough, which has long been a phenomenon
of the market in the United States and other rich countries, increasingly characterizes small
developing countries as well. In that sense, slow passthrough was “imported” by lower-income
countries in the 1990s. In the aftermath of large devaluations in East Asia, Latin America, and
other emerging market countries between December 1994 (Mexico) and December 2001
(Argentina), most observers feared correspondingly large increases in local currency prices.
That such price increases did not materialize was a welcome surprise, but was a surprise
nonetheless: the conventional wisdom had long been that passthrough is relatively rapid and
complete in countries that are small, or less developed, or both. This is why the “small open
economy” model has in the past been thought more applicable to them than to rich countries.
The apparent decline in the passthrough coefficient in developing countries in the 1990s
has been much discussed informally. Yet it has not been extensively documented, let alone
explained. Most of the many econometric studies of passthrough, even those that examine a
recent decline in the passthrough coefficient, have focused on prices of imports into
industrialized countries, rather than into developing countries. For example, Otani, Shiratsuka,
and Shirota (2003) find a decline in passthrough for imports into Japan, which they attribute to
increased penetration by intra-firm imports and to a decline in global inflation.1 Campa and
Goldberg (2001) find a decline in the passthrough coefficient in the 1990s, which they attribute
to changing commodity composition more than to a less inflationary environment; but their data
set again consists solely of industrialized countries.
A few studies include lower-income countries. Choudhri and Hakura (2001) extend to a
sample of 71, including developing countries, the Taylor (2001) and Gagnon and Ihrig (2004)
findings that a low-inflation environment reduced passthrough to the CPI in the 1990s.
Borensztein and De Gregorio (1999) and Goldfajn and Werlang (2000), study the low
passthrough of recent large devaluations in developing countries.2 Saiki (2004) includes two
developing countries in her study of whether a switch in monetary regime to inflation-targeting is
associated with a fall in the passthrough coefficient. Devereux and Yetman (2002) have 122
countries in their sample, and Barhoumi (2005) studies pass-through to import prices in 24
developing countries. But these are all studies of influences on aggregate price measures, the
CPI in particular, not on import prices. Few studies concentrate on imports of specific goods
into developing countries.3 A primary goal of this paper is to extend the literature to a broad
1

Taylor (2001) proposed that a decline in passthrough of exchange rate changes into the CPI in the 1990s
was due to a lower inflationary environment, and looked at US data. Gagnon and Ihrig (2001) extended
this claim to a sample of 11 industrialized countries, finding that the standard deviation of inflation
explains the coefficient better than does the average inflation rate.
2
The BIS (2002, p. 92) is among those attributing the low passthrough to the CPI of recent large
devaluations in developing countries to a decline in long-run inflation. But Burstein, Eichenbaum and
Rebelo (2002) attribute the low observed passthrough in general price indices to the disappearance from
consumption of newly expensive import goods, and their replacement in the indices by inferior local
substitutes.
3
Aw (1993) examines exports from Taiwan to four countries of footwear, but they are heavily affected by
quotas. Also, like Maloney’s (1999) study of Chile, the data are for an earlier period. Parsley (2004)
examines exports from Hong Kong, and finds little pricing to market.

sample that includes developing countries, where the question is particularly salient in light of
recent experience, and to examine the reported decline in their passthrough coefficients and
possible explanations for it.
It is important to be explicit about the degree of disaggregation. “Passed through” to
what? We must distinguish between passthrough, on the one hand, in the narrow sense of the
determination of prices of goods that are physically imported -- or at least are physically
identical with goods that are imported -- versus, on the other hand, the broader sense of the
determination of the general price level. There is also an intermediate question: the
determination of prices of goods that may be relatively close substitutes for the imported goods
but that are produced at home. Gradual passthrough to the general price level has been
extensively documented, even for developing countries. The decline in passthrough to the
general price level in the 1990s has also been documented. It is primarily to the question of
passthrough to narrowly defined import prices that the present paper seeks to contribute. But we
will also trace through effects on the prices of domestically produced substitutes and to the
general price level, thus facilitating a connection between our findings on passthrough narrowly
defined and others’ findings on passthrough defined more broadly.
We use data on imports into 76 countries, for eight narrowly defined goods. They are
(given with their country of origin): Marlboro Cigarettes (US), Coca-cola (US), Cognac
(France), Gilbey’s gin (US), Time magazine (US), Kodak Color Film (US), Cointreau Liqueur
(France), and Martini & Rossi Vermouth (Italy). Our data pertain to literally the identical
product across different countries. The period is 1990-2001. Further details are given below.
Hypotheses to be tested
Any theory of incomplete passthrough must posit some barrier to arbitrage between the
import good in the country of origin and the same good in the country of purchase. Among the
candidate explanations for the barrier to arbitrage are: trade distortions, transportation costs, and
the local value added that enters into the distribution process between the dock and the point of
retail.4 Beyond the question of the arbitrage barriers, some theories model the “pricing to
market” phenomenon as a case of optimal price discrimination by firms.5 Others, perhaps
motivated by the notion that the barriers to arbitrage are smaller in the long run than in the short
run, model prices as completely sticky in the local currency at a moment in time, but adjusting
gradually over time.6 Given the diversity of models that have been proposed, it would be good
4

Among those who emphasize the importance in incomplete passthrough of local distribution costs
consisting of nontraded inputs are Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2002), Burstein, Neves and Rebelo
(2003), Campa and Goldberg (2004), Corsetti and Dedola (2002), Frankel (1984), and many others.
Parsley and Wei (2003) offer some detailed evidence that the law of one price holds much better for
traded inputs than for the product sold to consumers. They seek to reaffirm the conventional wisdom that
the failure of PPP can be partly explained by non-traded goods and services, by refuting the Engel (1999)
challenge, that the explanation lies solely in failures of the law of one price among traded goods.
Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2003) is another challenge to Engel, this time for four largedevaluation episodes.
5
In addition to Dornbusch (1987) and Krugman (1987), the price discrimination theory is featured in
Marston (1991), Gagnon and Knetter (1995), Yang (1997), Corsetti and Dedola (2002), among many
others.
6
Kasa (1992) shows how adjustment costs can generate incomplete passthrough in the short-run. Ghosh
and Wolf (1995) study changes in the local price of the Economist magazine in various countries in

2

to be able to choose among them empirically or, if it turns out that all raise factors that are
important determinants of passthrough, then to get an idea of their relative importance. A second
important goal of this paper is to try to see which of the factors that are invoked in the
theoretical literature are in practice important and which are not, using a panel of data that
extends across a broad set of countries.
There are important connections between the recent experience of developing countries
and the various competing models in the theoretical literature. Three testable hypotheses apply
(after eliminating the compositional effects that affect aggregate price measures). (1) A priori, if
passthrough coefficients are higher in small countries, one could attribute that to a paucity of
local substitutes in small countries, as in some models of price discrimination.7 (2) If
passthrough coefficients are higher (for retail prices) in poor countries, one could attribute that to
lower costs for labor and commercial real estate, which are the non-traded inputs into the
distribution and retail process. (3) If passthrough coefficients have declined over time, one could
attribute that to (a) a less inflationary environment, or (b) to costs of labor and rent that rise over
time, as in the Balassa-Samuelson effect (internationally) or Baumol effect (domestically).
The question whether passthrough is indeed lower for developing countries is important
for a number of reasons. It matters for the determination of the trade balance, and for whether
the small open economy model is appropriate. It also matters for a country’s choice of
exchange rate regime. It has been observed that developing countries generally are more
reluctant to see their exchange rates fluctuate than rich industrial countries are, a phenomenon
sometimes labeled "fear of floating." Even among those that have adopted inflation targeting as
a monetary framework, it is more common to see them intervene heavily and frequently in the
foreign exchange market than developed economies. Several explanations have been proposed
for this phenomenon. For the purpose of this paper, we note that a relatively high degree of passthrough for developing countries has been cited as a rationale for the developing countries'
stance on exchange rates (e.g., Ho and McCauley, 2003).
One further motivation for this research arises in the recent emphasis that the PPP
literature has given to the issue that heterogeneity in parameters can create bias in the estimates
from aggregate data.8 Allowing parameters to vary by means of fixed effects, across goods or
across countries, is one way to address the problem. But a better way is to model the variables
on which the parameters depend. To the extent that variation in passthrough behavior across
countries is an issue (especially rich vs. poor countries), and to the extent that such variation is
related to differences in income, size, and so forth, our approach may be able to shed more light
on the true parameters.

response to exchange rate changes, and argue that the timing supports the sticky price view, arising from
menu costs, better than the pricing to market view, arising from price discrimination. Devereux and
Yetman (2002) apply a menu-cost model to the endogenous determination of passthrough. Burstein,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2003) includes another sticky-price model.
7
In the Cournot oligopoly model of Dornbusch (1987), for example, the extent of passthrough is
determined by the proportion of foreign firms present in the domestic marketplace, relative to domestic
firms.
8
Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn, and Rey (2002) claim that problems of aggregation are the source of estimates of
apparently slow convergence to PPP. Chen and Engel (2004) reject their argument.

3

A brief further review of the models in the literature, and their predictions
A major empirical discovery of recent years is that goods markets are less integrated than
previously thought. The Law of One Price fails by surprisingly large margins, even when tests
are applied to goods that are narrowly defined into homogeneous categories. An important
subset of this research looks at slow or incomplete passthrough of exchange rate changes into
import prices: when the exchange rate changes, the price of an imported good does not seem to
change by the full amount, at least in the short run.
We have learned steadily about the phenomenon of slow or incomplete passthrough. The
subject gets a boost every time there are large increases in a country’s exchange rate followed by
surprisingly small increases in import prices. For example, some of the early contributions date
from the dollar devaluations of the early 1970s.9 Next, the large swing in the dollar in the 1980s,
unaccompanied by matching swings in import prices, produced a large literature, both theoretical
and empirical, on slow or incomplete passthrough.10 Krugman (1987) gave it the name Pricing
to Market, to indicate that firms were deliberately setting prices in different countries with an eye
to their competitors in the local markets. Theoretical models showed how firms should pricediscriminate optimally, as a function of demand elasticities -- for example, Knetter (1989, 1993)
and Dornbusch (1987). If local demand is highly elastic, foreign firms are forced to absorb
exchange rate fluctuations in their profit margins rather than passing them fully through in local
markets. More recently, the case of Local Currency Pricing (the price of the importable is
unchanged in domestic currency) has been successfully incorporated into modern
macroeconomic theory, as a starkly different case from the traditional assumption of Producer
Currency Pricing (the change in the exchange rate is fully passed through to the import price).11
There is also an extensive empirical literature.12
As already noted, any theory of incomplete passthrough must begin with a reason why
the law of one price fails, that is, with a barrier to arbitrage. To whatever extent we are talking
about goods that are not identical to the foreign good, or perhaps not even close substitutes for it,
no further explanation is required. But when we are talking about the identical good, the obvious
candidates for barriers to arbitrage fall into two categories: (1) the transport costs, tariffs, and
other trade barriers that intervene between the port in the country of export and the port in the
country of import, and (2) the costs of distribution and retail that intervene between the dock in
9

Kreinen (1977) and Magee (1973).
There are also other reasons why the literature on incomplete passthrough took off in the late 1980s: it
provided an application for some tools of game theory that had then been newly imported into
international trade theory from industrial organization; it provided an application for new mathematical
techniques of option-pricing with continuous-time stochastic processes (e.g., Dixit, Krugman, Baldwin);
the micro price data needed for empirical work became available (e.g., Knetter, 1989, 1993); the partial
equilibrium exercise of taking exchange rate movements as given became more interesting when models
to explain the exchange rate had clearly failed; and slow passthrough into the US market -- particularly in
the case of automobiles and other exports from long-horizon Japanese producers (e.g., Marston, 1990;
Froot and Klemperer, 1989; Feenstra, 1989; Parsley, 1993; Gagnon and Knetter, 1995; Ohno, 1989) -seemed to help explain the slow reaction of the US trade balance to the 1985-97 depreciation of the dollar
(Mann, 1986).
11
The models of Devereux and Engel (2002) and Devereux, Engel and Storgaard (2002) show how the
absence of passthrough reduces the real effects of exchange rate variation.
12
See Goldberg and Knetter (1997) for a survey.
10

4

the country of import and the customer at the store counter. Many modelers have focused on just
one category of barrier or the other, but both are potentially important. We will proxy transport
costs with bilateral distance between exporting country and importing country, and will measure
trade barriers with data on commodity-specific tariffs. We might expect the effect of distance to
be the same for rich and poor importers alike; but poor countries are more likely to have higher
trade barriers. We will proxy the costs of distribution and retail by the country’s wage rate.
These are nontraded services, and so the Baumol and Balassa-Samuelson effects lead us to
expect that they may play a smaller role in developing countries than in rich countries. Indeed,
the low real cost of retail services in poor countries, as a fraction of the value of the product,
should constitute one of the possible explanations for the traditional proposition that passthrough
is higher in developing countries.
Whatever their choice for an explanation for the failure of arbitrage, modelers can also be
distinguished according to their view of price-setting behavior. Here we distinguish three
categories of models: (1) prices are sticky in local currency in the short-run, (2) firms follow
rule-of-thumb markup pricing, so that an increase in the exchange rate will be fully passed
through to local prices (but in some cases there may be a lag, until previous shipments are
sold),13 and (3) firms engage in price-discrimination, optimally “pricing to market” so as to take
into account the relevant demand elasticities. Price stickiness should show up as slow
adjustment, leaving aside the degree of passthrough that holds in the long run. Markup pricing
predicts substantial passthrough, but perhaps with a short lag. It seems less straightforward to
get at the hypothesis of price discrimination than the other influences. One piece of evidence
that might support price discrimination is that small economies tend to experience higher longrun passthrough than large countries, even after conditioning for other determinants like income
per capita or wages. The rationale is the Dornbusch (1987) finding from a Cournot oligopoly
model: under optimal price discrimination, the passthrough coefficient will be determined by the
share of foreign firms in the domestic marketplace, relative to domestic firms (times the degree
of competition, defined as the reciprocal of price as a markup over marginal cost). The more
heavily foreign firms outnumber domestic firms, the higher the degree of passthrough. In the
limit, a very small country under perfect competition experiences complete passthrough.
Admittedly there may be an important difference between the size of the presence of foreign
versus domestic firms in the domestic market for a particular commodity, and the size of the
foreign presence in the economy in the aggregate.
Another piece of evidence in favor of the price discrimination hypothesis would be if
passthrough to local prices of imported goods tended to behave similarly to prices of local
substitutes.14 Under the mark-up pricing hypothesis, by contrast, a devaluation should soon open
up a discrete wedge between the import price and the prices of local competitors. Under the
sticky price hypothesis the devaluation should also have that effect, but only gradually over time.
One instance of the size hypothesis is that passthrough is particularly low into the world’s
largest market, the United States, a proposition that goes back at least to Kreinen (1977). Knetter
13

With full mark-up pricing, passthrough may be complete even though the Law of One Price fails. The
two criteria differ. Failure of complete passthrough will invalidate even relative Purchasing Power Parity,
while failure of the Law of One Price need invalidate only Absolute PPP.
14
We would expect passthrough to prices of other local goods to be lower, however. In an optimalpricing model where imports are intermediate products, Bacchetta and Van Wincoop (2002) show
passthrough to consumer goods prices to be low if there is local competition.

5

1993) and Campa and Goldberg (2002), however, found this to be an artifact of composition, that
such apparent differences in passthrough across countries tend to disappear for given industries.
So the US dummy is another proposition to be tested.
Another composition hypothesis is the claim of Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo that
recent estimates of low passthrough of devaluations to the CPI are due in part to substitution
away from high-end varieties of imports to lower-quality substitutes. If this phenomenon were
to constitute the entire explanation for incomplete passthrough, then we would expect that the
passthrough would be close to complete and instantaneous for the completely disaggregated
import goods in our sample. The ability to discriminate among such hypotheses is one benefit of
working with products that are so narrowly defined as to be literally identical in the exporting
and importing countries – a pack of Marlboro cigarettes, etc.
We also test two hypotheses regarding a country’s longer-term monetary environment.
Chronic high rates of inflation affect a country’s economic structure, including such institutions
as indexation of wages and automatic passthrough of exchange rate changes, as a number of
models have shown. We measure the average inflation rate over the preceding five years, to see
if it affects the extent of concurrent passthrough and the speed of subsequent adjustment. If so,
the lower-inflation environment of the 1990s, relative to the 1970s and 1980s, would clearly be a
leading candidate to explain any decline in the passthrough coefficient.
We also test the effect of exchange rate volatility, measured as the standard deviation of
monthly exchange rate changes over the preceding five years. At first glance, one might expect
exchange rate variability to have the same positive effect on the passthrough coefficient as the
long run inflation rate.15 The logic here, however, is quite different; it is almost the opposite.
Krugman (1989), Froot and Klemperer (1989) and Taylor (2000) hypothesized that a given
exchange rate change is less likely to be passed through to import prices in an environment
where such fluctuations are common and transitory. Firms fear losing market share, and will
wait to see whether the exchange rate change looks permanent before modifying local prices.
Thus we expect variability (around the trend) to have a negative effect on the passthrough
coefficient, not a positive effect.
There is some empirical documentation in the literature for the familiar claim that
exchange rate pass-through tends to be higher in developing economies than in rich countries has
been documented. For example, Choudhri and Hakura (2001) reported that for a sample of 12
emerging market economies during 1979-2000, their average one-year pass-through is 26% (with
some individual pass-through degrees as high as 40%). This is much higher than the average
one-year pass-through for a group of non-G3 industrial countries (12%) or G3 (only 7%).16 But
few have offered explicit explanations for the differential. It may be that low-income countries
are on average smaller and more inflation-prone than rich countries. Or it may be that due to
lower real wages and rents, distribution and retail costs tend to be less important for them.
Think of a street vendor in a poor country, as compared to an expensive retail operation in a rich
country. (Tariffs and transport costs on the other hand are likely to be more important for
developing countries, on average.) It would be useful to know if the difference in passthrough

15

Indeed, in the thoery of Devereux and Yetman (2002), exchange rate variability, like price instability,
should raise the passthrough coefficient. But they sometimes find the opposite, empirically.
16
Ho and McCauley (2003).

6

behavior that has been observed historically is a result of these other factors, or pertains to the
difference in income per se. Answering this question is another goal of this paper.

Our Approach
Description of the Data
The individual goods prices used in this study were compiled by the Economist
Intelligence Unit (EIU). The EIU data are collected as part of the Worldwide Cost of Living
Survey, and are designed for use by human resource managers in the design of compensation
policies. The EIU description is at http://eiu.e-numerate.com/asp/wcol_HelpWhatIsWCOL.asp.
The data set contains more than two hundred local currency retail prices of (mostly generic)
goods and services collected from 120 cities around the world (some goods are priced at two
locations and both prices appear in the data set). The data have been collected annually, during
the first week of September since 1990.
We focus on one city (the capital) per country (76 countries), and on well defined,
specific products. The EIU product descriptions include the brand name, physical attributes,
e.g., size, volume, and in some cases, the type of retail establishment where the price was
observed, e.g., supermarket versus mid-priced outlet. Where multiple prices are available for the
same product, we selected the supermarket price. Alcoholic beverages are heavily represented in
the list: French VSOP Cognac, Gilbey’s Gin, Cointreau, and Martini and Rossi Vermouth. This
reflects our selection criterion: that the survey must specify the brand that has been priced, rather
than anything about the types of products the EIU thinks important for its survey. Most product
specifications in the survey are too generic for our criterion, e.g., “facial tissues, box of 100.” 17
An additional restriction we imposed on the sample was that the goods be associated with
a particular country of origin. We recognize that some of our products might have significant
local value added, e.g., Time magazine may be printed locally, Coca-Cola may be locally
bottled, and Philip Morris may have Marlboro production facilities outside the United States.
Our assumption, however, is that even for these cases the primary content (news articles, CocaCola syrup, Burley tobacco, and/or the recipe) is exported from the U.S. Applying these
restrictions yields a sample of 76 cities, eight well-defined goods for the years 1990 to 2001.
We also collected the prices of local competitor products from the EIU data set. For
comparison, Table A lists the imported products, their country of origin, and the domestic
substitute good that we use in our analysis. The choice of domestic substitute prices is dictated
by the data set and is clearly more precisely matched for some products, e.g., Marlboro cigarettes
than others. However, our results are surprisingly robust across products.
A complete listing of the countries is presented in Table B. For these same countries and
years, we use also the nominal exchange rates, hourly labor costs, that are included in the EIU
data base.

17

French VSOP Cognac is an exception to this stringent brand-specific rule; however after checking with
the EIU we were told that the Cognac brands were, in fact, specified as Remy Martin, or Courvoisier;
however another brand would be surveyed if these were not available, as long as it was VSOP, and not
VS, XO, or 3-star. Moreover, our empirical findings also apply to this more general category.

7

All of the price series were checked for coding errors. First, price observations (in
common currency) that differed from the cross-sectional mean by more than a factor of three
were set to missing. Next, price series missing one year’s observation were interpolated using
the average of the previous and next year’s values. Next, we attempted to catch potential coding
errors by focusing on within-product/country price swings. Specifically, price changes within a
given city of more than 60%, that were subsequently reversed in the next period, were also
replaced by the average of the previous and next year’s values. Finally, in our reported
regressions, we first ran preliminary regressions to identify the largest residual outliers. The
observations associated with the top 1 percent of the residuals in these preliminary regressions
were then excluded prior to obtaining the estimates reported in the tables.
In addition to the EIU data, we obtained aggregate consumer price indices (used to
deflate the nominal wage, and to compute long-term five-year rolling averages of inflation), per
capita real GDP, monthly bilateral exchange rate, and aggregate real GDP data from the World
Economic Outlook data base. We obtained simple average tariff levels from Table 6.6 of the
World Bank publication World Development Indicators 2001. For each country, the tariff data
are available for two years – once in the early 1990s and once for the late 1990s. We use the first
reported value in our bilateral tariff rate calculations for the years 1990-95 and the most recent
tariff rate for the years 1996-2001. Finally, the distance between importer and exporter cities
was calculated using the great circle formula using each city’s latitude and longitude data
obtained from the UN web site www.un.org/Depts/unsd/demog/ctry.htm.
We also obtained matching unit value data from the United Nations Commodity Trade
Statistics Database (Comtrade), and matching product-specific tariff data from the UNCTADTRAINS data base. The unit value data were thoroughly checked for errors using the same
procedures as for the price data.
The equations estimated
We begin by estimating an error correction equation using all of the data, i.e., we pool the
eight goods, twelve years, and seventy-six countries. We estimate equation 1 below,
where ∆ ≡ the first-difference operator.
∆ptimp = β1∆st + β 2 ∆ptexp +

∑ λ ∆s X
i

t

i

+ γ ecmt −1 +

i

∑ α ecm
i

t −1 X i

+

i

+ product and country dummies + ε t .

(1)

For the base case estimation, the matrix X is empty. The variables initially included in equation
(1) are defined as:
ptimp = log price of import good in local currency
st = log bilateral exchange rate (importer' s currency per unit of exporter' s currency)
ptexp

= log exporter' s price (in the exporting country)

exp
ecmt −1 = error correction term ( ptimp
−1 − st −1 − pt −1 ),

8

After reporting estimates from this basic equation, we sequentially add variables to the X
matrix. This approach allows us to begin with a very simple equation that explains changes in
local prices as a function only of changes in the exchange rate and changes in the price of the
identical commodity, and an error-correction process. This tells us the contemporaneous or
short-term passthrough coefficient and the speed of subsequent adjustment [the negative ECM
term]. Next, we look for possible (unconditional) time trends in the degree of short-term
passthrough and the speed of adjustment, by interacting a time trend with the exchange rate
change and with the ECM term. Finally, we add successive variables (from the list below) that
might help explain these two parameters and their trends. We begin with relative income
(importer/exporter) because we want to know if passthrough is (unconditionally) stronger for
poor countries than rich. Then we proceed to condition on a sequence of further variables, not
only to see if they are important determinants in their own right, but also to see if they claim
some of the explanatory power of the trend and the income term. Specifically, we sequentially
add the following variables to the matrix X in equation (1):
trend = trend
incomet = log(import country per capita GDP export country per capita GDP )
tarifft = log(import country tariff levels)

dist = log distance (between importer and exporter )
sizet = log(import country GDP export country GDP )

rwaget = log real wage (in import country )

inflt = log inflation (average of previous five year' s, in import country )
xrvol = standard deviation of previous five year' s monthly log changes in bilateral exchange rates
US dummy = dummy variable (1 if US is importer, 0 otherwise).

Results
For the tables below, we report results for the complete set of commodities. Good
specific regressions are reported in a separate Kennedy School working paper version of the
manuscript.
The Determination of Retail Prices of Imported Goods
Table 1 presents the coefficient estimates for the determination of imported goods prices
at the retail stage, as specified in equation 1. We report standard errors corrected for
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation (Newey-West). There are dummy variables for countries
as well as commodities. The advantage of allowing dummy variables is that it takes care of any
country-specific or commodity-specific omitted variables, such as whether some market are
more highly competitive than others. The disadvantage, of course, is that it means throwing out
a lot of potentially useful variation in the data. It is our hope that our independent variables, such
as income, size, and so forth, will explicitly capture much of what would otherwise be
heterogeneity in the parameters.

9

In column 1, the specification includes only the change in the exchange rate, the change
in exporter’s price, and last period’s deviation from the law of one price (and good and country
dummies). According to the estimates in column 1, pass-through is highly significant, but far
from complete after one year (0.42). The passthrough of changes in the exporter’s price is also
highly significant, but much smaller in magnitude, a pattern that will hold throughout. The
difference between the two kinds of passthrough is large and significant, and so we will not
impose the constraint that they are equal as the law of one price would require.18
The coefficient on the error correction term captures long-run reversion to absolute price
parity. Although highly significant statistically, the estimate of .11 suggests that convergence is
quite slow. The half life is 6.1 years (ln(.5)/ln(1-.107)), somewhat above the ‘consensus’ noted
by Rogoff (1996). In the first year, the failure of the law of one price is apparently due to slow
adjustment far more than to a long-run passthrough coefficient that falls short of one. This
suggests that sticky prices play a large role, relative to either optimal price discrimination or ruleof-thumb mark-up pricing. We also note that since our data are (a) sampled at a point in time,
and (b) disaggregated by product, recent theoretical arguments suggesting that slow convergence
may be due to product-aggregation bias, or temporal-aggregation bias, apparently do not apply to
these data.
Column 2 reports highly significant downward time trends in both the magnitude of the
passthrough coefficient and the magnitude of the ECM term. Remarkably, the trend is estimated
to be strong enough to eliminate more than 2/3 of the passthrough coefficient over a ten-year
period (10*.053/.76=.70). Perhaps the linear trend is not the best functional form, however; after
all we don’t think that the passthrough coefficient should go negative.
In column 3 we add the income term: the log of relative per capita income (the importer
relative to the exporter), interacted both with the change in the exchange rate and the ECM term.
At this point the interaction variables in X , so far, are: income, and a trend. The result is a
highly significant negative effect on the passthrough coefficient, confirming lower passthrough
for rich countries than poor. There is no tendency for the time trend in the passthrough
coefficient to lose strength when controlling for income; this indicates that one cannot explain
the tendency for the coefficient to decline globally simply to a convergence of income levels.
(Indeed, Figure 1, a graph of the average income per capita, PPP basis, vis-à-vis the US shows
no overall tendency toward income convergence among these countries during the 12 years of
the sample.) There is no significant implication of income for the ECM term, the speed of
adjustment.
In column 4 we control for tariffs and distance. Both coefficients have the hypothesized
negative signs, but neither is statistically significant. Distance does, however, have a highly
significant effect on the ECM term, suggesting quite sensibly that transport costs slow down the
speed of adjustment, as in a sticky price model, or possibly a rule-of-thumb markup pricing
model.
Size, introduced in column 5, is not statistically significant. Even if it had been, Figure 2
shows no sign of convergence in the size of countries’ economies within our sample. Thus
18

It is possible that there is an element of endogeneity to the export prices – that a depreciation of the
Moroccan currency against the French franc shows up partly as a decline in the price of the export
product in France, not just as an increase in the price in Morocco. But as almost all the exporters are
large countries, we guess that this effect may be small.

10

growth by small countries does not appear to have been the source of declining passthrough in
our sample. The coefficient on wages in column 6 again is of the hypothesized sign (for the
distribution and retail models) but not statistically significant.
Long-term inflation, in columns 7-8, is significant, especially if we do not control for
exchange rate variability at the same time. The trend term falls somewhat when controlling for
inflation. Furthermore, long-term inflation is also a significant determinant of the ECM term,
signifying that adjustment takes place more quickly in an inflationary environment. And the
trend in the ECM term also falls sharply and loses significance when controlling for inflation.
Thus we conclude that the inflationary environment is an important determinant of the speed and
degree of passthrough, and that the decline in inflation during the 1990s is one reason for the
decline in both of these parameters.
To complete the attribution of declining pass-through to a less-inflationary environment,
as in Taylor (2000), we should document the extent to which inflation did indeed decline in our
sample. Figure 3 depicts what has happened to average inflation for the 76 countries considered
here during the twelve years of this study. In accord with conventional wisdom, inflation has
been falling everywhere. Both the mean and its cross-country standard deviation have declined
since 1990.19 In our sample of countries, average (un-weighted) inflation fell from 22 percent
per year in 1990 to 6 percent in 2001. According to the estimates in the table, this magnitude of
decline in average inflation (18 percentage points) implies a decline in the average pass-through
coefficient of about six percentage points (.06 = 18*.36). The decline for the median country is
smaller, from .07 in the first part of the sample to .03 in 2000 and 2001. Nevertheless, the
decline in inflation is apparently one component of the overall observed decline in pass-through.
Figure 4 illustrates the contrast between the passthrough coefficient in high-inflation countries
and low inflation countries, and between the first half of the sample period and the lowerinflation second half.
Poor countries have historically had higher tariffs and higher inflation rates than rich
countries. One might have therefore expected that the estimated effect of the income term would
change when controlling for such factors -- that it would have been biased upward before
controlling for tariffs, and downward before controlling for inflation. But that does not happen
in Table 1.
Exchange rate variability is also a significant determinant of the ECM term, but with a
sign that indicates a positive effect on the speed of adjustment, the opposite from the KrugmanFroot-Klemperer-Taylor prediction. It may be that this term is capturing changing long run
trends in the same way that the inflation term is.
Finally, the dummy representing when the US is an importer is significant. This confirms
the consensus that pricing to market is more common in the world’s largest national market.
Exporters to the United States absorb exchange rate fluctuations in profit margins, rather than
passing them through to their customers. Because our data are so narrowly defined, it is not
possible that this finding is due to the sort of composition differences to which others have
19

Indeed, the decline in the average inflation rate in industrial countries has been steady over three
decades: from 12% in the second half of the 1970s to 2% in the second half of the 1990s. The average
inflation rate among developing countries has moved less monotonically, but also has declined
substantially more recently (from 25% in the second half of the 1970s to 13% in the second half of the
1990s); see, Tytell and Wei (2003).

11

attributed findings of low passthrough to US price indices.20 [It should be noted, however, that
we are talking about only three products; the other goods are US products and so are excluded.]
For robustness, Appendix Table 1 drops some observations where one might have qualms
about the data, such as prices of alcoholic beverages in Moslem countries. Most of the results
are qualitatively the same as before. Appendix Table 5 reports the same regressions, but without
the country dummies. Again, most of the results are qualitatively similar.
The next order of business is to examine other points along the chain of pricing
passthrough. The complete chain runs from the country of export to dockside in the country of
import, to retail in the country of import, to locally produced competing goods, to the general
price level. So far we have looked only at the second passthrough, to the import price at the
retail level.
Determination of prices of local substitutes
Tables 2, and Appendix tables 2 and 6, show the next stage, passthrough to the prices of
locally produced goods that are competitive with the specific imported goods in our sample. For
example, we use a local cigarette brand as the relevant substitute for Marlboros, local beer as a
substitute for imported alcoholic beverages, a local newspaper as a substitute for Time magazine,
and so on. (Appendix Table A gives the complete list of commodities and substitutes.)
Obviously these goods are not perfect substitutes for the imports. As one would expect,
the R2 is somewhat smaller; and the passthrough of exchange rate changes to the local substitutes
is less than the passthrough to imports. But it is still highly significant, and only slightly smaller
[.37 as compared to .40, in the complete sample with country dummy variables; or .56 as
compared to .58, in the version that includes country dummies].21 The main difference is in the
ECM parameter: adjustment is far slower for the local substitutes than for the imports
themselves. Furthermore the downward trend in the passthrough coefficient is even stronger
than for imports themselves. (The trend in the ECM coefficient suggests that adjustment has
been speeding up in the case of the local substitutes, when estimated with the full sample and
dummies.)
As before, the relative income term is statistically significant, suggesting that richer
countries have lower passthrough coefficients; but the effect is only half as strong as for the case
of import prices. Distance appears significant, but paradoxically appears to have the effect of
increasing the passthrough coefficient. Size has a consistent and significant effect on the ECM
term: larger countries exhibit slower adjustment, as expected. Real wages have the negative
effect on the passthrough coefficient that is hypothesized -- higher labor costs create more of a
margin insulating prices of local substitutes from import competition -- and are often highly
significant statistically. Long-term inflation has the hypothesized positive effect on the degree of
contemporaneous passthrough, and is highly significant. Exchange rate variability again has the
unexpected effect of increasing the speed of subsequent adjustment. As was also the case with
import prices, some but not all of the downward trend in passthrough to local prices is explained,
by long-term inflation.
20

Knetter (1993) and Campa and Goldberg (2002). [Otani, Shiratsuka and Shirota (2003) similarly
conclude that composition cannot be the entire explanation for the decline of passthrough, for the case of
the Japanese market.]
21
That the passthrough coefficient is similar suggests higher substitution than one might expect.

12

Some of the differences relative to import prices are noteworthy: that distance, size, and
wages are now important determinants of the level as short-run passthrough, whereas previously
distance and wages mattered only for the speed of adjustment.
Without country dummies (Appendix Table 6), the unconditional passthrough coefficient
is higher (.56), with an equally strong downward trend. Most of the results are as before. Richer
countries clearly have a lower passthrough coefficient [but appear to have a faster speed].
Tariffs, wages, size and long-term inflation have strong effects on the level of passthrough. Size
works strongly to slow down the speed of adjustment. Exchange rate variability again has the
unexpected significant effect of increasing the speed. [Distance has a puzzling positive
coefficient. The US dummy appears very significant and of the unexpected sign; but this should
probably be discounted because it is estimated from only three non-U.S. export goods -cointreau, cognac and vermouth -- all three of which unfortunately have the same domestic
competitor good, beer.]
Determination of the CPI
Next we leap to the highest level of aggregation: the determination of the consumer price
index, in Table 3 and Appendix tables 3 and 7. As one would expect, there is a clear fall in the
magnitude and significance of passthrough – but the coefficient remains fairly strong (.28-.59)
and highly significant. The estimated speed of adjustment falls enough to lose statistical
significance. The downward trend in the passthrough coefficient is just as strong as before. But
now there is also a significant trend toward a slower speed of adjustment. The speed of
adjustment is slower the higher is the country’s income, when not conditioning on other
variables, as expected. But there is no indication that the passthrough coefficient depends
(unconditionally) on income. And when conditioning on wages and the monetary variables,
passthrough is actually significantly higher in rich countries. [The speed of adjustment also
increases conditionally with income, in Appendix table 7 which excludes the country dummies.]
Tariffs and distance are both estimated to have negative effects on the passthrough
coefficient, as hypothesized. Size is significant, but of the wrong sign: big countries appear to
experience more passthrough. The effect of wages is highly significant and of the right sign:
labor costs reduce passthrough to the CPI. Both monetary variables are highly significant and of
the right sign: long-term inflation raises the level and speed of passthrough to the CPI, while
long-term exchange rate variability lowers the level and speed of passthrough.
The results are similar when the country dummies are omitted (Appendix Table 7). The
most notable difference is that higher wages are now seen to slow down the speed of adjustment
significantly.
Determination of Import Prices at the Dock
Finally, we go back to the determination of the prices of our narrowly defined import
goods when they first arrive in the country. These data are disaggregated unit value prices. The
prices are observed, figuratively speaking, “at the dock;” in other words, the stage before the
retail prices that we began by examining above. Figure 5 shows that the passthrough coefficient
is higher for the prices at the dock than for the same imports at retail, higher for retail import
prices than for local competitor prices, and higher for local competitor prices than for the
aggregate price index. This is precisely what we would expect, but it is nice to see it.

13

Table 4, and Appendix Tables 4 and 8, seek to explain passthrough to unit value import
prices, with the same variables that we used to explain other local price measures. [To the extent
that price discrimination is the right model of price determination, we might expect that these incountry wholesale prices would exhibit similar pricing to market behavior as do the retail prices
of the same goods. But to the extent that retailers follow inertial sticky-price rules, we might
expect that passthrough will be more immediate at the wholesale level.]
The table shows that passthrough to prices in the port behaves quite differently than to
retail. It is not surprising to find a higher overall passthrough coefficient, as noted: .53-.68. But,
more strikingly, there is an upward trend in the coefficient, at .04 per year, and also in the speed
of adjustment. The estimated trend in the passthrough coefficient, in theory, should be strong
enough to reach 1.0 -- complete passthrough -- by the end of the sample period. (Extrapolating
the estimated trend in the ECM term, by contrast, suggests it would take more than a century to
reach instantaneous adjustment.) Moreover, income is highly significant, appearing to suggest
that richer countries have higher passthrough. Perhaps wholesale markets are more competitive
and less regulated in rich countries than poor.
More in line with our a priori reasoning, tariffs, distance and size all work to reduce
passthrough significantly. [Distance paradoxically works to increase the speed of adjustment,
however.]. Unlike the retail case, the effect of inflation on the passthrough coefficient is of the
wrong sign, and insignificant. Evidently the rising importance of pricing to market, and the role
of a less inflationary environment, are entirely retail phenomenon.
Unit value data are traditionally viewed as less reliable than other price data. That is one
reason why we have placed these results last. But this suspicion is less justified for prices of
highly disaggregated goods such as we are using, than it would be for aggregate indices of
import prices. Furthermore, that we have a strong passthrough estimate and that we are able to
identify specific significant determinants of it, suggest that the unit value prices may not be
subject to large measurement error.
Passthrough in Developing Countries
Our last task in this paper is to break out the results for low-income countries, separately
from high-income countries. Our motivations for doing so were laid out at the beginning,
including the lack of detailed econometric scrutiny that they have received in the past.
Moreover, the results in the preceding section have confirmed the traditional wisdom that the
passthrough coefficient varies with per capita income. Perhaps the most striking lesson of this
paper emerges only in this section: some of the aspects of the determination of local retail prices
that we have identified in the preceding sections turn out to be phenomena that apply primarily
or even exclusively to developing countries.
In Tables 5-8 we report for each coefficient the base-case estimate from the sample of
high-income countries, and then the estimate for developing countries (defined as either lowincome or middle-income) expressed as a deviation from the base case. Table 5 reports the
determination of retail import prices. Equation 1 shows that for developing countries, the level
of the (unconditional) passthrough coefficient is almost four times as high as it is for highincome countries. In Table 6, for competitors’ prices, and Table 7, for the CPI, the passthrough
coefficient in poor countries is an even greater multiple of that in rich countries, on the order of

14

ten times as high. Table 8, for unit values, is the exception. The estimate for the passthrough
coefficient shows no significant difference between rich and developing countries.
In Equation 2 of Table 5, the clear downward trend in the passthrough coefficient during
the sample period is twice as high for developing countries as for rich countries. But because the
initial level of passthrough is high, the trend is not enough to eliminate the poor-rich differential
by the end of the period. The downward trend is also substantially stronger for poor countries in
the determination of competitors’ prices and the CPI. Indeed, in the case of the CPI, the
downward trend in the pass-through coefficient for developing countries is strong enough to
eliminate all of the difference by the end of the 12-year sample period.
The ECM term in these tables suggests significantly faster adjustment for poor countries
than rich in the case of retail imported goods (Equation 1 of Table 5). [The difference is not
significant in the case of local competitors’ prices or unit values, and is significantly slower in
the case of the CPI.] While the ECM term has no trend at all for rich countries, there is a strong
downward trend in the speed of adjustment for developing countries, which by the end of the
period is again sufficient to outweigh the initial difference in speeds.
Equation 3 of Table 5 suggests that, even within the set of developing countries alone,
higher income continues to mean lower passthrough to import prices. The effect whereby higher
wages reduce the passthrough coefficient, however, turns out to be only a property of rich
countries. The effect whereby greater distance means significantly slower adjustment turns out
apply equally to both sets of countries. The breakdown sheds light on the earlier finding that
long-term exchange rate variability increases the speed of adjustment: this turns out to be a
property only of developing countries. For rich countries, exchange rate variability delays
adjustment, as hypothesized by Froot-Klemperer-Krugman-Taylor. Most likely the result for
poor countries is dominated by time variation in trends, even though we are also conditioning on
long-term inflation variability, and even though we have removed a (constant) trend from both
monetary measures before computing variability.
In the determination of local competitors’ prices, Table 6, the difference in trends is
enough to eliminate more than half of the difference in passthrough by the end of the sample
period. The phenomenon whereby long-term high inflation increases passthrough turns out to be
a property of rich countries. Controlling for the effect of lower inflation all but eliminates the
downward trend in rich-country passthrough to competitors’ prices. But we do not explain the
downward trend for developing countries, either with inflation or with any other variables.
[Long-term inflation appears to slow down adjustment of competitor prices for rich
countries, but only for them. (This puzzle applies also to the CPI in the next table.) Controlling
for the change in inflation in turn all but eliminates the apparent trend of acceleration of the
ECM parameter. Again, the effect whereby exchange rate variability appears to raise the speed
of adjustment turns out to be a phenomenon of the developing countries alone.]
In the determination of the CPI, Table 7, as already noted, the downward trend in
passthrough for developing countries is strong enough to eliminate the entire differential vis-àvis rich countries. In this case we can identify the main reason for the downward trend: longterm exchange rate variability has a strong negative effect on passthrough for developing
countries (the opposite of the effect for rich). When controlling for exchange rate variability, the
downward trend for poor countries all but disappears. This suggests that the trend estimates are
capturing low passthrough during the currency crises of the latter half of the sample period.
15

Tariffs and distance both turn out to reduce the passthrough coefficient even more strongly for
developing countries than they do for rich countries. But the pattern whereby tariffs and distance
slow down the speed of adjustment turns out to apply only to rich countries.
Generalizing across the three different price measures, the passthrough coefficient has
traditionally been higher for lower-income countries, but a strong downward trend in the
coefficient during the course of the 1990s eliminated much of the gap. A similar story can be
told for the speed of adjustment in the case of import prices. But in the case of the CPI, it is rich
countries that have the faster adjustment. Tariffs and distance have highly significant downward
effects on passthrough to the CPI. The monetary variables have the hypothesized effect for
developing country CPIs, but not necessarily in other cases.
Those results pertain to the various retail prices. The case of passthrough to the prices in
the port, reported in Table 8 is a different story. Here there is not much difference in the
passthrough coefficient between rich and poor countries (although the speed of adjustment is
higher for poor countries than rich). Both have passthrough coefficients in the neighborhood of
.7. Tariffs have the hypothesized significant negative effect on passthrough for rich countries
(when controlling for other variables like size), but only for rich countries. Rich countries are
also the only ones to show the unexpected negative effect of long-term inflation on passthrough
to unit prices and positive effect of exchange rate variability on the speed of adjustment.
Other Extensions
We have pursued a number of extensions in response to comments from readers of earlier
drafts.
We tried adding on the right-hand side of the import price equation measures of domestic
inflation, particularly changes in prices of competing goods and changes in the cost of domestic
inputs (wages). We had omitted them from our basic results, because we had already been using
the former as the dependent variable in the local prices regression and the latter as an interactive
component of the Balassa-Samuelson variable. But this is not a good enough reason, in that
theory requires these variables. The least we can do to respond to concerns that they are missing
from the equation -- and, worse yet, that such measures of domestic inflation are correlated with
exchange rate changes -- is to try adding them to the right-hand side. We did try this, and found
that the basic conclusions about the coefficient trend did not change.22
Three other important extensions are to look for:
(1) asymmetric effects between appreciation and depreciation
(2) threshhold effects whereby the proportionate effect on prices of large devaluations is
proportionately different -- presumably, smaller -- than for small devaluations, and,
(3) cyclical factors, as an additional determinant on the list.
The salient motivation in all three cases is the emerging market currency crashes of the
late 1990s. The observation that inflation rates did not rise nearly to the extent of currency
depreciation during the recent crises in Asia and Latin America does not necessarily imply a
consensus that the pass-through coefficient has declined structurally. Goldfajn and Werlang
(2000) argue that the pass-through measured during these crises may be lower than during a
22

Charles Engel suggested this line of exploration to us.

16

normal, tranquil time. The reason is that recession could act to depress domestic prices, hence
generating a spurious appearance that domestic prices do not respond much to exchange rate
depreciation. Carranza, Galdon-Sanchez, and Gomez Biscarri (2004) find evidence of such
asymmetries in passthrough of devaluation to the CPI in 15 emerging market countries.
Thus we checked with our data if one still saw a secular decline in the degree of passthrough among developing countries after controlling for the effect of crisis-related recession
episodes, via asymmetry and/or a business cycle effect.23 For comparison with previous tables,
we report results for each stage (retail, local competitor, CPI, and unit value) in Appendix Tables
9-12. In Appendix Tables 13-16, we present the results for the rich-poor comparison.
The output gap interacted with exchange rate change appears statistically significant, but
the direction is opposite the hypothesized effect (passthrough appears higher in recessions, not
lower). The threshold effect, while significant, goes the wrong way: increases in the exchange
rate above 25% are found to have proportionately larger passthrough effects, not smaller. We
did find strong evidence of asymmetry. In fact we cannot reject the hypothesis that appreciation
is not passed through at all, suggesting downward price rigidity. This is an interesting finding.
But the significant downward trend in the passthrough coefficient remains nonetheless. In short,
the decline in passthrough during this period does not appear to be merely an artifact of the highprofile currency crashes in emerging markets.

To Conclude
We have produced a lot of results, but we still have things to do.
Next steps
A number of possible extensions remain for future work. It would be nice to ground the
estimation in a theoretical model of the passthrough coefficients for prices of imports and local
substitutes, simultaneously. The parameters should be modeled as depending, at a minimum, on
a parameter representing the magnitude of barriers to arbitrage and another representing the
competitiveness of local markets.
We could relax the constraint that passthrough is complete in the long run. The spirit of
the models of optimal price discrimination such as Dornbusch (1987), Gagnon and Knetter
(1995), and others is that passthrough is incomplete even in the very long run and even for the
most disaggregated of products. One possible empirical extension is to apply the TAR (threshold
autoregressive) technique, to reflect that arbitrage should in theory work within a band
determined by barriers (tariffs, transport, distribution costs, etc.), rather than as a linear
autoregressive process.
We could allow for correlation of errors across commodities. In a working paper version
of this study (see especially, Appendices a1-a8, b1-b8, and c1-c8 in the Kennedy School working
paper RWP05-016), we report results we have obtained for individual commodities. They show

23

The output gap was computed as the difference between real GDP and a Hodrick-Prescott filtered real
GDP series for each country. We also computed (not reported) an alternate measure of the business cycle
for each country. Namely, we constructed a dummy variable that takes the value -1 whenever real GDP
growth is negative, and zero otherwise. Our results are qualitatively similar for both business cycle
measures.

17

a lot of variation (which we attribute to garden-variety estimation error). The results reported
here were for the eight commodities pooled together, though with commodity-specific dummies.
Summary of conclusions
To summarize our findings,
1. As one would expect, passthrough of exchange rate changes is greatest in the determination
of prices of imported goods at the dock, is less to prices of the same goods at the retail level,
somewhat less to prices of local substitutes for such goods, and still less to the CPI.
2. Nevertheless, even for import prices at the dock (and even in developing countries),
passthrough is not complete and instantaneous. We would reject the idea that the Burstein,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo hypothesis constitutes the entire explanation for incomplete
passthrough to the CPI, though nothing rules out that it could explain part.
3. Transport costs (as proxied by distance) are an important barrier to arbitrage reducing or
slowing passthrough at all four stages -- dockside imports, retail, competitors’ prices, and the
CPI.
4. Tariffs are another important barrier.
5. There is clear evidence of stickiness: that is, inertia, followed by slow adjustment, as
reflected in an error-correction process;
6. Importers do indeed “price to market” in that passthrough to retail import prices is not just
incomplete, but is broadly similar to passthrough to the prices of local substitutes. (There is
no need to choose between the price discrimination model and the price stickiness model;
both are probably important.)
7. There is a little evidence of a size effect -- passthrough is higher or faster in a small country
than in a large one – but much less than one would expect.
8. A particular example, for retail prices, is that passthrough is much smaller into the United
States import market than into other countries. This result cannot be attributed to
composition effects, because the goods are so disaggregated.
9. Per capita income is perhaps the second most robust determinant of the passthrough
coefficient (after distance). It generally does not lose value when conditioning on wages (but
it sometimes loses some explanatory power when conditioning on long-term inflation). As
implied by the “small open economy model,” poor countries have traditionally experienced
higher passthrough.
10. The monetary climate is also important: passthrough coefficients are significantly higher in
an environment of high inflation. Often they are also influenced by an environment of
transitory exchange rate fluctuations.
11. There is some evidence that passthrough to price of imports on the dock has actually gone up
(perhaps due to declining transportation costs).
12. Otherwise, passthrough to retail prices (or imports, substitutes, and the CPI) did indeed
experience a substantial downward trend during the 1990s – both a decrease in the
contemporaneous coefficient and a (small) decrease in the speed of subsequent adjustment.
13. In particular, retail passthrough coefficients have historically been much higher in poor
countries than in rich ones, but the coefficient in poor countries declined significantly in the
1990s. The downward trend among rich countries is much less, and for the CPI is not
statistically significant.

18

14. Some of the downward trends in the degree of passthrough and speed of adjustment can be
explained by changes in its determinants, but some of the trend remains unexplained.
15. One factor in explaining part of the decline in the passthrough coefficient in the 1990s is a
decline in the inflationary environment.
16. The hypothesized monetary variables are particularly relevant in explaining the decline in the
passthrough to developing-country CPIs.
17. Higher wages have a strong negative effect on passthrough to the local competitors’ prices
and the CPI, supporting the hypothesized importance of distribution and retail costs.
Controlling for wages reverses the tendency for passthrough to the CPI to decline as income
grows (compare equations 5 and 6 in Table 3). A possible interpretation is that the role of
distribution costs in pricing to market may become increasingly important as countries
achieve higher incomes, due to the Balassa-Samuelson-Baumol effect.

19

References
Aw, Bee-Yan, 1993, “Price Discrimination and Markups in Export Markets,” Journal of Development Economics
42, 315-336.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2002, “Why Do Consumer Prices React Less than Import Prices to
Exchange Rates?” NBER Working Paper No. 9352, Nov. Journal of the European Economic Association 2003.
Bank for International Settlements, 2002, 72nd Annual Report, Basle.
Barhoumi, Karim, 2005, “Long Run Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import Prices in Developing Countries: An
Empirical Investigation”.
Borensztein, Eduardo, and Jose De Gregorio, 1999, “Devaluation and Inflation after Currency Crises,” International
Monetary Fund.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2002, “What Are Rates of Inflation So Low After Large
Devaluations?” NBER, January.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2003. “Large Devaluations and the Real Exchange Rate,”
IMF seminar, September.
Burstein, Ariel, Joao Neves and Sergio Rebelo, 2003 “Distribution Costs and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics During
Exchange-Rate-Based-Stabilizations,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50: 1189-1214.
Campa, Jose, and Linda Goldberg, 2002, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import Prices, A Macro or Micro
Phenomenon?” NBER WP no. 8934.
Campa, Jose, and Linda Goldberg, 2004, “Do Distribution Margins Solve the Exchange Rate Disconnect Puzzle?”
forthcoming, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Carranza, Luis, Jose Enrique Galdon-Sanchez, and Javier Gomez Biscarri, 2004, “Exchange Rate and Inflation
Dynamics in Dollarized Economies,” FCEE WP no. 10/04,, Universidad de Navarra, Spain, May.
Chen, Shiu-Sheng, and Charles Engel, 2004,”Does ‘Aggregation Bias’ Explain the PPP Puzzle,” NBER Working
Paper No. 10304.
Choudhri, Ehsan, and Dalia Hakura, 2001, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Domestic Prices: Does the Inflationary
Environment Matter?” IMF Working Paper WP/01/194.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Luca Dedola, 2002, “Macroeconomics of International Price Discrimination,” June.
Devereux, Michael, and Charles Engel, 2002, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Exchange Rate Volatility and
Exchange Rate Disconnect,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference (Nov. 2001); March.
Devereux, Michael, Charles Engel, and Peter Storgaard, 2002, “Endogenous Exchange Rate Pass-Through When
Nominal Prices Are Set in Advance,” CEPR Discussion Paper 3608, October.
Devereux, Michael, and James Yetman, 2002, “Price Setting and Exchange Rate Pass-Through: Theory and Evidence,”
Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research Working Paper No. 22/2002, December.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1987, "Exchange Rates and Prices," American Economic Review, 77, 1, March , 93-106.
Engel, Charles, “Accounting for US Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 107, 507-38.

Feenstra, Robert, 1989, “Symmetric Pass-Through of Tariffs and Exchange Rates Under Imperfect Competition: An
Empirical Test,” Journal of International Economics, 27, no. 1,2, August, pp 25-45.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1984, "The Theory of Trade in Middle Products: Extension," American Economic Review, June.
Frankel, Jeffrey, David Parsley, and Shang-jin Wei, 2005, "Slow Passthrough Around the World: A New Import for
Developing Countries?", Kennedy School of Government Faculty Research Working Paper Series RWP05-016,
February.
Froot, Kenneth, and Paul Klemperer, 1989, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through When Market Share Matters,” American
Economic Review 79, no. 4, Sept., 637-54.
Gagnon, Joseph, and Michael Knetter, 1995, “Markup Adjustment and Exchange Rate Fluctuations: Evidence from
Panel Data on Automobile Exports,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 14, no. 2 , April, 289-310.
Gagnon, Joseph, and Jane Ihrig, 2004, “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Pass-Through,” International Journal of
Finance and Economics, vol. 9 no. 4, October, 315-338.
Ghosh, Atish R. and Holger Wolf, 1995, “Pricing in International Markets: Lessons from the Economist,” March.
Goldberg, Pinelopi, and Michael Knetter, 1997, "Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have We Learned?"
Journal of Economic Literature XXXV, September, 1243-1272.
Goldfajn, Ilan, and Sergio Werlang, 2000,”The Pass-Through from Depreciation to Inflation: A Panel Study,”
Economics Department, PUC-Rio, Texto Para Discussao No. 424.
Ho, Corrinne, and Robert McCauley, 2003, "Living with Flexible Exchange Rates: Issues and Recent Experience in
Inflation Targeting Emerging Market Economies," Bank for International Settlements Working Paper 130, Basel.
Imbs, Jean, Haroon Mumtaz, Morton O. Ravn, Helene Rey, 2002, “PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation and the Real
Exchange Rate,“ NBER Working Paper No. 9372, December.
Kasa, Kennth, 1992, “Adjustment Costs and Pricing-to-Market: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of International
Economics, 32, no. 1-2, Feb., pp. 1-30.
Knetter, Michael, 1989, “Price Discrimination by U.S. and German Exporters,” American Economic Review, 79,
no. 1, March 198-210.
Knetter, Michael, 1993, “International Comparisons of Price-to-Market Behavior,” American Economic Review 83,
no. 3, June, 473-86.
Kreinen, Mordechai, 1977, “The Effect of Exchange Rate Changes on the Prices and Volume of Foreign Trade,”
International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, July, 24, no. 2, 297-329.
Krugman, Paul, 1987, “Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes,” in Sven Arndt and J. David
Richardson, eds., Real-Financial Linkages Among Open Economies, (MIT Press: Cambridge), 49-70.
Krugman, Paul, 1989, "The Delinking of Exchange Rates from Reality," Chapter 2 in Exchange Rate Instability,
MIT Press.
Magee, Stephen, 1973, “Currency Contracts, Passthrough and Devaluation,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1, 202-23.
Maloney, William, 1999, “Exchange Rate Uncertainty and the Law of One Price,” Review of International
Economics, Volume 7, Number 2, p. 328-341.

Mann, Catherine, 1986, “Prices, Profit Margins, and Exchange Rates,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, 72, June, 366-79.
Marston, Richard, 1990, "Pricing to Market in Japanese Manufacturing," J. of International Economics 29, Dec., 217-36.
Ohno, Kenichi, 1989, “Export Pricing Behavior of Manufacturing: A US-Japan Comparison,” International Monetary
Fund Staff Papers 36, Sept, 550-79.
Otani, Akira, Shigenori Shiratsuka, and Toyoichiro Shirota, 2003, “The Decline in the Exchange Rate PassThrough: Evidence from Japanese Import Prices,” Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, vol. 21, no. 3,
October; p.53-81.
Parsley, David, 1993, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through: Evidence from Aggregate Japanese Exports,” Southern Economic
Journal, 60, no. 2, October, 454-62.
Parsley, David, 2004, “Pricing in International Markets: A ‘Small Country’ Benchmark,” 2004, Review of International
Economics, Volume 12, Number 3, p. 509-524.
Parsley, David, and Shang-Jin Wei, “A Prism into the PPP Puzzles: The Micro-Foundations of Big Mac Real
Exchange Rates,” NBER Working Paper No. 10074, Nov. 2003.
Rogoff, Kenneth, 1996, “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle, J. Economic Literature, 34: (2), 647-68.
Saiki, Ayako, 2004, “The Change in Inflation Persistence and Exchange Rate Pass-Through for Inflation Targeting
Countries,” Essay 2 in Ph.D. dissertation, Brandeis University
Taylor, John, 2000, “Low Inflation, Pass-Through and the Pricing Power of Firms,” European Economic Review, 44, no.
7, June, 1389-1408.
Tytell, Irina, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2003, "Does Financial Globalization Induce Better Macroeconomic Policies?"
forthcoming, NBER working papers.
Yang, Jiawen, 1997, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through in US Manufacturing Industries,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 95-104.

Figure 1: Average log per capita income relative to the US
-0.86
-0.88
-0.90
-0.92
-0.94
-0.96
-0.98
-1.00
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

1999

2000

2001

1999

2000

2001

Figure 2: Average log Real GDP relative to the US
-3.02
-3.03
-3.04
-3.05
-3.06
-3.07
-3.08
-3.09
-3.10
-3.11
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Figure 3: Inflation Decline in Sample
0.60
0.50
0.40
Standard Deviation
Average Inflation

0.30
0.20
0.10

Median Inflation

0.00
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Figure 4: Passthrough coefficient and Inflation
passthrough coefficient

1.0

High
inflation

0.8
0.6

Low
inflation

0.4
0.2
0.0
1990-1995

1996-2001

passthrough coefficient

Figure 5: Exchange Rate Passthrough to Domestic Prices

0.6

0.4

0.2
at the dock

imported good
prices

local competitor consumer price
prices
index

Table A: Goods Included
Goods (from Supermarket)
Exporting Country
1.
Marlboro Cigarettes (pack of 20)
United States
Coca-cola (1 liter)
United States
2.
Cognac, French VSOP (700 ml)
France
3.
4.
Gilbey’s Gin, or equivalent (700ml) United States
Time magazine
United States
5.
Kodak Color Film (36 exposures)
United States
6.
Cointreau Liqueur (700 ml)
France
7.
8.
Martini & Rossi Vermouth (1 liter) Italy

Table B: Countries Included
1 Argentina
20
2 Australia
21
3 Austria
22
4 Azerbaijan
23
5 Bahrain
24
6 Bangladesh
25
7 Belgium
26
8 Brazil
27
9 Cameroon
28
10 Canada
29
11 Chile
30
12 China
31
13 Colombia
32
14 Costa Rica
33
15 Cote d'Ivoire
34
16 Croatia
35
17 Czech Republic
36
18 Denmark
37
19 Ecuador
38

Egypt
Finland
France
Gabon
Germany
Greece
Guatemala
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kenya

39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57

Competing Prices from EIU
Local brand cigarettes
Mineral water
Local brand beer
Local brand beer
Daily local newspaper
Compact disk album
Local brand beer
Local brand beer

Libya
Luxembourg
Malaysia
Mexico
Morocco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua N. Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia

58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76

Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Singapore
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
U. Arab Emirates
U. Kingdom
U. States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Vietnam

Table C: Unit Value Series
Goods
SITC Code
1. Cigarettes
Cigarettes (tobacco) (4 digit) under Tobacco, manufactured
1222
Flavored waters, non alcoholic (5 digit) under Beverage non-alcohol nes 11102
2. Coca-cola
Brandies/marc, etc (5 digit) under Distilled Alcoholic beverages
11242
3. Cognac
Gin/Geneva (5 digit) under Distilled alcoholic beverages
11245
4. Gin
89229
5. Time magazine Newspapers/periodic nes (5 digit) under Newspapers/periodicals
Photo film roll unexposed (4 digit) under Photographic supplies
8823
6. Color Film
Brandies/marc, etc (5 digit) under Distilled Alcoholic beverages
11242
7. Cointreau
8. Vermouth
Vermouth/flavored wine (5 digit) under Wines of fresh grapes
11213

Table 1: Pass-through to Imported Good Prices
Eqn 1
0.423
(0.029)

Eqn2
0.758
(0.063)

Eqn3
0.690
(0.065)

Eqn 4
1.215
(0.922)

Eqn 5
1.350
(0.921)

Eqn 6
1.794
(0.878)

Eqn 7
1.076
(0.812)

Eqn 8
1.168
(0.822)

Eqn 9
1.353
(0.848)

change in

exchange rate

change in

exporter's price

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

tariff levels

-0.085
(0.174)

-0.116
(0.174)

-0.170
(0.148)

-0.066
(0.142)

-0.082
(0.144)

-0.109
(0.143)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.014
(0.039)

-0.007
(0.040)

-0.013
(0.051)

-0.013
(0.050)

-0.013
(0.050)

-0.027
(0.050)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.019
(0.015)

0.038
(0.020)

0.019
(0.020)

0.024
(0.021)

0.031
(0.020)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.007)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.353
(0.202)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-1.211
(1.292)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

Error Correction term (ECM)

0.086
(0.024)

***

***

***

***

**

0.100
(0.024)

***

0.103
(0.024)

***

0.102
(0.025)

***

0.101
(0.025)

***

0.066
(0.029)

**

0.050
(0.029)

*

0.050
(0.029)

*

0.060
(0.028)

**

-0.053
(0.008)

***

-0.053
(0.008)

***

-0.052
(0.008)

***

-0.052
(0.008)

***

-0.072
(0.010)

***

-0.050
(0.010)

***

-0.050
(0.010)

***

-0.048
(0.010)

***

-0.035
(0.009)

***

-0.039
(0.010)

***

-0.057
(0.017)

***

-0.072
(0.022)

***

-0.044
(0.023)

*

-0.047
(0.024)

**

-0.058
(0.023)

**

*

-0.006
(0.008)

-0.107
(0.007)

*

0.358
(0.202)

*

0.237
(0.067)

***

-0.365
(0.162)

**

-0.441
(0.162)

***

-1.261
(1.295)

-0.159
(0.016)

***

-0.158
(0.015)

***

-0.436
(0.105)

***

-0.458
(0.105)

***

-0.602
(0.116)

***

-0.385
(0.116)

***

-0.383
(0.116)

***

-0.465
(0.118)

***

0.007
(0.002)

***

0.007
(0.002)

***

0.008
(0.002)

***

0.008
(0.002)

***

0.006
(0.002)

***

0.004
(0.002)

*

0.004
(0.002)

*

0.004
(0.002)

*

0.003
(0.003)

0.006
(0.004)

*

-0.001
(0.006)

0.000
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.006)

ECM* tariff levels

0.021
(0.017)

0.025
(0.018)

0.034
(0.022)

0.006
(0.021)

0.006
(0.021)

0.012
(0.022)

ECM* log distance

0.018
(0.008)

ECM* trend

***

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

0.001
(0.002)

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

**

0.018
(0.009)
-0.003
(0.004)

ECM* log real wage ($)

**

0.040
(0.010)

***

0.001
(0.006)
0.017
(0.007)

**

0.029
(0.011)

***

0.030
(0.011)

***

0.000
(0.005)

0.001
(0.006)

0.003
(0.006)

0.001
(0.008)

0.001
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.083
(0.046)

*

-0.083
(0.046)

*

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.185
(0.072)

**

-0.183
(0.072)

**

ECM* US Importer dummy

# of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Country dummies
Product dummies
Full sample
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

5677
0.297
yes
yes

5677
0.315
yes
yes

5677
0.321
yes
yes

5192
0.330
yes
yes

5192
0.330
yes
yes

3316
0.316
yes
yes

0.036
(0.010)

3250
0.288
yes
yes

-0.092
(0.045)

-0.057
(0.062)

-0.062
(0.063)

3250
0.288
yes
yes

3316
0.330
yes
yes

product specific (ps) tariffs

***

**

Table 2: Pass-through to Local Competitor Prices
Eqn 1
0.396
(0.027)

Eqn2
0.756
(0.053)

Eqn3
0.723
(0.054)

Eqn 4
-0.382
(0.550)

Eqn 5
-0.017
(0.563)

Eqn 6
-0.668
(0.786)

Eqn 7
-1.015
(0.791)

Eqn 8
-1.117
(0.800)

Eqn 9
-1.142
(0.832)

0.022
(0.030)

0.019
(0.030)

0.014
(0.037)

0.013
(0.035)

0.013
(0.035)

0.009
(0.037)

change in

exchange rate

change in

exporter's price

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

tariff levels

0.011
(0.093)

(delta s)*

log distance

0.118
(0.039)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.621
(0.254)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-2.222
(1.640)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

Error Correction term (ECM)

0.052
(0.027)

***

*

***

0.038
(0.028)
-0.057
(0.007)

***

0.040
(0.028)
***

-0.057
(0.007)

***

-0.057
(0.007)

***

-0.058
(0.007)

***

-0.082
(0.009)

***

-0.050
(0.010)

***

-0.050
(0.010)

***

-0.063
(0.011)

***

-0.018
(0.006)

***

-0.020
(0.006)

***

-0.061
(0.016)

***

-0.094
(0.025)

***

-0.113
(0.023)

***

-0.109
(0.023)

***

-0.078
(0.026)

***

-0.075
(0.097)
***

-0.010
(0.133)

0.126
(0.133)

0.144
(0.135)

0.134
(0.039)

***

0.193
(0.054)

***

0.139
(0.049)

***

0.139
(0.049)

***

0.186
(0.055)

***

0.042
(0.015)

***

0.078
(0.022)

***

0.099
(0.021)

***

0.093
(0.022)

***

0.065
(0.023)

***

-0.019
(0.008)

**

-0.010
(0.007)

-0.018
(0.008)

**

**

0.180
(0.063)

***

**

0.478
(0.184)

***

-0.010
(0.007)
**

0.615
(0.254)
-2.166
(1.643)
0.436
(0.182)

-0.018
(0.006)

ECM* trend

***

0.006
(0.014)
-0.003
(0.001)

0.005
(0.014)

-0.033
(0.113)

-0.038
(0.111)

-0.037
(0.111)

-0.004
(0.113)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

**

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.008
(0.004)

**

-0.020
(0.006)

ECM* tariff levels

-0.009
(0.012)

-0.012
(0.012)

-0.025
(0.020)

ECM* log distance

0.003
(0.007)

0.003
(0.007)

0.027
(0.008)

***

0.027
(0.009)

***

0.027
(0.009)

***

0.027
(0.008)

***

0.015
(0.005)

***

0.011
(0.005)

**

0.011
(0.005)

**

0.015
(0.005)

***

0.019
(0.007)

***

0.013
(0.007)

*

0.013
(0.007)

*

0.018
(0.007)

**

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

-0.001
(0.002)

**

-0.003
(0.002)

0.047
(0.084)
-0.003
(0.002)

**

-0.003
(0.001)

0.023
(0.084)

0.053
(0.144)

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

**

0.006
(0.003)

ECM* log real wage ($)

*

***

-0.016
(0.006)
-0.026
(0.019)

ECM* long term inflation

0.011
(0.025)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.175
(0.077)

ECM* US Importer dummy

# of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Country dummies
Product dummies

5630
0.224
yes
yes

Full sample
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

5630
0.240
yes
yes

5630
0.242
yes
yes

5077
0.248
yes
yes

5077
0.250
yes
yes

3299
0.241
yes
yes

***

3235
0.259
yes
yes

-0.016
(0.006)

***

-0.026
(0.019)

-0.176
(0.077)

***

-0.030
(0.020)

0.011
(0.025)
**

-0.020
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.026)
**

-0.018
(0.053)

-0.041
(0.053)

3235
0.259
yes
yes

3299
0.246
yes
yes

product specific (ps) tariffs

Table 3: Pass-through to the CPI
change in

exchange rate

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

Eqn 1
0.279
(0.052)

***

Eqn2
0.602
(0.103)
-0.054
(0.011)

***

Eqn3
0.623
(0.135)

Eqn 4
3.254
(1.641)

Eqn 5
4.898
(2.061)

**

Eqn 6
5.621
(1.840)

***

Eqn 7
2.616
(1.331)

***

-0.066
(0.011)

***

-0.011
(0.007)

-0.037
(0.041)

-0.099
(0.052)

*

0.777
(0.195)

***

0.466
(0.100)

tariff levels

-0.509
(0.356)

-0.860
(0.438)

**

-0.934
(0.446)

**

-0.287
(0.306)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.031
(0.055)

-0.001
(0.074)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

(delta s)*

(delta s)*

***

0.009
(0.040)

-0.054
(0.012)

**

-0.057
(0.012)

***

-0.055
(0.011)

***

***

**

***

-0.157
(0.131)

-0.156
(0.069)

**

0.034
(0.034)

0.055
(0.020)

***

-0.334
(0.050)

***

long term inflation

0.907
(0.139)

***

long term exchange rate variability

-4.303
(0.929)

***

Error Correction term (ECM)

0.084
(0.043)

*

-0.540
(0.077)

-0.014
(0.009)

ECM* trend

-0.003
(0.006)
0.003
(0.001)

-0.003
(0.006)

-0.428
(0.307)

-0.900
(0.477)

*

0.461
(0.189)

**

0.010
(0.003)

***

0.006
(0.002)

***

0.008
(0.002)

***

0.008
(0.002)

0.014
(0.008)

*

0.010
(0.008)

0.012
(0.055)

0.091
(0.065)

0.194
(0.102)

*

-0.099
(0.040)

-0.004
(0.004)

-0.011
(0.006)

*

0.002
(0.004)

0.005
(0.007)

0.003
(0.008)

0.003
(0.006)

-0.003
(0.029)

0.040
(0.021)

*

ECM* long term inflation

-0.162
(0.039)

***

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

0.115
(0.065)

*

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

***

0.004
(0.001)

-0.417
(0.319)

***

0.015
(0.011)

***

ECM* tariff levels

0.089
(0.067)

ECM* log distance

-0.006
(0.002)

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

***

ECM* log real wage ($)

# of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Country dummies
full sample
Average Tariffs
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

732
0.693
yes

732
0.693
yes

732
0.693
yes

732
0.693
yes

732
0.693
yes

***

732
0.693
yes

-0.056
(0.039)

732
0.693
yes

**

Table 4: Pass-through to Unit Values
change in

exchange rate

change in

exporter's price

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

Eqn 1
0.666
(0.067)

***

0.094
(0.063)

Eqn2
0.423
(0.144)

***

Eqn3
0.451
(0.143)

***

Eqn 4
5.339
(1.265)

***

Eqn 5
5.169
(1.367)

***

Eqn 6
1.966
(1.520)

Eqn 7
1.663
(1.508)

Eqn 8
1.697
(1.537)

Eqn 9
2.195
(1.572)

0.136
(0.065)

**

0.138
(0.065)

**

0.137
(0.068)

**

0.135
(0.068)

**

0.263
(0.072)

***

0.258
(0.073)

***

0.257
(0.073)

***

0.271
(0.072)

0.037
(0.017)

**

0.039
(0.017)

**

0.041
(0.017)

**

0.042
(0.018)

**

0.049
(0.021)

**

0.040
(0.024)

*

0.040
(0.024)

*

0.033
(0.024)

0.028
(0.015)

*

0.028
(0.014)

**

0.040
(0.041)

0.105
(0.051)

**

0.151
(0.055)

***

0.149
(0.055)

***

0.100
(0.053)

tariff levels

-0.482
(0.235)

**

-0.448
(0.255)

*

-0.066
(0.296)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.290
(0.074)

***

-0.292
(0.074)

***

-0.163
(0.083)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

-0.116
(0.047)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

(delta s)*

-0.013
(0.040)

-0.046
(0.304)

-0.084
(0.301)

**

-0.141
(0.093)

-0.141
(0.093)

-0.159
(0.082)

*

**

-0.156
(0.047)

-0.115
(0.049)

**

-0.002
(0.013)

***

-0.154
(0.049)

***

-0.020
(0.016)

-0.005
(0.013)

long term inflation

-0.553
(0.404)

-0.551
(0.404)

-0.337
(0.223)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

1.350
(2.202)

1.330
(2.214)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

-0.140
(0.278)
-0.218
(0.030)

ECM* trend

***

-0.183
(0.033)

***

-0.186
(0.034)

***

0.064
(0.121)

-0.005
(0.002)

**

-0.005
(0.002)

**

-0.005
(0.002)

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

-0.002
(0.003)

0.091
(0.135)
**

-0.005
(0.002)

**

-0.169
(0.269)

0.266
(0.148)

*

0.388
(0.148)

***

0.388
(0.148)

***

0.283
(0.149)

*

-0.006
(0.003)

*

-0.007
(0.003)

**

-0.007
(0.003)

**

-0.006
(0.003)

**

-0.005
(0.004)

-0.008
(0.005)

-0.007
(0.009)

-0.003
(0.009)

-0.003
(0.009)

-0.007
(0.009)

ECM* tariff levels

0.015
(0.025)

0.011
(0.029)

0.002
(0.024)

-0.020
(0.021)

-0.020
(0.021)

-0.001
(0.024)

ECM* log distance

-0.038
(0.012)

***

-0.039
(0.012)

***

-0.048
(0.017)

***

-0.052
(0.019)

***

-0.052
(0.019)

***

-0.048
(0.017)

0.007
(0.007)

0.004
(0.007)

0.004
(0.007)

0.007
(0.007)

-0.001
(0.015)

-0.015
(0.016)

-0.015
(0.016)

-0.005
(0.016)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.017
(0.052)

-0.017
(0.052)

-0.030
(0.047)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.149
(0.107)

-0.149
(0.106)

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.003
(0.006)

ECM* log real wage ($)

ECM* US Importer dummy

# of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Country dummies
Product dummies

3774
0.151
yes
yes

Full sample
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

3774
0.153
yes
yes

3774
0.154
yes
yes

3548
0.162
yes
yes

3548
0.161
yes
yes

*

-0.040
(0.299)

-0.020
(0.016)

Error Correction term (ECM)

***

2625
0.153
yes
yes

2561
0.155
yes
yes

0.164
(0.115)

0.158
(0.116)

2561
0.154
yes
yes

2625
0.154
yes
yes

product specific (ps) tariffs

***

Table 5. Determination of Passthrough to Imported Goods Prices: Developing Countries, Relative to Rich Countries
Equation 1
Rich
D Dev.

Equation2
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 3
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 4
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 5
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 6
Rich
D Dev.

change in

exchange rate

0.133 ***
0.365 ***
(0.031)
(0.045)

0.310 *** 0.496 ***
(0.075)
(0.101)

0.314 *** 0.422 ***
(0.075)
(0.104)

2.840 *** -1.424
(0.852)
(1.409)

2.551 **
(1.057)

-1.032
(1.533)

2.084 *
(1.083)

change in

exporter's price

0.108 *** -0.052
(0.025)
(0.042)

0.108 *** -0.023
(0.025)
(0.042)

0.107 *** -0.017
(0.025)
(0.042)

0.102 *** -0.008
(0.027)
(0.045)

0.101 **
(0.045)

-0.008
(0.045)

(delta s)*

trend

-0.025 *** -0.026 **
(0.009)
(0.013)

-0.026 *** -0.025 *
(0.009)
(0.013)

-0.024 **
(0.010)

-0.025 *
(0.013)

-0.024 **
(0.010)

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

-0.005
(0.010)

-0.010
(0.010)

-0.025 *
(0.015)

(delta s)*

tariff levels

-0.433 **
(0.190)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.057
(0.041)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

(delta s)*

2.489 **
(1.144)

-1.607
(1.595)

0.080 *** -0.046
(0.027)
(0.061)

0.081 *** -0.068
(0.028)
(0.062)

0.082 **
(0.028)

-0.069
(0.062)

-0.026 **
(0.013)

-0.021 **
(0.010)

-0.059 ***
(0.017)

-0.013
(0.012)

-0.047 **
(0.019)

-0.014
(0.012)

-0.046 **
(0.019)

0.004
(0.025)

-0.058 *
(0.033)

0.011
(0.028)

-0.070
(0.043)

-0.004
(0.031)

-0.069
(0.046)

-0.022
(0.034)

-0.050
(0.048)

0.228
(0.314)

-0.368
(0.246)

0.228
(0.314)

-0.275
(0.252)

0.055
(0.301)

-0.318
(0.246)

0.256
(0.298)

-0.431
(0.265)

0.368
(0.314)

0.054
(0.068)

-0.063
(0.045)

0.054
(0.068)

-0.064
(0.046)

0.059
(0.088)

-0.046
(0.046)

0.066
(0.089)

-0.029
(0.048)

0.049
(0.091)

-0.013
(0.020)

0.033
(0.027)

-0.018
(0.024)

0.045
(0.039)

-0.006
(0.025)

0.051
(0.041)

0.016
(0.030)

0.029
(0.044)

-0.014
(0.008)

0.013
(0.012)

-0.018 *
(0.010)

0.016
(0.013)

-0.019 *
(0.010)

0.017
(0.013)

long term inflation

2.016
(1.860)

-1.662
(1.872)

2.135
(1.871)

-1.781
(1.884)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-1.620
(4.962)

0.247
(5.141)

-2.262
(4.932)

0.890
(5.112)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

Error Correction term (ECM)

2.032 *
(1.083)

Equation 8
Rich
D Dev.

-1.155
(1.551)

-0.026 *
(0.014)

0.009
(1.545)

Equation 7
Rich
D Dev.

-0.442 **
(0.190)
-0.091 *** -0.105 ***
(0.016)
(0.025)

-0.092 *** -0.101 ***
(0.016)
(0.026)

-0.124
(0.220)

-0.427
(0.264)

-0.117
(0.248)

-0.446
(0.286)

-0.128
(0.265)

-0.770 **
(0.340)

-0.146
(0.260)

-0.330
(0.334)

-0.129
(0.264)

-0.347
(0.337)

0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.011 ***
(0.003)

0.001
(0.002)

0.011 ***
(0.003)

0.001
(0.002)

0.011 ***
(0.003)

0.001
(0.002)

0.011 **
(0.004)

0.001
(0.002)

0.006
(0.004)

0.001
(0.002)

0.006
(0.004)

-0.005 **
(0.002)

0.007 *
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.002)

0.007 *
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.006)

0.010
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.006)

0.004
(0.015)

-0.004
(0.006)

0.007
(0.015)

-0.005
(0.007)

0.008
(0.015)

ECM* tariff levels

-0.040
(0.047)

0.078
(0.051)

-0.041
(0.056)

0.081
(0.060)

-0.041
(0.061)

0.088
(0.066)

-0.034
(0.060)

0.046
(0.064)

-0.040
(0.061)

0.052
(0.066)

ECM* log distance

0.025 *** -0.007
(0.009)
(0.016)

0.025 **
(0.011)

-0.007
(0.017)

0.031 *** 0.026
(0.011)
(0.022)

0.030 *** 0.001
(0.011)
(0.023)

0.032 **
(0.011)

-0.001
(0.024)

0.001
(0.006)

-0.003
(0.007)

0.001
(0.006)

0.001
(0.013)

0.002
(0.006)

-0.003
(0.013)

0.003
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.013)

0.018
(0.016)

-0.007
(0.022)

0.015
(0.015)

-0.020
(0.023)

0.016
(0.015)

-0.020
(0.023)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.086
(0.266)

0.022
(0.270)

-0.083
(0.267)

0.019
(0.271)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

0.142 *
(0.085)

-0.424 ***
(0.133)

0.152 *
(0.087)

-0.433 ***
(0.134)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

-0.093 *** -0.017 *
(0.008)
(0.010)

0.011 ***
(0.003)

ECM* log real wage ($)

ECM* US Importer dummy
5677
5677
5677
5192
5192
# of Observations
0.305
0.324
0.327
0.338
0.338
Adjusted R-squared
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance; note: Developing country coefficient = values in the "D Dev." column should be added to estimates in column labelled "Rich".

-0.053
(0.061)
3316
0.327

3250
0.294

3250
0.294

Table 6. Determination of Passthrough to Local Competitor Prices: Developing Countries, Relative to Rich Countries
Equation 1
Rich
D Dev.

Equation2
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 3
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 4
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 5
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 6
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 7
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 8
Rich
D Dev.

change in

exchange rate

0.035
(0.031)

0.456 ***
(0.044)

0.158 **
(0.076)

0.676 ***
(0.096)

0.168 **
(0.076)

0.656 ***
(0.098)

-0.439
(0.576)

0.773
(0.884)

0.839
(0.741)

-0.319
(0.999)

0.957
(0.772)

-1.580
(1.301)

0.523
(0.874)

-1.564
(1.432)

-0.129
(0.938)

-0.912
(1.470)

change in

exporter's price

0.046
(0.034)

-0.007
(0.051)

0.036
(0.034)

-0.012
(0.051)

0.036
(0.034)

-0.011
(0.052)

0.020
(0.037)

-0.011
(0.056)

0.017
(0.045)

-0.010
(0.055)

0.017
(0.040)

-0.020
(0.076)

0.014
(0.040)

0.000
(0.072)

0.013
(0.040)

0.000
(0.072)

(delta s)*

trend

-0.016 *
(0.010)

-0.040 ***
(0.012)

-0.018 *
(0.010)

-0.039 ***
(0.012)

-0.019 *
(0.010)

-0.037 ***
(0.013)

-0.022 **
(0.010)

-0.036 ***
(0.013)

-0.022 **
(0.011)

-0.073 ##
(0.016)

-0.009
(0.012)

-0.054 ***
(0.020)

-0.007
(0.012)

-0.056 ***
(0.020)

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

-0.014
(0.009)

0.009
(0.012)

-0.008
(0.009)

-0.002
(0.012)

-0.062 *** 0.024
(0.022)
(0.029)

-0.077 *** 0.028 ##
(0.026)
(0.047)

-0.072 **
(0.030)

-0.049
(0.045)

-0.045
(0.033)

-0.077
(0.047)

(delta s)*

tariff levels

0.068
(0.123)

0.070
(0.196)

-0.204
(0.166)

0.070
(0.196)

-0.244
(0.172)

0.223 ##
(0.226)

-0.218
(0.187)

0.345
(0.243)

-0.056
(0.205)

0.183
(0.257)

(delta s)*

log distance

0.034
(0.042)

0.062
(0.065)

0.051
(0.044)

0.062
(0.065)

0.062
(0.046)

0.148
(0.092)

0.063
(0.050)

0.099
(0.090)

0.037
(0.052)

0.124
(0.091)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.051
(0.019)

-0.022
(0.026)

0.066
(0.024)

-0.027
(0.043)

0.067 *** 0.044
(0.025)
(0.042)

0.034
(0.029)

0.076 *
(0.044)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.001
(0.008)

-0.014
(0.011)

-0.006
(0.008)

-0.003
(0.011)

-0.004
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.011)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

2.980 **
(1.501)

-2.376
(1.527)

2.810 *
(1.506)

-2.206
(1.531)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

1.980
(4.541)

-4.503
(4.848)

2.941
(4.578)

-5.463
(4.881)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

Error Correction term (ECM)

0.669 ***
(0.215)
0.028 *
(0.016)

-0.031
(0.025)

-0.046
(0.160)

0.105
(0.198)

0.136
(0.182)

0.016
(0.197)

-0.181
(0.275)

0.015
(0.200)

-0.180
(0.276)

-0.004 **
(0.002)

0.002
(0.003)

-0.005 **
(0.002)

0.003
(0.003)

-0.005 *** 0.003
(0.002)
(0.003)

-0.005 *** 0.008 **
(0.002)
(0.004)

-0.002
(0.002)

0.005
(0.005)

-0.002
(0.002)

0.005
(0.005)

-0.006 **
(0.002)

0.004
(0.003)

-0.019 *** 0.011
(0.006)
(0.007)

-0.019 *** -0.008
(0.007)
(0.014)

-0.019 *** 0.000
(0.007)
(0.013)

-0.018 **
(0.007)

0.000
(0.013)

ECM* tariff levels

-0.007
(0.034)

0.003
(0.037)

-0.052
(0.040)

0.045
(0.043)

-0.053
(0.043)

0.028
(0.050)

-0.031
(0.044)

0.009
(0.050)

-0.030
(0.045)

0.008
(0.051)

ECM* log distance

0.012
(0.009)

-0.018
(0.014)

0.020 **
(0.009)

-0.026 *
(0.014)

0.018
(0.011)

0.016
(0.018)

0.019 *
(0.012)

0.019
(0.019)

0.018
(0.012)

0.020
(0.019)

0.013 **
(0.006)

0.009
(0.012)

0.014 **
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.011)

0.013 **
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.011)

-0.008
(0.015)

0.044 **
(0.020)

0.002
(0.015)

0.018
(0.020)

0.002
(0.015)

0.018
(0.020)

ECM* long term inflation

0.530 *
(0.273)

-0.502 *
(0.275)

0.537 *
(0.274)

-0.509 *
(0.275)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

0.099
(0.065)

-0.323 **
(0.129)

0.085
(0.065)

-0.309 **
(0.129)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

-0.006
(0.008)

-0.013
(0.010)

0.029 *
(0.016)

-0.032
(0.025)

-0.005 *** 0.003
(0.002)
(0.003)

-0.006 *** 0.005 *
(0.002)
(0.003)

-0.042
(0.217)

0.013 *** -0.008
(0.005)
(0.006)

ECM* log real wage ($)

0.150
(0.189)

-0.190
(0.265)

ECM* US Importer dummy
5630
5630
5630
5077
5077
# of Observations
0.236
0.250
0.250
0.255
0.256
Adjusted R-squared
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance; note: Developing country coefficient = values in the "D Dev." column should be added to estimates in column labelled "Rich".

-0.003
(0.062)
3299
0.252

3235
0.264

3235
0.265

Table 7. Determination of Passthrough to the CPI: Developing Countries, Relative to Rich Countries
Equation 1
Rich
D Dev.
change in

exchange rate

0.017
(0.011)

0.336 ***
(0.065)

change in

exporter's price

-0.021 *** -0.073 ***
(0.007)
(0.028)

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

Equation2
Rich
D Dev.
0.001
(0.034)

0.677 ***
(0.124)

Equation 3
Rich
D Dev.
-0.022
(0.033)

1.131 ***
(0.220)

Equation 4
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 5
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 6
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 7
Rich
D Dev.

1.620 *
(0.851)

1.017
(2.038)

1.733 *
(1.031)

2.338
(2.416)

1.858 *
(1.072)

-2.086
(3.377)

1.915 *
(1.079)

-3.681
(2.656)

-0.024 *** 0.002
(0.008)
(0.027)

-0.023 *** 0.013
(0.008)
(0.027)

-0.019 **
(0.009)

0.022
(0.032)

-0.018
(0.045)

0.031
(0.033)

-0.017
(0.011)

0.049
(0.044)

-0.019 *
(0.011)

0.021
(0.031)

0.002
(0.004)

0.002
(0.004)

-0.065 ***
(0.013)

0.001
(0.004)

-0.063 ***
(0.014)

0.001
(0.004)

-0.065 ***
(0.014)

0.001
(0.004)

-0.101 ***
(0.021)

0.005
(0.006)

0.002
(0.015)

-0.063
(0.045)

0.251 ***
(0.085)

-0.040
(0.046)

0.235 **
(0.098)

-0.036
(0.049)

0.151 *
(0.090)

-0.050
(0.088)

1.120 ***
(0.248)

0.102
(0.102)

0.453 ***
(0.167)

tariff levels

-0.336 *
(0.192)

-0.440
(0.493)

-0.358
(0.227)

-0.440
(0.493)

-0.396 *
(0.233)

0.153
(0.638)

-0.452 **
(0.220)

1.072 **
(0.528)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.007
(0.024)

0.122
(0.109)

-0.006
(0.024)

0.122
(0.109)

0.000
(0.027)

0.086
(0.290)

0.009
(0.025)

-0.194
(0.165)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.003
(0.009)

0.079 *
(0.041)

0.007
(0.010)

-0.099 *
(0.056)

0.003
(0.012)

0.008
(0.048)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.002
(0.039)

-0.684 ***
(0.094)

-0.020
(0.042)

-0.369 ***
(0.071)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.920
(0.938)

0.055
(0.954)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

2.301 **
(1.133)

-7.133 ***
(1.549)

Error Correction term (ECM)

-0.037 *** 0.036 ***
(0.012)
(0.014)

-0.039 *** 0.039 ***
(0.013)
(0.014)

-0.989
(0.704)

0.697
(0.753)

-0.923
(0.700)

0.617
(0.749)

-0.984
(0.719)

0.216
(0.897)

-0.807
(0.684)

1.155
(0.706)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.001)

0.006 ***
(0.002)

0.000
(0.001)

0.008 ***
(0.002)

0.000
(0.001)

0.008 ***
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.001)

0.015 **
(0.006)

0.001
(0.002)

0.010 ***
(0.004)

-0.008
(0.016)

0.032
(0.021)

-0.018
(0.015)

0.057 ***
(0.021)

-0.012
(0.017)

0.046 **
(0.022)

0.023
(0.041)

0.022
(0.108)

0.022
(0.039)

-0.117
(0.088)

ECM* tariff levels

0.207
(0.149)

-0.144
(0.159)

0.193
(0.148)

-0.127
(0.158)

0.205
(0.152)

-0.038
(0.190)

0.166
(0.144)

-0.241
(0.149)

ECM* log distance

-0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.004)

0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.006)

0.001
(0.003)

-0.009
(0.013)

-0.001
(0.004)

0.006
(0.009)

0.005 *
(0.003)

0.002
(0.008)

0.010 *** -0.004
(0.003)
(0.015)

0.008 **
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.012)

-0.019
(0.016)

-0.012
(0.015)

0.085 *
(0.044)

ECM* long term inflation

0.473
(0.485)

-0.629
(0.487)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.007
(0.034)

0.156
(0.097)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

-0.037 *** 0.025 *
(0.012)
(0.014)

-0.059 ***
(0.013)

0.003 ***
(0.001)

ECM* log real wage ($)

732
710
710
579
579
# of Observations
0.716
0.747
0.767
0.778
0.786
Adjusted R-squared
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance; note: Developing country coefficient = values in the "D Dev." column should be added to estimates in column labelled "Rich".

350
0.861

0.016
(0.052)

345
0.907

Table 8. Determination of Passthrough to Unit Values: Developing Countries, Relative to Rich Countries
Equation 1
Rich
D Dev.

Equation2
Rich
D Dev.

-0.062
(0.321)

Equation 5
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 6
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 7
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 8
Rich
D Dev.

8.496 *** -3.408
(1.781)
(2.355)

8.144 *** -3.142
(2.557)
(3.024)

7.244 *** -7.188 **
(2.404)
(3.012)

6.966 ***
(2.459)

-5.754 *
(3.114)

7.422 **
(2.647)

-6.213 *
(3.260)

exchange rate

0.681 *** -0.022
(0.112)
(0.144)

0.516 **
(0.262)

change in

exporter's price

0.226 *** -0.237 **
(0.069)
(0.116)

0.322 *** -0.328 ***
(0.077)
(0.121)

0.322 *** -0.327 ***
(0.077)
(0.121)

0.327 *** -0.336 ***
(0.081)
(0.126)

0.326 *** -0.333 ***
(0.045)
(0.126)

0.307 *** -0.082
(0.084)
(0.144)

0.311 ***
(0.084)

-0.104
(0.152)

0.309 **
(0.084)

-0.102
(0.151)

(delta s)*

trend

0.029
(0.028)

0.033
(0.028)

0.009
(0.035)

0.016
(0.032)

0.032
(0.039)

0.017
(0.035)

0.032
(0.041)

0.024
(0.033)

0.042 ##
(0.045)

-0.039
(0.055)

0.082
(0.066)

-0.039
(0.055)

0.082
(0.066)

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

0.032
(0.020)

-0.003
(0.027)

0.010
(0.020)

0.028
(0.027)

0.018
(0.085)

0.028
(0.097)

0.031
(0.088)

0.142 ##
(0.115)

0.127 *
(0.067)

0.037
(0.112)

0.108
(0.077)

0.055
(0.118)

(delta s)*

tariff levels

-1.446 *** 0.988
(0.420)
(0.699)

-1.358 **
(0.632)

0.988
(0.699)

-1.248 **
(0.598)

1.442 ##
(0.677)

-1.224 **
(0.611)

1.401 **
(0.687)

-1.337 **
(0.678)

1.514 **
(0.746)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.111
(0.141)

-0.122
(0.156)

-0.196
(0.185)

-0.085 *** -0.032
(0.157)
(0.192)

0.003
(0.237)

-0.211
(0.263)

0.021
(0.248)

-0.228
(0.272)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

-0.010
(0.081)

0.001
(0.093)

-0.017
(0.085)

-0.174
(0.109)

-0.133 **
(0.056)

-0.063
(0.099)

-0.109
(0.070)

-0.086
(0.107)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

0.003
(0.023)

-0.007
(0.030)

-0.055
(0.050)

0.059
(0.055)

-0.056
(0.050)

0.059
(0.055)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

-16.703 **
(8.483)

15.998 *
(8.487)

-16.205 *
(8.284)

15.500 *
(8.288)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

8.604
(7.164)

-6.531
(7.504)

7.571
(7.342)

-5.498
(7.679)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

0.011
(0.035)

0.485 *
(0.265)

Equation 4
Rich
D Dev.

change in

Error Correction term (ECM)

-0.139
(0.317)

Equation 3
Rich
D Dev.

-0.196
(0.185)

-0.572
(0.482)
-0.145 *** -0.082 **
(0.034)
(0.035)

-0.146 *** -0.094 **
(0.035)
(0.038)

0.094
(0.243)

0.171
(0.214)

0.429
(0.283)

0.169
(0.214)

0.432
(0.284)

-0.010 *** 0.010 **
(0.003)
(0.004)

-0.010 *** 0.010 **
(0.003)
(0.004)

-0.011 *** 0.010 **
(0.003)
(0.005)

-0.010 *** 0.010 **
(0.003)
(0.005)

-0.010 *** 0.012 **
(0.003)
(0.006)

-0.007 *
(0.004)

0.006
(0.006)

-0.007 *
(0.004)

0.006
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.005
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.004)

-0.016 *
(0.009)

0.015
(0.012)

-0.010
(0.011)

0.000
(0.020)

-0.009
(0.010)

0.008
(0.018)

-0.009
(0.010)

0.008
(0.018)

ECM* tariff levels

0.022
(0.081)

-0.001
(0.084)

0.018
(0.085)

0.013
(0.088)

0.020
(0.064)

-0.035
(0.070)

0.012
(0.057)

-0.056
(0.063)

0.012
(0.058)

-0.056
(0.064)

ECM* log distance

-0.041 *
(0.025)

0.005
(0.027)

-0.037
(0.028)

0.003
(0.030)

-0.050
(0.031)

0.000
(0.032)

-0.047 *
(0.028)

-0.011
(0.028)

-0.047 *
(0.028)

-0.011
(0.028)

0.011
(0.009)

-0.017
(0.012)

0.009
(0.009)

0.004
(0.017)

0.009
(0.008)

-0.003
(0.015)

0.008
(0.008)

-0.003
(0.015)

-0.023
(0.026)

0.046
(0.031)

-0.020
(0.022)

0.027
(0.027)

-0.020
(0.022)

0.027
(0.027)

ECM* long term inflation

0.512
(0.532)

-0.542
(0.537)

0.508
(0.531)

-0.538
(0.535)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.429 *
(0.260)

0.491 *
(0.278)

-0.428 *
(0.259)

0.490 *
(0.277)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

-0.210 *** -0.014
(0.036)
(0.016)

-0.002
(0.004)

-0.116
(0.292)

0.090
(0.251)

ECM* log real wage ($)

-0.201
(0.306)

0.190
(0.195)

0.234
(0.268)

ECM* US Importer dummy
3774
3774
3774
3548
3548
# of Observations
0.152
0.155
0.156
0.163
0.163
Adjusted R-squared
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance; note: Developing country coefficient = values in the "D Dev." column should be added to estimates in column labelled "Rich".

0.136
(0.104)
2625
0.158

2561
0.165

2561
0.165

Appendix Table 1: Pass-through to Imported Good Prices: Restricted Sample
Eqn 1
0.565 ***
(0.029)

Eqn2
0.796 ***
(0.064)

Eqn3
0.703 ***
(0.065)

Eqn 4
4.519 ***
(0.597)

Eqn 5
4.807 ***
(0.639)

Eqn 6
4.327 ***
(1.002)

Eqn 7
2.186 **
(0.924)

Eqn 8
2.282 **
(0.941)

Eqn 9
3.762 ***
(0.991)

0.053 *
(0.031)

0.073 **
(0.031)

0.084 ***
(0.030)

0.083 ***
(0.032)

0.083 ***
(0.032)

0.081 **
(0.037)

0.077 **
(0.036)

0.078 **
(0.036)

0.080 **
(0.037)

-0.036 ***
(0.009)

-0.042 ***
(0.009)

-0.044 ***
(0.009)

-0.044 ***
(0.009)

-0.052 ***
(0.011)

-0.041 ***
(0.011)

-0.041 ***
(0.011)

-0.027 **
(0.011)

-0.051 ***
(0.009)

-0.051 ***
(0.010)

-0.076 ***
(0.017)

-0.100 ***
(0.027)

-0.030
(0.025)

-0.034
(0.026)

-0.085 ***
(0.028)

tariff levels

-0.535 ***
(0.101)

-0.602 ***
(0.111)

-0.405 **
(0.165)

-0.085
(0.162)

-0.101
(0.166)

-0.345 **
(0.162)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.138 ***
(0.042)

-0.129 ***
(0.042)

-0.180 ***
(0.056)

-0.144 ***
(0.054)

-0.145 ***
(0.054)

-0.182 ***
(0.056)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.027 *
(0.016)

0.059 **
(0.025)

-0.006
(0.021)

-0.002
(0.022)

0.052 **
(0.026)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.020 **
(0.009)

-0.011
(0.009)

-0.011
(0.009)

-0.016 *
(0.008)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.174
(0.185)

0.175
(0.185)

0.259 ***
(0.063)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

0.075
(1.151)

0.060
(1.152)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

change in

exchange rate

change in

exporter's price

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

Error Correction term (ECM)

-0.086 ***
(0.007)

-0.263
(0.164)

-0.509 ***
(0.172)

-0.148 ***
(0.017)

-0.146 ***
(0.016)

-0.259 **
(0.106)

-0.223 *
(0.117)

-0.265 *
(0.158)

-0.278 *
(0.154)

-0.265 *
(0.156)

-0.195
(0.162)

0.008 ***
(0.002)

0.008 ***
(0.002)

0.008 ***
(0.002)

0.008 ***
(0.002)

0.008 ***
(0.002)

0.006 **
(0.002)

0.006 **
(0.002)

0.007 ***
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.004)

0.004
(0.006)

0.007
(0.005)

0.006
(0.006)

0.003
(0.006)

ECM* tariff levels

0.006
(0.020)

-0.001
(0.022)

-0.003
(0.033)

0.006
(0.032)

0.003
(0.033)

-0.013
(0.034)

ECM* log distance

0.010
(0.008)

0.010
(0.008)

0.016
(0.010)

0.012
(0.010)

0.013
(0.011)

0.013
(0.011)

0.002
(0.003)

-0.004
(0.004)

-0.008 *
(0.004)

-0.007
(0.005)

-0.004
(0.005)

0.001
(0.007)

-0.007
(0.007)

-0.007
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.008)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.065
(0.045)

-0.066
(0.045)

-0.057
(0.047)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.112
(0.077)

-0.109
(0.078)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log real wage ($)

ECM* US Importer dummy

# of Observations
3776
3776
3776
3520
3520
Adjusted R-squared
0.251
0.266
0.288
0.306
0.307
Country dummies
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Product dummies
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
restricted sample excludes Dakar, Libreville, Sao Palo, Tunis, Prague, Zagreb, Muslim Countries, Gin and Coca Cola
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

-0.040
(0.038)
2351
0.268
yes
yes

2323
0.244
yes
yes

-0.054
(0.037)

2323
2351
0.244
0.288
yes
yes
yes
yes
product specific (ps) tariffs

Appendix Table 2: Pass-through to Local Competitor Prices: Restricted Sample
Eqn 1
0.543 ***
(0.027)

Eqn2
0.917 ***
(0.062)

Eqn3
0.858 ***
(0.060)

Eqn 4
1.530 **
(0.666)

Eqn 5
1.989 ***
(0.672)

Eqn 6
0.446
(0.910)

Eqn 7
-0.213
(0.976)

Eqn 8
-0.395
(0.999)

Eqn 9
-0.168
(0.966)

0.040
(0.028)

0.040
(0.028)

0.049 *
(0.027)

0.034
(0.029)

0.032
(0.029)

0.044
(0.036)

0.057 *
(0.033)

0.056 *
(0.033)

0.042
(0.035)

-0.057 ***
(0.009)

-0.062 ***
(0.008)

-0.061 ***
(0.008)

-0.062 ***
(0.008)

-0.087 ***
(0.010)

-0.060 ***
(0.010)

-0.060 ***
(0.010)

-0.072 ***
(0.011)

-0.033 ***
(0.006)

-0.033 ***
(0.006)

-0.073 ***
(0.019)

-0.090 ***
(0.025)

-0.108 ***
(0.024)

-0.101 ***
(0.025)

-0.073 ***
(0.025)

tariff levels

-0.191 *
(0.114)

-0.298 **
(0.118)

-0.065
(0.152)

0.086
(0.155)

0.117
(0.160)

0.017
(0.164)

(delta s)*

log distance

0.029
(0.038)

0.044
(0.038)

0.108 **
(0.053)

0.078
(0.052)

0.080
(0.052)

0.109 **
(0.054)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.042 **
(0.018)

0.065 ***
(0.023)

0.088 ***
(0.023)

0.079 ***
(0.025)

0.049 **
(0.024)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.016 *
(0.009)

-0.009
(0.008)

-0.008
(0.008)

-0.013
(0.009)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.437 **
(0.191)

0.436 **
(0.190)

0.178 ***
(0.064)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-1.186
(1.193)

-1.166
(1.192)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

change in

exchange rate

change in

exporter's price

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

Error Correction term (ECM)

-0.035 ***
(0.006)

0.449 **
(0.176)

0.477 ***
(0.178)

-0.040 **
(0.016)

-0.042 ***
(0.015)

-0.016
(0.085)

0.114
(0.091)

0.078
(0.135)

0.065
(0.121)

0.062
(0.123)

0.127
(0.131)

0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

-0.006 ***
(0.002)

-0.007 ***
(0.002)

-0.017 ***
(0.004)

-0.022 ***
(0.005)

-0.017 ***
(0.005)

-0.017 ***
(0.005)

-0.022 ***
(0.005)

ECM* tariff levels

-0.011
(0.013)

-0.030 **
(0.014)

-0.037
(0.025)

-0.034
(0.023)

-0.033
(0.023)

-0.044 *
(0.025)

ECM* log distance

0.002
(0.007)

0.001
(0.007)

0.015 *
(0.008)

0.014 *
(0.008)

0.014 *
(0.008)

0.013 *
(0.008)

0.011 ***
(0.003)

0.014 ***
(0.004)

0.009 **
(0.004)

0.009 **
(0.005)

0.014 ***
(0.005)

0.013 **
(0.006)

0.005
(0.006)

0.005
(0.006)

0.009
(0.006)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.045
(0.029)

-0.044
(0.029)

-0.045
(0.036)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.145 **
(0.063)

-0.146 **
(0.063)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log real wage ($)

ECM* US Importer dummy

# of Observations
3796
3796
3796
3480
3480
Adjusted R-squared
0.207
0.228
0.243
0.256
0.261
Country dummies
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Product dummies
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
restricted sample excludes Dakar, Libreville, Sao Palo, Tunis, Prague, Zagreb, Muslim Countries, Gin and Coca Cola
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

0.019
(0.030)
2350
0.256
yes
yes

2326
0.282
yes
yes

-0.003
(0.030)

2326
2350
0.282
0.264
yes
yes
yes
yes
product specific (ps) tariffs

Appendix Table 3: Pass-through to the CPI: Restricted Sample
Eqn2
0.712 ***
(0.137)

Eqn3
0.605 ***
(0.154)

Eqn 4
1.596
(2.118)

Eqn 5
4.750 *
(2.884)

Eqn 6
8.151 ***
(2.278)

Eqn 7
4.318 ***
(1.143)

-0.063 ***
(0.014)

-0.060 ***
(0.014)

-0.055 ***
(0.015)

-0.052 ***
(0.013)

-0.047 ***
(0.008)

-0.016 ***
(0.006)

-0.063
(0.049)

-0.057
(0.051)

-0.159 ***
(0.061)

0.480 ***
(0.168)

0.370 ***
(0.088)

tariff levels

-0.205
(0.467)

-0.876
(0.612)

-1.567 ***
(0.516)

-0.718 ***
(0.250)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.005
(0.061)

0.034
(0.084)

-0.113
(0.106)

-0.117 *
(0.063)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.133 ***
(0.048)

0.068 **
(0.030)

0.070 ***
(0.018)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.475 ***
(0.066)

-0.330 ***
(0.045)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.855 ***
(0.155)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-3.968 ***
(0.944)

change in

exchange rate

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

Error Correction term (ECM)

Eqn 1
0.337 ***
(0.066)

-0.014
(0.010)

-0.005
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.006)

-0.406
(0.367)

-0.495
(0.365)

-0.707
(0.435)

0.455 **
(0.205)

0.002 **
(0.001)

0.005 ***
(0.001)

0.009 ***
(0.002)

0.009 ***
(0.002)

0.012 ***
(0.002)

0.006 ***
(0.002)

0.028 ***
(0.010)

0.015
(0.011)

0.006
(0.012)

0.010
(0.053)

-0.050
(0.041)

ECM* tariff levels

0.086
(0.078)

0.105
(0.077)

0.152
(0.093)

-0.097 **
(0.044)

ECM* log distance

-0.009 ***
(0.002)

-0.005
(0.004)

-0.014 ***
(0.005)

0.001
(0.004)

0.013
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.008)

0.004
(0.007)

0.002
(0.030)

0.040 *
(0.023)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log real wage ($)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.150 ***
(0.025)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

0.169 ***
(0.063)

# of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Country dummies

530
0.682
yes

530
0.682
yes

530
0.682
yes

530
0.682
yes

530
0.682
yes

restricted sample excludes Dakar, Libreville, Sao Palo, Tunis, Prague, Zagreb, Muslim Countries, Gin and Coca Cola
Average Tariffs
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

530
0.682
yes

530
0.682
yes

Appendix Table 4: Pass-through to Unit Values: Restricted Sample
Eqn 1
0.529 ***
(0.030)

Eqn2
0.818 ***
(0.080)

Eqn3
0.774 ***
(0.079)

Eqn 4
0.733
(0.719)

Eqn 5
1.205
(0.784)

Eqn 6
-0.116
(1.035)

Eqn 7
-0.823
(0.948)

Eqn 8
-1.060
(0.970)

Eqn 9
-1.272
(0.969)

0.110 ***
(0.031)

0.112 ***
(0.031)

0.105 ***
(0.031)

0.099 ***
(0.033)

0.101 ***
(0.033)

0.112 ***
(0.038)

0.115 ***
(0.035)

0.117 ***
(0.035)

0.107 ***
(0.037)

-0.038 ***
(0.010)

-0.049 ***
(0.010)

-0.047 ***
(0.010)

-0.047 ***
(0.010)

-0.073 ***
(0.011)

-0.057 ***
(0.011)

-0.058 ***
(0.011)

-0.058 ***
(0.011)

-0.043 ***
(0.006)

-0.042 ***
(0.006)

-0.072 ***
(0.022)

-0.100 ***
(0.025)

-0.103 ***
(0.027)

-0.094 ***
(0.028)

-0.076 ***
(0.024)

tariff levels

-0.014
(0.128)

-0.107
(0.145)

0.097
(0.170)

0.116
(0.163)

0.154
(0.167)

0.168
(0.168)

(delta s)*

log distance

0.013
(0.041)

0.015
(0.041)

0.069
(0.057)

0.114 **
(0.054)

0.117 **
(0.054)

0.130 ***
(0.050)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.032
(0.022)

0.060 **
(0.024)

0.080 ***
(0.026)

0.068 **
(0.028)

0.053 **
(0.024)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.008
(0.009)

0.000
(0.008)

0.001
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.008)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.764 ***
(0.197)

0.762 ***
(0.197)

0.660 ***
(0.128)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-0.637
(1.224)

-0.615
(1.223)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

change in

exchange rate

change in

exporter's price

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

Error Correction term (ECM)

-0.008 **
(0.003)

0.576 ***
(0.186)

0.588 ***
(0.183)

-0.007
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.006)

0.062
(0.040)

0.067 *
(0.041)

0.135 **
(0.057)

0.135 **
(0.056)

0.136 **
(0.056)

0.124 **
(0.057)

0.000
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.002 **
(0.001)

0.002 *
(0.001)

0.001
(0.002)

0.004
(0.002)

0.002
(0.002)

0.002
(0.002)

0.004
(0.002)

ECM* tariff levels

-0.001
(0.007)

-0.002
(0.007)

-0.021 **
(0.010)

-0.021 **
(0.010)

-0.021 **
(0.010)

-0.019 **
(0.010)

ECM* log distance

-0.007 ***
(0.002)

-0.007 ***
(0.003)

-0.006 **
(0.003)

-0.006 *
(0.003)

-0.006 *
(0.003)

-0.006 *
(0.003)

0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

-0.008 ***
(0.003)

-0.007 **
(0.003)

-0.007 **
(0.003)

-0.008 **
(0.003)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.007
(0.013)

-0.007
(0.013)

-0.018
(0.016)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

0.029
(0.030)

0.028
(0.030)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log real wage ($)

ECM* US Importer dummy

# of Observations
2853
2853
2853
2640
2640
Adjusted R-squared
0.196
0.205
0.229
0.241
0.242
Country dummies
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Product dummies
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
restricted sample excludes Dakar, Libreville, Sao Palo, Tunis, Prague, Zagreb, Muslim Countries, Gin and Coca Cola
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

-0.043
(0.032)
1945
0.182
yes
yes

1934
0.226
yes
yes

-0.038
(0.032)

1934
1945
0.227
0.215
yes
yes
yes
yes
product specific (ps) tariffs

Appendix Table 5: Pass-through to Imported Good Prices
Eqn 1
0.581 ***
(0.026)

Eqn2
0.865 ***
(0.061)

Eqn3
0.766 ***
(0.063)

Eqn 4
2.459 ***
(0.926)

Eqn 5
2.614 ***
(0.914)

Eqn 6
2.061 **
(0.978)

Eqn 7
0.767
(0.826)

Eqn 8
0.802
(0.835)

Eqn 9
1.352
(0.886)

0.081 ***
(0.024)

0.100 ***
(0.025)

0.103 ***
(0.024)

0.104 ***
(0.026)

0.103 ***
(0.026)

0.069 **
(0.030)

0.052 *
(0.029)

0.053 *
(0.029)

0.062 **
(0.029)

-0.044 ***
(0.008)

-0.046 ***
(0.008)

-0.046 ***
(0.008)

-0.047 ***
(0.008)

-0.057 ***
(0.010)

-0.034 ***
(0.010)

-0.034 ***
(0.010)

-0.028 ***
(0.010)

-0.048 ***
(0.008)

-0.048 ***
(0.009)

-0.067 ***
(0.016)

-0.070 ***
(0.023)

-0.019
(0.022)

-0.020
(0.022)

-0.049 **
(0.023)

tariff levels

-0.179
(0.173)

-0.215
(0.171)

-0.066
(0.157)

0.107
(0.138)

0.102
(0.140)

0.007
(0.142)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.092 **
(0.039)

-0.085 **
(0.040)

-0.101 *
(0.055)

-0.083
(0.052)

-0.084
(0.052)

-0.102 *
(0.053)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.020
(0.014)

0.027
(0.021)

-0.011
(0.018)

-0.009
(0.019)

0.014
(0.021)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.011
(0.009)

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.006
(0.007)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.443 ***
(0.157)

0.445 ***
(0.157)

0.329 ***
(0.069)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-1.470
(0.961)

-1.489
(0.962)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

change in

exchange rate

change in

exporter's price

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

Error Correction term (ECM)

-0.100 ***
(0.007)

-0.238
(0.155)

-0.384 **
(0.165)

-0.158 ***
(0.014)

-0.157 ***
(0.014)

-0.251 ***
(0.089)

-0.270 ***
(0.089)

-0.360 ***
(0.107)

-0.240 **
(0.105)

-0.234 **
(0.105)

-0.238 **
(0.108)

0.008 ***
(0.002)

0.008 ***
(0.002)

0.009 ***
(0.002)

0.009 ***
(0.002)

0.007 ***
(0.002)

0.005 **
(0.002)

0.005 **
(0.002)

0.005 ***
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

0.003
(0.003)

0.001
(0.005)

0.003
(0.005)

0.002
(0.005)

0.000
(0.005)

ECM* tariff levels

-0.002
(0.014)

0.000
(0.014)

0.013
(0.020)

0.000
(0.020)

-0.002
(0.020)

-0.006
(0.020)

ECM* log distance

0.011
(0.008)

0.012
(0.008)

0.021 **
(0.009)

0.015
(0.010)

0.016
(0.010)

0.018 *
(0.010)

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.004)

0.000
(0.005)

0.010 *
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.007)

0.002
(0.007)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.081 *
(0.046)

-0.082 *
(0.046)

-0.091 *
(0.047)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.248 ***
(0.071)

-0.245 ***
(0.071)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log real wage ($)

ECM* US Importer dummy

# of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Country dummies
Product dummies
Full sample
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

-0.049
(0.035)
5677
0.246
no
yes

5677
0.263
no
yes

5677
0.275
no
yes

5192
0.285
no
yes

5192
0.286
no
yes

3316
0.264
no
yes

3250
0.263
no
yes

-0.065 *
(0.036)

3250
3316
0.262
0.293
no
no
yes
yes
product specific (ps) tariffs

Appendix Table 6: Pass-through to Local Competitor Prices
Eqn 1
0.560 ***
(0.025)

Eqn2
0.925 ***
(0.052)

Eqn3
0.860 ***
(0.052)

Eqn 4
1.227 **
(0.516)

Eqn 5
1.665 ***
(0.522)

Eqn 6
-0.246
(0.703)

Eqn 7
-1.059
(0.758)

Eqn 8
-1.171
(0.768)

Eqn 9
-0.782
(0.761)

0.055 **
(0.028)

0.049 *
(0.028)

0.051 *
(0.028)

0.037
(0.030)

0.034
(0.030)

0.034
(0.038)

0.031
(0.036)

0.030
(0.036)

0.029
(0.037)

-0.056 ***
(0.007)

-0.057 ***
(0.007)

-0.057 ***
(0.007)

-0.059 ***
(0.007)

-0.085 ***
(0.009)

-0.059 ***
(0.011)

-0.059 ***
(0.011)

-0.069 ***
(0.011)

-0.031 ***
(0.006)

-0.032 ***
(0.006)

-0.078 ***
(0.015)

-0.079 ***
(0.024)

-0.083 ***
(0.021)

-0.079 ***
(0.022)

-0.063 **
(0.025)

tariff levels

-0.131
(0.087)

-0.237 ***
(0.089)

0.071
(0.115)

0.243 **
(0.121)

0.260 **
(0.123)

0.127
(0.126)

(delta s)*

log distance

0.032
(0.036)

0.052
(0.036)

0.113 **
(0.051)

0.090 *
(0.049)

0.092 *
(0.049)

0.116 **
(0.052)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.049 ***
(0.015)

0.053 **
(0.022)

0.066 ***
(0.019)

0.060 ***
(0.020)

0.037 *
(0.023)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.021 ***
(0.008)

-0.009
(0.007)

-0.009
(0.007)

-0.019 **
(0.008)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.531 ***
(0.200)

0.527 ***
(0.200)

0.193 ***
(0.061)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-1.767
(1.240)

-1.727
(1.240)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

change in

exchange rate

change in

exporter's price

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

Error Correction term (ECM)

-0.036 ***
(0.006)

0.526 ***
(0.166)

0.529 ***
(0.170)

-0.030 **
(0.014)

-0.032 **
(0.013)

-0.007
(0.074)

0.079
(0.075)

0.018
(0.105)

-0.011
(0.100)

-0.012
(0.100)

0.022
(0.103)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

-0.004 **
(0.002)

-0.005 ***
(0.002)

-0.015 ***
(0.003)

-0.018 ***
(0.005)

-0.014 ***
(0.005)

-0.014 ***
(0.005)

-0.018 ***
(0.005)

ECM* tariff levels

-0.005
(0.010)

-0.017 *
(0.010)

-0.028
(0.018)

-0.024
(0.017)

-0.024
(0.018)

-0.030
(0.018)

ECM* log distance

0.000
(0.007)

-0.001
(0.007)

0.015 **
(0.008)

0.016 **
(0.008)

0.016 **
(0.008)

0.016 **
(0.008)

0.011 ***
(0.003)

0.012 ***
(0.004)

0.007 *
(0.004)

0.007
(0.004)

0.012 ***
(0.005)

0.009
(0.006)

0.007
(0.006)

0.007
(0.006)

0.011 *
(0.006)

ECM* long term inflation

0.022
(0.023)

0.023
(0.023)

0.006
(0.027)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.237 ***
(0.075)

-0.239 ***
(0.075)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log real wage ($)

ECM* US Importer dummy

# of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Country dummies
Product dummies

0.028
(0.029)
5630
0.169
no
yes

Full sample
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

5630
0.185
no
yes

5630
0.191
no
yes

5077
0.200
no
yes

5077
0.205
no
yes

3299
0.205
no
yes

3235
0.232
no
yes

0.001
(0.030)

3235
3299
0.232
0.212
no
no
yes
yes
product specific (ps) tariffs

Appendix Table 7: Pass-through to the CPI
Eqn2
0.923 ***
(0.136)

Eqn3
1.007 ***
(0.191)

Eqn 4
8.804 ***
(2.254)

Eqn 5
11.205 ***
(2.733)

Eqn 6
11.709 ***
(2.873)

Eqn 7
3.952 **
(1.570)

-0.059 ***
(0.015)

-0.060 ***
(0.016)

-0.055 ***
(0.018)

-0.061 ***
(0.016)

-0.085 ***
(0.015)

-0.031 ***
(0.008)

0.047
(0.051)

-0.071
(0.058)

-0.181 ***
(0.061)

0.463 ***
(0.172)

0.149 *
(0.089)

tariff levels

-1.352 ***
(0.458)

-1.795 ***
(0.502)

-1.834 ***
(0.607)

-0.214
(0.305)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.182 *
(0.094)

-0.172
(0.127)

-0.344 ***
(0.115)

-0.316 ***
(0.076)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.139 ***
(0.045)

0.039
(0.037)

0.010
(0.019)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.473 ***
(0.065)

-0.202 ***
(0.041)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.906 ***
(0.103)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-6.048 ***
(0.725)

change in

exchange rate

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

Error Correction term (ECM)

Eqn 1
0.589 ***
(0.069)

-0.008
(0.011)

-0.001
(0.009)

0.000
(0.009)

0.410
(0.443)

0.326
(0.410)

-0.309
(0.394)

0.478
(0.350)

-0.003 ***
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.007 ***
(0.002)

0.007 ***
(0.002)

0.010 ***
(0.002)

0.005 ***
(0.001)

0.016 ***
(0.006)

0.003
(0.006)

0.006
(0.006)

-0.058 **
(0.029)

-0.065 ***
(0.022)

ECM* tariff levels

-0.086
(0.093)

-0.068
(0.086)

0.067
(0.084)

-0.103
(0.075)

ECM* log distance

-0.011 ***
(0.002)

-0.012 ***
(0.003)

0.001
(0.005)

0.006 *
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.004)

0.009
(0.008)

0.012 **
(0.006)

0.046 ***
(0.018)

0.043 ***
(0.013)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log real wage ($)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.203 ***
(0.057)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.045
(0.067)

# of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Country dummies
full sample
Average Tariffs
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

732
0.416
no

732
0.416
no

732
0.416
no

732
0.416
no

732
0.416
no

732
0.416
no

732
0.416
no

Appendix Table 8: Pass-through to Unit Values
Eqn 1
0.675 ***
(0.051)

Eqn2
0.402 ***
(0.132)

Eqn3
0.425 ***
(0.135)

Eqn 4
5.452 ***
(1.219)

Eqn 5
5.282 ***
(1.301)

Eqn 6
2.549 *
(1.546)

Eqn 7
2.486 *
(1.494)

Eqn 8
2.552 *
(1.517)

Eqn 9
2.663 *
(1.589)

0.082
(0.063)

0.111 *
(0.065)

0.114 *
(0.065)

0.107
(0.068)

0.106
(0.068)

0.250 ***
(0.068)

0.257 ***
(0.070)

0.257 ***
(0.070)

0.256 ***
(0.069)

0.040 **
(0.018)

0.040 **
(0.017)

0.046 ***
(0.018)

0.047 ***
(0.018)

0.045 **
(0.020)

0.041 *
(0.022)

0.041 *
(0.022)

0.039 *
(0.022)

0.004
(0.014)

0.016
(0.013)

0.029
(0.037)

0.085 *
(0.047)

0.095 **
(0.048)

0.093 *
(0.049)

0.083 *
(0.049)

change in

exchange rate

change in

exporter's price

(delta s)*

trend

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)*

tariff levels

-0.434 *
(0.224)

-0.401 *
(0.242)

-0.104
(0.291)

-0.096
(0.299)

-0.107
(0.302)

-0.097
(0.295)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.336 ***
(0.071)

-0.338 ***
(0.071)

-0.205 **
(0.084)

-0.190 **
(0.090)

-0.190 **
(0.090)

-0.212 **
(0.083)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

-0.014
(0.036)

-0.107 **
(0.042)

-0.114 ***
(0.042)

-0.110 **
(0.044)

-0.107 **
(0.044)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.001
(0.013)

-0.012
(0.015)

-0.012
(0.015)

-0.004
(0.013)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.069
(0.312)

0.073
(0.313)

-0.145
(0.183)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-1.504
(1.810)

-1.532
(1.818)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

Error Correction term (ECM)

-0.180 ***
(0.025)

-0.232
(0.267)

-0.162
(0.253)

-0.155 ***
(0.029)

-0.159 ***
(0.031)

-0.052
(0.114)

-0.045
(0.132)

0.128
(0.113)

0.212 *
(0.108)

0.209 *
(0.108)

0.137
(0.112)

-0.004 *
(0.002)

-0.004 *
(0.002)

-0.004 *
(0.002)

-0.004 *
(0.002)

-0.005 *
(0.003)

-0.006 **
(0.003)

-0.006 **
(0.003)

-0.005 **
(0.003)

-0.004
(0.003)

-0.006 *
(0.003)

-0.007
(0.005)

-0.008
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.008)

-0.008
(0.008)

ECM* tariff levels

0.021
(0.023)

0.020
(0.027)

0.016
(0.021)

-0.001
(0.019)

-0.001
(0.019)

0.014
(0.021)

ECM* log distance

-0.025 ***
(0.009)

-0.025 ***
(0.009)

-0.037 ***
(0.014)

-0.039 ***
(0.015)

-0.039 ***
(0.015)

-0.037 ***
(0.014)

0.001
(0.005)

0.006
(0.007)

0.003
(0.007)

0.003
(0.007)

0.006
(0.007)

0.001
(0.013)

-0.010
(0.014)

-0.010
(0.014)

-0.002
(0.014)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.014
(0.051)

-0.014
(0.051)

-0.024
(0.045)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.093
(0.103)

-0.093
(0.103)

ECM* trend

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

ECM* log real wage ($)

ECM* US Importer dummy

# of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Country dummies
Product dummies

-0.029
(0.046)
3774
0.135
no
yes

Full sample
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

3774
0.137
no
yes

3774
0.137
no
yes

3548
0.147
no
yes

3548
0.146
no
yes

2625
0.147
no
yes

2561
0.146
no
yes

-0.049
(0.043)

2561
2625
0.145
0.146
no
no
yes
yes
product specific (ps) tariffs

Appendix Table 9: Pass-through to Imported Good Prices
Eqn2
0.010
(0.061)

Eqn3
0.296 ***
(0.084)

Eqn 4
0.302 ***
(0.084)

Eqn 5
1.536 *
(0.859)

Eqn 6
1.159
(0.824)

Eqn 7
1.116
(0.826)

depreciations

0.241 ***
(0.086)

0.257 ***
(0.086)

0.219 **
(0.088)

0.214 *
(0.126)

0.051
(0.119)

0.073
(0.119)

depreciations above 25%

0.342 ***
(0.052)

0.269 ***
(0.053)

0.246 ***
(0.052)

0.141 *
(0.086)

0.080
(0.091)

0.071
(0.091)

0.070 ***
(0.024)

0.089 ***
(0.024)

0.092 ***
(0.024)

0.060 **
(0.029)

0.049 *
(0.029)

0.047 *
(0.029)

-0.040 ***
(0.008)

-0.041 ***
(0.008)

-0.061 ***
(0.010)

-0.049 ***
(0.010)

-0.050 ***
(0.010)

-0.024 ***
(0.009)

-0.058 **
(0.024)

-0.042 *
(0.024)

-0.047 *
(0.024)

(delta s)* tariff levels

-0.158
(0.145)

-0.089
(0.145)

-0.086
(0.146)

(delta s)* log distance

-0.025
(0.050)

-0.017
(0.050)

-0.012
(0.049)

(delta s)* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.033
(0.022)

0.022
(0.022)

0.027
(0.022)

(delta s)* log real wage ($)

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.008)

(delta s)* long term inflation

0.330 *
(0.200)

0.296
(0.201)

(delta s)* long term exchange rate variability

-1.258
(1.297)

-1.344
(1.292)

(delta s)* US Importer dummy

-0.325 **
(0.164)

-0.336 **
(0.165)

change in exchange rate

change in exporter's price

Eqn 1
0.423 ***
(0.029)

0.086 ***
(0.024)

(delta s)* trend
(delta s)* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)* stage of business cycle

-0.677 *
(0.388)
-0.158 ***
(0.016)

-0.158 ***
(0.016)

-0.571 ***
(0.117)

-0.377 ***
(0.116)

-0.367 ***
(0.115)

0.007 ***
(0.002)

0.007 ***
(0.002)

0.006 ***
(0.002)

0.004 *
(0.002)

0.004 *
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.006)

ECM* tariff levels

0.030
(0.022)

0.005
(0.021)

0.004
(0.021)

ECM* log distance

0.038 ***
(0.010)

0.030 ***
(0.011)

0.029 ***
(0.010)

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.001
(0.006)

0.001
(0.006)

0.001
(0.006)

ECM* log real wage ($)

0.016 **
(0.007)

0.002
(0.008)

0.001
(0.008)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.082 *
(0.046)

-0.079 *
(0.047)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.175 **
(0.072)

-0.183 **
(0.074)

ECM* US Importer dummy

-0.058
(0.062)

-0.056
(0.062)

Error Correction term (ECM)

-0.107 ***
(0.007)

-0.105 ***
(0.007)

ECM* trend
ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* stage of business cycle
# of Observations
5677
Adjusted R-squared
0.297
Country dummies
yes
Product dummies
yes
Full sample
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

0.090
(0.101)
5677
0.318
yes
yes

5677
0.329
yes
yes

5677
0.332
yes
yes

3316
0.321
yes
yes

3250
3250
0.289
0.289
yes
yes
yes
yes
product specific (ps) tariffs

Appendix Table 10: Pass-through to Local Competitor Prices
Eqn2
0.162 **
(0.064)

Eqn3
0.467 ***
(0.082)

Eqn 4
0.470 ***
(0.082)

Eqn 5
-0.688
(0.791)

Eqn 6
-0.961
(0.796)

Eqn 7
-0.898
(0.811)

depreciations

-0.085
(0.092)

-0.067
(0.093)

-0.078
(0.095)

-0.064
(0.115)

-0.118
(0.118)

-0.115
(0.118)

depreciations above 25%

0.475 ***
(0.052)

0.395 ***
(0.054)

0.388 ***
(0.054)

0.265 ***
(0.090)

0.228 **
(0.089)

0.236 ***
(0.088)

0.035
(0.027)

0.026
(0.027)

0.027
(0.027)

0.007
(0.037)

0.010
(0.035)

0.009
(0.035)

-0.042 ***
(0.007)

-0.043 ***
(0.007)

-0.070 ***
(0.010)

-0.047 ***
(0.011)

-0.048 ***
(0.010)

-0.007
(0.006)

-0.070 **
(0.027)

-0.092 ***
(0.024)

-0.088 ***
(0.024)

(delta s)* tariff levels

-0.014
(0.134)

0.120
(0.135)

0.114
(0.135)

(delta s)* log distance

0.176 ***
(0.053)

0.130 ***
(0.049)

0.126 **
(0.051)

(delta s)* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.062 **
(0.024)

0.080 ***
(0.023)

0.076 ***
(0.023)

(delta s)* log real wage ($)

-0.017 **
(0.007)

-0.009
(0.006)

-0.009
(0.006)

(delta s)* long term inflation

0.587 **
(0.244)

0.594 **
(0.235)

(delta s)* long term exchange rate variability

-2.327
(1.635)

-2.352
(1.658)

(delta s)* US Importer dummy

0.484 ***
(0.184)

0.501 ***
(0.183)

change in exchange rate

change in exporter's price

Eqn 1
0.396 ***
(0.027)

0.052 *
(0.027)

(delta s)* trend
(delta s)* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)* stage of business cycle

0.137
(0.696)
0.008
(0.014)

0.007
(0.014)

-0.011
(0.114)

-0.033
(0.111)

0.013
(0.117)

-0.003 **
(0.001)

-0.003 **
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.020 ***
(0.006)

-0.017 ***
(0.006)

-0.016 ***
(0.006)

ECM* tariff levels

-0.028
(0.020)

-0.028
(0.020)

-0.030
(0.020)

ECM* log distance

0.027 ***
(0.008)

0.027 ***
(0.009)

0.023 **
(0.009)

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.015 ***
(0.005)

0.012 **
(0.005)

0.010 **
(0.005)

ECM* log real wage ($)

0.019 ***
(0.007)

0.015 **
(0.007)

0.014 **
(0.007)

ECM* long term inflation

0.012
(0.025)

0.019
(0.025)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.158 **
(0.074)

-0.146 *
(0.077)

ECM* US Importer dummy

-0.021
(0.054)

-0.007
(0.053)

Error Correction term (ECM)

-0.018 ***
(0.006)

-0.014 **
(0.006)

ECM* trend
ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* stage of business cycle
# of Observations
5630
Adjusted R-squared
0.224
Country dummies
yes
Product dummies
yes
Full sample
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

0.298 **
(0.135) **
5630
0.246
yes
yes

5630
0.254
yes
yes

5630
0.254
yes
yes

3299
0.246
yes
yes

3235
3187
0.262
0.269
yes
yes
yes
yes
product specific (ps) tariffs

Appendix Table 11: Pass-through to Imported the CPI
Eqn2
-0.368 ***
(0.095)

Eqn3
-0.129
(0.113)

Eqn 4
-0.035
(0.093)

Eqn 5
0.777
(1.187)

Eqn 6
2.162
(1.571)

Eqn 7
5.069 ***
(1.780)

Eqn 8
2.726 **
(1.241)

Eqn 9
-0.702
(1.350)

depreciations

0.495 ***
(0.127)

0.585 ***
(0.134)

0.615 ***
(0.113)

0.539 ***
(0.102)

0.548 ***
(0.105)

0.407 **
(0.184)

0.071
(0.095)

0.168 *
(0.089)

depreciations above 25%

0.352 ***
(0.063)

0.243 ***
(0.062)

0.295 ***
(0.070)

0.314 ***
(0.075)

0.289 ***
(0.069)

0.156
(0.103)

0.147 ***
0.094 *
(0.052)
(0.050)

-0.042 ***
(0.009)

-0.044 ***
(0.009)

-0.044 ***
(0.010)

-0.047 ***
(0.010)

-0.062 ***
(0.013)

-0.007
(0.008)

0.078 **
(0.032)

0.075 **
(0.036)

0.021
(0.032)

0.735 ***
(0.183)

0.437 ***
0.452 ***
(0.104)
(0.090)

(delta s)* tariff levels

-0.384 *
(0.233)

-0.669 **
(0.309)

-1.120 ***
(0.407)

-0.408
(0.264)

0.317
(0.270)

(delta s)* log distance

0.116 **
(0.058)

0.134 **
(0.068)

-0.019
(0.108)

-0.109 *
(0.060)

-0.110 *
(0.057)

0.065 **
(0.032)

0.040
(0.033)

0.054 ***
0.051 ***
(0.019)
(0.018)

-0.455 ***
(0.085)

-0.292 *** -0.281 ***
(0.052)
(0.046)

change in exchange rate

Eqn 1
0.279 ***
(0.052)

(delta s)* trend
(delta s)* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]
(delta s)* log real wage ($)

-0.003
(0.008)

(delta s)* long term inflation

0.775 ***
0.857 ***
(0.124)
(0.114)

(delta s)* long term exchange rate variability

-4.257 *** -4.784 ***
(0.870)
(0.770)

(delta s)* stage of business cycle
Error Correction term (ECM)

-1.999 ***
(0.393)
-0.014
(0.009)

-0.011
0.007

ECM* trend

-0.002
0.005
0.003 ***
0.001

ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

-0.001
0.005

-0.338
0.243

-0.346
(0.232)

-0.740 *
(0.447)

0.472 **
0.201

0.468 ***
0.181

0.006 ***
0.001

0.009 ***
0.001

0.009 ***
(0.001)

0.012 ***
(0.002)

0.006 ***
0.007 ***
(0.002)
(0.002)

0.028 ***
0.007

0.022 ***
0.007

0.018 **
(0.008)

0.034
(0.053)

-0.042
(0.038)

-0.045
(0.038)

0.072
0.051

0.074
(0.049)

0.160 *
(0.096)

-0.101 **
(0.043)

-0.100 ***
(0.039)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.014 ***
(0.005)

0.000
(0.004)

-0.002
(0.004)

0.006
(0.007)

0.000
(0.008)

0.001
(0.006)

0.001
(0.006)

-0.012
(0.028)

0.033
(0.020)

0.033
(0.020)

ECM* tariff levels
ECM* log distance

-0.006 ***
0.002

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]
ECM* log real wage ($)
ECM* long term inflation

-0.172 *** -0.180 ***
(0.039)
(0.040)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

0.126 **
(0.059)

ECM* stage of business cycle
# of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Country dummies

0.049
(0.054)
-0.153 *
(0.087)

732
0.693
yes

Full sample
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

732
0.761
yes

710
0.785
yes

710
0.795
yes

579
0.797
yes

579
0.805
yes

350
0.856
yes

345
0.896
yes

343
0.903
yes

Appendix Table 12: Pass-through to Unit Values
Eqn2
-0.036
(0.186)

Eqn3
-0.336
(0.235)

Eqn 4
-0.386
(0.237)

Eqn 5
1.446
(1.491)

Eqn 6
1.143
(1.515)

Eqn 7
0.645
(1.500)

depreciations

1.021 ***
(0.274)

1.048 ***
(0.274)

1.130 ***
(0.277)

0.609 **
(0.301)

0.625 **
(0.305)

0.441
(0.306)

depreciations above 25%

-0.160
(0.150)

-0.157
(0.152)

-0.126
(0.152)

-0.195
(0.192)

-0.108
(0.209)

-0.153
(0.211)

0.082
(0.063)

0.122 *
(0.066)

0.122 *
(0.066)

0.263 ***
(0.073)

0.252 ***
(0.074)

0.211 ***
(0.074)

0.042 **
(0.017)

0.046 ***
(0.017)

0.048 **
(0.022)

0.040 *
(0.024)

0.041 *
(0.024)

0.043 ***
(0.016)

0.084
(0.056)

0.137 **
(0.058)

0.131 **
(0.058)

(delta s)* tariff levels

-0.039
(0.292)

-0.022
(0.301)

0.014
(0.299)

(delta s)* log distance

-0.154 *
(0.085)

-0.132
(0.094)

-0.132
(0.095)

(delta s)* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

-0.088 *
(0.051)

-0.131 **
(0.051)

-0.115 **
(0.051)

(delta s)* log real wage ($)

-0.001
(0.013)

-0.019
(0.016)

-0.025
(0.017)

(delta s)* long term inflation

-0.625
(0.400)

-0.559
(0.400)

(delta s)* long term exchange rate variability

1.545
(2.221)

1.391
(2.235)

(delta s)* US Importer dummy

-0.043
(0.274)

0.244
(0.268)

change in exchange rate

change in exporter's price

Eqn 1
0.666 ***
(0.067)

0.094
(0.063)

(delta s)* trend
(delta s)* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

(delta s)* stage of business cycle

0.602 ***
(0.142)
-0.187 ***
(0.033)

-0.191 ***
(0.034)

0.236
(0.148)

0.352 **
(0.146)

0.332 **
(0.159)

-0.005 **
(0.002)

-0.005 **
(0.002)

-0.006 *
(0.003)

-0.007 **
(0.003)

-0.006 **
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.008
(0.009)

-0.003
(0.009)

-0.003
(0.009)

ECM* tariff levels

0.003
(0.024)

-0.019
(0.021)

-0.013
(0.022)

ECM* log distance

-0.045 ***
(0.017)

-0.049 ***
(0.019)

-0.050 **
(0.020)

ECM* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.007
(0.007)

0.004
(0.007)

0.003
(0.008)

ECM* log real wage ($)

-0.002
(0.015)

-0.016
(0.016)

-0.014
(0.017)

ECM* long term inflation

-0.015
(0.052)

-0.006
(0.053)

ECM* long term exchange rate variability

-0.156
(0.107)

-0.174
(0.114)

ECM* US Importer dummy

0.149
(0.110)

0.143
(0.109)

Error Correction term (ECM)

-0.218 ***
(0.030)

-0.221 ***
(0.030)

ECM* trend
ECM* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

ECM* stage of business cycle
# of Observations
3774
Adjusted R-squared
0.151
Country dummies
yes
Product dummies
yes
Full sample
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of significance

0.115
(0.158)
3774
0.155
yes
yes

3774
0.157
yes
yes

3774
0.158
yes
yes

2625
0.154
yes
yes

2561
2522
0.155
0.161
yes
yes
yes
yes
product specific (ps) tariffs

Appendix Table 13. Determination of Passthrough to Imported Goods Priees: Developing countries, Relative to Rich countries
Equation 1
Rich
D Dev.
change in

Equation2
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 3
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 4
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 5
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 6
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 7
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 8
Rich
D Dev.

exchange rate

-0.052
(0.059)

0.125
(0.111)

0.126
(0.092)

0.249 *
(0.150)

0.119 ***
(0.003)

0.232
(0.153)

0.869 **
(0.339)

0.257
(0.610)

0.847 **
(0.335)

0.244
(0.612)

0.821 **
(0.331)

0.972
(0.825)

0.984 **
(0.383)

0.232
(0.879)

0.590
(0.372)

0.709
(0.887)

depreciations

0.267 ***
(0.088)

-0.070
(0.157)

0.303 ***
(0.089)

-0.108
(0.157)

0.305 ***
(0.004)

-0.137
(0.162)

0.275 ***
(0.103)

-0.084
(0.173)

0.254 **
(0.110)

-0.027
(0.181)

0.235 **
(0.112)

-0.221
(0.269)

0.227 **
(0.110)

-0.388
(0.256)

0.235 **
(0.111)

-0.348
(0.261)

depreciations above 25%

0.093
(0.143)

0.242
(0.155)

0.064
(0.149)

0.197
(0.162)

0.078
(0.149)

0.172
(0.162)

0.105
(0.151)

0.125
(0.165)

0.116
(0.152)

0.108
(0.166)

0.128
(0.150)

0.000
(0.192)

0.238
(0.151)

-0.176
(0.192)

0.143
(0.149)

-0.104
(0.196)

change in

exporter's priee

0.104 ***
(0.025)

-0.058
(0.042)

0.105 ***
(0.025)

-0.028
(0.043)

0.104 ***
(0.025)

-0.021
(0.042)

0.104 ***
(0.028)

-0.023
(0.047)

0.104 ***
(0.028)

-0.023
(0.047)

0.086 ***
(0.029)

-0.044
(0.066)

0.085 ***
(0.029)

-0.056
(0.065)

0.086 ***
(0.029)

-0.063
(0.066)

(delta s)*

trend

-0.027 ***
(0.010)

-0.013
(0.013)

-0.028 ***
(0.010)

-0.013
(0.013)

-0.026 ***
(0.010)

-0.010
(0.013)

-0.025 **
(0.010)

-0.012
(0.013)

-0.022 **
(0.010)

-0.060 ***
(0.018)

-0.029 **
(0.013)

-0.026
(0.021)

-0.018
(0.013)

-0.039 *
(0.021)

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

0.007
(0.011)

-0.033 **
(0.015)

0.004
(0.011)

-0.029 *
(0.016)

0.015
(0.020)

-0.061 **
(0.030)

0.017
(0.023)

-0.080 *
(0.044)

0.001
(0.026)

-0.070
(0.046)

-0.024
(0.027)

-0.049
(0.046)

(delta s)*

tariff levels

-0.066
(0.041)

-0.012
(0.056)

-0.060
(0.041)

-0.032
(0.058)

-0.051
(0.041)

-0.084
(0.080)

-0.065
(0.042)

0.034
(0.076)

-0.055
(0.043)

0.028
(0.082)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.073 **
(0.036)

0.001
(0.063)

-0.074 **
(0.036)

0.013
(0.065)

-0.074 **
(0.036)

0.011
(0.092)

-0.066
(0.044)

0.030
(0.096)

-0.018
(0.043)

-0.026
(0.097)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

-0.011
(0.016)

0.034
(0.025)

-0.009
(0.020)

0.048
(0.042)

-0.001
(0.021)

0.046
(0.043)

0.028
(0.024)

0.022
(0.044)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.019 **
(0.009)

0.012
(0.012)

-0.021 **
(0.010)

0.016
(0.013)

-0.023 **
(0.010)

0.018
(0.013)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

-2.337
(2.341)

2.760
(2.352)

-0.289
(2.354)

0.655
(2.367)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-3.522
(4.824)

1.822
(5.038)

-7.818
(4.791)

6.144
(5.005)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

-0.376 **
(0.167)

(delta s)*

stage of business cycle

-2.313 ***
(0.820)

1.545
(1.255)

Error correction term (Ecm)

-0.093 ***
(0.016)

-0.101 ***
(0.025)

-0.094 ***
(0.016)

-0.098 ***
(0.026)

-0.302 ***
(0.081)

-0.153
(0.152)

-0.301 ***
(0.082)

-0.161
(0.154)

-0.288 ***
(0.080)

-0.477 **
(0.222)

-0.288 ***
(0.088)

-0.110
(0.238)

-0.266 ***
(0.089)

-0.211
(0.247)

0.000
(0.002)

0.011 ***
(0.003)

0.000
(0.002)

0.011 ***
(0.003)

0.001
(0.002)

0.009 ***
(0.003)

0.001
(0.002)

0.009 ***
(0.003)

0.001
(0.002)

0.009 **
(0.004)

0.001
(0.002)

0.003
(0.005)

0.001
(0.002)

0.004
(0.005)

-0.004 *
(0.002)

0.006
(0.004)

-0.002
(0.002)

0.005
(0.005)

0.000
(0.005)

0.005
(0.008)

0.001
(0.005)

0.012
(0.014)

0.000
(0.005)

0.011
(0.013)

0.000
(0.005)

0.015
(0.014)

Ecm* tariff levels

0.005
(0.008)

0.001
(0.011)

0.005
(0.008)

0.002
(0.012)

0.009
(0.009)

-0.020
(0.018)

0.012
(0.009)

-0.028
(0.017)

0.005
(0.009)

-0.025
(0.018)

Ecm* log distance

0.023 **
(0.009)

0.007
(0.017)

0.022 **
(0.010)

0.007
(0.017)

0.024 **
(0.010)

0.039
(0.026)

0.023 **
(0.010)

0.004
(0.027)

0.024 **
(0.010)

0.008
(0.028)

-0.002
(0.004)

0.000
(0.007)

-0.004
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.012)

-0.002
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.011)

-0.002
(0.005)

-0.010
(0.011)

0.017
(0.014)

-0.027
(0.019)

0.014
(0.014)

-0.037 **
(0.019)

0.021
(0.015)

-0.049 **
(0.021)

Ecm* long term inflation

0.005
(0.456)

-0.092
(0.458)

-0.070
(0.461)

-0.001
(0.464)

Ecm* long term exchange rate variability

0.098
(0.076)

-0.336 ***
(0.124)

0.104
(0.077)

-0.333 ***
(0.128)

Ecm* trend
Ecm* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

-0.093
(0.008)

-0.016
(0.010)

Ecm* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]
Ecm* log real wage ($)

Ecm* US Importer dummy

-0.022
(0.058)

Ecm* stage of business cycle

0.309 *
(0.181)

# of Observations
5677
5677
5677
4633
Adjusted R-squared
0.319
0.333
0.335
0.367
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of signifieanee; note: Developing country coeffieient = values in the "D Dev." column should be added to estimates in column labelled "Rich".

4633
0.367

2947
0.348

2909
0.308

2893
0.313

0.094
(0.341)

Appendix Table 14. Determination of Passthrough to Local Competitor Priees: Developing countries, Relative to Rich countries
Equation 1
Rich
D Dev.
change in

Equation2
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 3
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 4
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 5
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 6
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 7
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 8
Rich
D Dev.

exchange rate

0.043
(0.061)

0.289 **
(0.116)

0.131
(0.091)

0.555 ***
(0.148)

0.152 ***
(0.003)

0.541 ***
(0.150)

-0.074
(0.341)

-0.212
(0.594)

0.004
(0.344)

-0.344
(0.594)

-0.037
(0.354)

-0.640
(0.917)

-0.207
(0.430)

-0.142
(0.924)

-0.323
(0.441)

-0.109
(0.967)

depreciations

-0.071
(0.101)

-0.113
(0.168)

-0.044
(0.100)

-0.150
(0.170)

-0.064 ***
(0.003)

-0.134
(0.172)

-0.024
(0.121)

-0.126
(0.194)

0.012
(0.127)

-0.169
(0.199)

0.018
(0.132)

-0.442 *
(0.268)

-0.003
(0.136)

-0.383
(0.274)

0.058
(0.138)

-0.410
(0.278)

depreciations above 25%

0.276 **
(0.127)

0.126
(0.141)

0.251 *
(0.131)

0.072
(0.145)

0.244 *
(0.131)

0.078
(0.146)

0.246 *
(0.135)

0.055
(0.151)

0.226 *
(0.134)

0.079
(0.151)

0.224 *
(0.136)

-0.016
(0.179)

0.174
(0.149)

-0.011
(0.189)

0.171
(0.146)

-0.016
(0.189)

change in

exporter's priee

0.029
(0.033)

-0.011
(0.050)

0.019
(0.033)

-0.012
(0.050)

0.019
(0.033)

-0.011
(0.051)

0.017
(0.039)

-0.036
(0.057)

0.016
(0.039)

-0.037
(0.057)

0.015
(0.043)

-0.075
(0.080)

0.013
(0.043)

-0.026
(0.077)

0.013
(0.043)

-0.025
(0.078)

(delta s)*

trend

-0.013
(0.010)

-0.034 ***
(0.013)

-0.015
(0.010)

-0.033 ***
(0.013)

-0.013
(0.011)

-0.029 **
(0.014)

-0.016
(0.011)

-0.027 *
(0.014)

-0.014
(0.011)

-0.060 ***
(0.019)

-0.007
(0.014)

-0.038
(0.023)

-0.008
(0.015)

-0.040 *
(0.023)

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

-0.011
(0.009)

0.010
(0.012)

-0.006
(0.009)

0.003
(0.012)

-0.032 *
(0.018)

0.030
(0.027)

-0.039 *
(0.021)

0.059
(0.047)

-0.044 *
(0.026)

-0.046
(0.044)

-0.032
(0.027)

-0.057
(0.045)

(delta s)*

tariff levels

0.079 *
(0.040)

0.013
(0.059)

0.063
(0.042)

0.029
(0.061)

0.063
(0.042)

0.134
(0.084)

0.053
(0.045)

0.087
(0.090)

0.091 **
(0.045)

0.063
(0.096)

(delta s)*

log distance

0.005
(0.040)

0.074
(0.065)

0.006
(0.041)

0.079
(0.065)

0.011
(0.042)

0.139
(0.101)

0.023
(0.054)

0.096
(0.102)

0.020
(0.056)

0.106
(0.106)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

0.026 *
(0.016)

-0.028
(0.024)

0.036 *
(0.020)

-0.069
(0.044)

0.040 *
(0.022)

0.033
(0.042)

0.019
(0.024)

0.053
(0.043)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.007
(0.011)

-0.006
(0.008)

0.001
(0.011)

-0.004
(0.008)

-0.001
(0.011)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

2.000
(2.997)

-1.381
(3.010)

1.229
(3.080)

-0.642
(3.090)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

-0.681
(5.056)

-1.953
(5.382)

-0.589
(5.193)

-2.109
(5.519)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

0.824 ***
(0.200)

(delta s)*

stage of business cycle

-0.832
(0.801)

0.371
(1.336)

Error correction term (Ecm)

0.035 **
(0.016)

-0.036
(0.024)

0.034 **
(0.016)

-0.037
(0.024)

-0.039
(0.076)

-0.027
(0.137)

-0.045
(0.076)

0.024
(0.137)

-0.035
(0.082)

-0.217
(0.207)

-0.076
(0.099)

-0.225
(0.223)

-0.023
(0.102)

-0.302
(0.231)

-0.005 ***
(0.002)

0.003
(0.003)

-0.005 ***
(0.002)

0.003
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.002)

0.002
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.002)

0.001
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.002)

0.003
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.003)

0.001
(0.005)

-0.002
(0.003)

0.002
(0.006)

-0.005 **
(0.002)

0.004
(0.003)

-0.006 **
(0.002)

0.002
(0.003)

-0.016 ***
(0.006)

0.000
(0.008)

-0.015 ***
(0.006)

-0.008
(0.013)

-0.014 ***
(0.006)

-0.003
(0.012)

-0.012 **
(0.006)

-0.004
(0.013)

Ecm* tariff levels

-0.003
(0.010)

-0.001
(0.013)

-0.005
(0.010)

-0.006
(0.013)

-0.004
(0.011)

-0.010
(0.019)

-0.002
(0.011)

-0.018
(0.018)

-0.009
(0.011)

-0.009
(0.018)

Ecm* log distance

0.007
(0.009)

-0.001
(0.015)

0.011
(0.009)

-0.005
(0.015)

0.009
(0.010)

0.037
(0.023)

0.011
(0.011)

0.035
(0.024)

0.009
(0.011)

0.039
(0.025)

0.010 **
(0.005)

0.002
(0.007)

0.007
(0.005)

0.010
(0.010)

0.008 *
(0.005)

0.004
(0.010)

0.006
(0.005)

0.004
(0.010)

-0.003
(0.016)

0.031
(0.020)

0.002
(0.015)

0.013
(0.019)

0.009
(0.015)

0.004
(0.019)

Ecm* long term inflation

0.557
(0.674)

-0.531
(0.675)

0.473
(0.686)

-0.441
(0.687)

Ecm* long term exchange rate variability

0.043
(0.072)

-0.297 **
(0.136)

0.043
(0.073)

-0.301 **
(0.141)

Ecm* trend
Ecm* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

-0.003
(0.008)

-0.014
(0.010)

Ecm* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]
Ecm* log real wage ($)

Ecm* US Importer dummy

0.026
(0.058)

Ecm* stage of business cycle

0.425 **
(0.189)

# of Observations
5676
5676
5676
4591
Adjusted R-squared
0.253
0.262
0.262
0.282
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of signifieanee; note: Developing country coeffieient = values in the "D Dev." column should be added to estimates in column labelled "Rich".

4591
0.283

2947
0.257

2909
0.254

2893
0.256

-0.264
(0.298)

Appendix Table 15. Determination of Passthrough to the CPI: Developing countries, Relative to Rich countries
Equation 1
Rich
D Dev.
change in

Equation2
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 3
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 4
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 5
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 6
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 7
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 8
Rich
D Dev.

exchange rate

-0.033
(0.033)

-0.516 ***
(0.125)

0.008
(0.031)

0.283 *
(0.171)

0.002 *
(0.001)

0.262
(0.182)

0.158
(0.209)

-0.987
(0.821)

0.070
(0.208)

-0.764
(0.809)

0.116
(0.180)

-5.787 ***
(1.935)

0.056
(0.185)

-3.299 *
(1.956)

0.015
(0.173)

-1.292
(1.675)

depreciations

0.058
(0.051)

0.638 ***
(0.167)

-0.023
(0.059)

0.443 ***
(0.141)

-0.026 ***
(0.007)

0.425 ***
(0.140)

-0.014
(0.061)

0.536 ***
(0.151)

-0.026
(0.065)

0.485 ***
(0.148)

-0.036
(0.065)

0.791 ***
(0.240)

-0.038
(0.072)

0.305
(0.230)

-0.002
(0.061)

0.281
(0.186)

depreciations above 25%

0.072 ***
(0.020)

0.278 ***
(0.073)

0.078 ***
(0.024)

0.175 **
(0.087)

0.066 *
(0.034)

0.185 **
(0.090)

0.078 **
(0.034)

0.177 *
(0.096)

0.080 **
(0.035)

0.179 *
(0.095)

0.057
(0.035)

-0.022
(0.175)

0.029
(0.036)

0.005
(0.135)

0.042
(0.029)

-0.062
(0.114)

change in

exporter's priee

-0.021 ***
(0.007)

-0.076 ***
(0.024)

0.011 *
(0.006)

-0.037
(0.029)

0.012 *
(0.006)

-0.029
(0.029)

0.005
(0.007)

-0.005
(0.033)

0.005
(0.007)

-0.019
(0.035)

0.003
(0.006)

0.044
(0.046)

0.002
(0.006)

-0.072 *
(0.039)

0.003
(0.006)

-0.087 **
(0.039)

(delta s)*

trend

0.005
(0.004)

-0.080 ***
(0.018)

0.004
(0.004)

-0.076 ***
(0.020)

0.003
(0.005)

-0.074 ***
(0.020)

0.003
(0.005)

-0.071 ***
(0.020)

0.004
(0.005)

-0.114 ***
(0.027)

0.007
(0.008)

-0.036 *
(0.020)

0.002
(0.007)

-0.027
(0.020)

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

-0.047
(0.068)

0.032
(0.085)

-0.024
(0.072)

0.008
(0.097)

-0.030
(0.071)

0.021
(0.096)

-0.091
(0.086)

0.900 ***
(0.280)

-0.094
(0.102)

0.782 ***
(0.198)

-0.106
(0.136)

0.685 ***
(0.228)

(delta s)*

tariff levels

-0.010
(0.013)

0.053
(0.072)

-0.008
(0.014)

0.074
(0.072)

0.001
(0.013)

-0.047
(0.077)

0.010
(0.014)

0.063
(0.062)

0.007
(0.014)

0.151 *
(0.078)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.015
(0.025)

0.112
(0.089)

-0.009
(0.023)

0.073
(0.092)

-0.016
(0.020)

0.494 **
(0.211)

-0.011
(0.017)

0.343 *
(0.208)

-0.014
(0.016)

0.223
(0.194)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

-0.010
(0.008)

-0.027
(0.036)

-0.011
(0.008)

-0.198 **
(0.084)

-0.011 *
(0.007)

-0.012
(0.068)

-0.016 **
(0.007)

0.122 *
(0.069)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

0.021
(0.028)

-0.547 ***
(0.122)

0.029
(0.030)

-0.376 ***
(0.083)

0.029
(0.038)

-0.233 ***
(0.085)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

0.580
(1.044)

-0.279
(1.069)

0.270
(0.947)

0.065
(0.967)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

0.544
(0.870)

-0.541
(1.281)

2.143 **
(0.933)

-4.427 ***
(1.339)

(delta s)*

stage of business cycle

0.586
(0.409)

-3.936 ***
(1.004)

Error correction term (Ecm)

-0.029 ***
(0.010)

0.035 ***
(0.012)

-0.029 ***
(0.010)

0.036 ***
(0.012)

-0.031 ***
(0.011)

0.038 ***
(0.013)

-0.031 ***
(0.011)

0.039 ***
(0.013)

-0.013
(0.011)

0.031 **
(0.016)

-0.009
(0.010)

-0.011
(0.014)

-0.007
(0.010)

-0.010
(0.013)

-0.001 ***
(0.000)

0.000
(0.001)

-0.001 ***
(0.000)

-0.002 *
(0.001)

-0.001 **
(0.000)

-0.003 ***
(0.001)

-0.001 **
(0.000)

-0.003 **
(0.001)

-0.001 ***
(0.000)

-0.004 **
(0.002)

0.000
(0.001)

0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.001)

0.000
(0.002)

0.002
(0.005)

-0.010
(0.007)

0.002
(0.006)

0.005
(0.009)

0.000
(0.007)

0.004
(0.009)

0.021 **
(0.008)

0.100 **
(0.051)

0.014 *
(0.008)

0.029
(0.042)

0.006
(0.009)

0.057
(0.037)

Ecm* tariff levels

0.005 **
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.006)

0.005 *
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.006)

0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.009)

0.002
(0.003)

0.013 *
(0.008)

0.002
(0.003)

0.004
(0.008)

Ecm* log distance

-0.001
(0.001)

0.005 **
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.008
(0.005)

-0.002
(0.002)

0.013
(0.010)

-0.003
(0.002)

-0.012
(0.008)

-0.004 **
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.007)

0.001
(0.003)

0.007
(0.009)

0.002
(0.003)

0.020
(0.018)

0.001
(0.003)

-0.017
(0.012)

-0.002
(0.002)

0.003
(0.012)

-0.017 ***
(0.003)

-0.031
(0.027)

-0.014 ***
(0.004)

-0.020
(0.020)

-0.013 ***
(0.003)

-0.030 *
(0.018)

Ecm* long term inflation

0.135 *
(0.078)

-0.052
(0.080)

0.137 *
(0.083)

-0.062
(0.085)

Ecm* long term exchange rate variability

-0.016
(0.015)

-0.230 **
(0.102)

-0.005
(0.014)

-0.257 ***
(0.073)

0.039
(0.027)

0.023
(0.049)

Ecm* trend
Ecm* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

-0.037 **
(0.011)

0.028 **
(0.013)

Ecm* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]
Ecm* log real wage ($)

Ecm* stage of business cycle
# of Observations
732
516
516
425
Adjusted R-squared
0.771
0.814
0.814
0.816
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of signifieanee; note: Developing country coeffieient = values in the "D Dev." column should be added to estimates in column labelled "Rich".

425
0.816

299
0.879

297
0.925

295
0.939

Appendix Table 16. Determination of Passthrough to Unit Values: Developing countries, Relative to Rich countries
Equation 1
Rich
D Dev.
change in

Equation2
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 3
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 4
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 5
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 6
Rich
D Dev.

Equation 7
Rich
D Dev.

Rich

Equation 8
D Dev.

exchange rate

0.320 *
(0.195)

-0.708 *
(0.376)

0.208
(0.305)

-1.100 **
(0.495)

0.130 ***
(0.004)

-1.006 **
(0.500)

1.376
(1.191)

0.802
(1.545)

1.300
(1.153)

0.896
(1.516)

1.123
(1.200)

-0.963
(1.642)

0.562
(1.646)

0.519
(2.024)

1.351
(1.545)

-0.688
(1.957)

depreciations

0.703 **
(0.288)

0.621
(0.517)

0.782 ***
(0.287)

0.642
(0.515)

0.861 ***
(0.004)

0.599
(0.520)

0.651 **
(0.312)

0.869
(0.570)

0.584
(0.362)

0.785
(0.595)

0.448
(0.379)

0.652
(0.687)

0.757
(0.498)

0.232
(0.752)

0.771
(0.503)

0.452
(0.765)

depreciations above 25%

-0.548 **
(0.237)

0.469
(0.310)

-0.664 ***
(0.248)

0.619 *
(0.318)

-0.652 ***
(0.252)

0.621 *
(0.321)

-0.732 ***
(0.276)

0.568
(0.352)

-0.689 **
(0.293)

0.555
(0.365)

-0.702 **
(0.305)

0.448
(0.399)

-0.787 **
(0.329)

0.651
(0.429)

-0.616 *
(0.347)

0.368
(0.452)

change in

exporter's priee

0.234 ***
(0.070)

-0.276 **
(0.117)

0.340 ***
(0.078)

-0.384 ***
(0.123)

0.339 ***
(0.078)

-0.382 ***
(0.123)

0.370 ***
(0.088)

-0.450 ***
(0.137)

0.367 ***
(0.090)

-0.442 ***
(0.138)

0.350 ***
(0.092)

-0.183
(0.161)

0.349 ***
(0.090)

-0.188
(0.167)

0.348 ***
(0.090)

-0.199
(0.165)

(delta s)*

trend

0.018
(0.027)

0.038
(0.035)

0.021
(0.028)

0.038
(0.035)

0.020
(0.030)

0.050
(0.038)

0.023
(0.030)

0.049
(0.038)

0.033
(0.029)

0.038
(0.045)

-0.003
(0.051)

0.046
(0.064)

-0.025
(0.055)

0.065
(0.068)

(delta s)*

log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

0.039 *
(0.020)

0.000
(0.027)

0.015
(0.021)

0.049 *
(0.028)

0.054
(0.060)

0.029
(0.077)

0.061
(0.066)

0.072
(0.104)

0.185 ***
(0.062)

-0.053
(0.123)

0.214 ***
(0.067)

-0.095
(0.128)

(delta s)*

tariff levels

0.040
(0.218)

0.053
(0.256)

0.058
(0.207)

0.045
(0.256)

0.072
(0.219)

-0.045
(0.284)

0.193
(0.269)

-0.197
(0.330)

0.152
(0.258)

-0.093
(0.325)

(delta s)*

log distance

-0.126
(0.128)

-0.239
(0.162)

-0.130
(0.128)

-0.231
(0.163)

-0.111
(0.130)

0.009
(0.174)

-0.110
(0.177)

-0.052
(0.212)

-0.194
(0.171)

0.066
(0.207)

(delta s)*

log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]

-0.042
(0.061)

0.022
(0.078)

-0.047
(0.070)

-0.095
(0.101)

-0.159 ***
(0.060)

0.004
(0.112)

-0.189 ***
(0.068)

0.047
(0.119)

(delta s)*

log real wage ($)

-0.007
(0.024)

0.009
(0.031)

-0.060
(0.059)

0.066
(0.064)

-0.057
(0.058)

0.064
(0.063)

(delta s)*

long term inflation

-10.441
(10.097)

9.643
(10.099)

-12.491
(10.685)

11.597
(10.687)

(delta s)*

long term exchange rate variability

18.566 *
(10.348)

-16.418
(10.515)

24.965 **
(11.832)

-24.108 **
(11.969)

(delta s)*

US Importer dummy

0.023
(0.275)

(delta s)*

stage of business cycle

4.641
(2.936)

-8.095 **
(3.392)

Error correction term (Ecm)

-0.148 ***
(0.035)

-0.085 **
(0.035)

-0.150 ***
(0.035)

-0.096 **
(0.038)

0.185
(0.144)

-0.382 *
(0.223)

0.173
(0.145)

-0.418 *
(0.224)

0.239 *
(0.131)

-0.181
(0.194)

0.181 *
(0.102)

-0.074
(0.182)

0.151
(0.103)

-0.052
(0.186)

-0.011 ***
(0.003)

0.012 ***
(0.004)

-0.011 ***
(0.003)

0.012 ***
(0.004)

-0.010 ***
(0.003)

0.009 *
(0.005)

-0.009 **
(0.004)

0.009
(0.005)

-0.010 **
(0.004)

0.011 *
(0.006)

-0.006 *
(0.004)

0.007
(0.006)

-0.006
(0.004)

0.006
(0.006)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.005)

-0.001
(0.006)

-0.011 *
(0.006)

0.020 **
(0.010)

-0.006
(0.009)

0.011
(0.017)

-0.006
(0.008)

0.008
(0.018)

-0.008
(0.008)

0.012
(0.018)

Ecm* tariff levels

0.052 ***
(0.020)

-0.038
(0.025)

0.052 ***
(0.020)

-0.033
(0.025)

0.042 **
(0.019)

-0.013
(0.027)

0.035
(0.022)

-0.007
(0.030)

0.037 *
(0.022)

-0.007
(0.030)

Ecm* log distance

-0.054 ***
(0.016)

0.046 *
(0.023)

-0.050 ***
(0.018)

0.043 *
(0.025)

-0.056 **
(0.022)

0.029
(0.026)

-0.051 ***
(0.018)

0.020
(0.025)

-0.048 ***
(0.018)

0.017
(0.024)

0.011
(0.009)

-0.023 *
(0.012)

0.008
(0.008)

-0.007
(0.016)

0.009
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.016)

0.011
(0.007)

-0.009
(0.016)

-0.022
(0.030)

0.040
(0.034)

-0.019
(0.026)

0.038
(0.032)

-0.022
(0.026)

0.039
(0.032)

Ecm* long term inflation

0.558
(0.605)

-0.573
(0.608)

0.567
(0.610)

-0.574
(0.613)

Ecm* long term exchange rate variability

-0.375
(0.314)

0.443
(0.333)

-0.380
(0.316)

0.444
(0.335)

Ecm* trend
Ecm* log[per capitaRGDP(importer) /
per capitaRGDP(exporter)]

-0.216
(0.036)

-0.008
(0.017)

Ecm* log[RGDP(importer)/RGDP(exporter)]
Ecm* log real wage ($)

Ecm* US Importer dummy

0.068
(0.087)

Ecm* stage of business cycle

-0.212
(0.248)

# of Observations
3774
3774
3774
3248
Adjusted R-squared
0.156
0.161
0.162
0.177
* = 10%, ** = 5%, and *** = 1% levels of signifieanee; note: Developing country coeffieient = values in the "D Dev." column should be added to estimates in column labelled "Rich".

3248
0.178

2423
0.166

2389
0.173

0.240
(0.330)
2381
0.175

