NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EQUIVALENCE RESULTS FOR OPTIMAL PASS-THROUGH,
OPTIMAL INDEXING TO EXCHANGE RATES,
AND OPTIMAL CHOICE OF CURRENCY FOR EXPORT PRICING
Charles Engel
Working Paper 11209
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11209
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

I have benefitted from comments from the comments of Michael Devereux, Rob Feenstra, Akito Matsumoto,
Roberto Perotti, and especially Cedric Tille. I have also received helpful comments on earlier versions of this
paper from seminars at the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research (HKIMR) and the Bank of Italy. I
thank the HKIMR and NSF for support for this research. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Equivalence Results for Optimal Pass-Through, Optimal Indexing to Exchange Rates, and Optimal
Choice of Currency for Export Pricing
Charles Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 11209
March 2005
JEL No. F1, F4
ABSTRACT
Firms sometimes write price lists or catalogs for their exports, so they set prices for a period of time
and do not adjust prices during that interval in response to changes in their environment. The firm
sets the price either in its own currency or the importer's currency. This paper draws a simple link
between the choice of currency, and the pricing decision of a firm that changes prices in response
to all shocks. Specifically, if the latter firm's price has a lower variance in terms of its own currency
than the importer's currency, then the firm with a price list will set the price in its own currency (and
otherwise it will set price in the foreign currency.) This relationship is established by consideration
of the firm with a price list as a special case of a firm that indexes its export price to the exchange
rate.
Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu

Exporting firms frequently have price lists or catalogs for their exported products. The
price is set for an interval of time, and does not respond to changes in the environment (such as
changes in demand or production costs) during that period. Firms typically set a price either in
their own currency or the importer’s currency. An extensive literature has investigated the
optimal currency of price setting.1
A related literature examines the optimal export price. In some of the literature, the firm
is assumed to respond to all shocks that might influence its price.2 Another strand of the
literature assumes that export prices are set for a period of time, and examines the factors that
influence the price (with the currency of invoicing given, rather than chosen optimally.)3
Here we draw a link between the literature on currency of price setting and the literature
in which firms can choose their price with knowledge of all shocks. In the latter case, if the
variance of the export price in the firm’s own currency is less than the variance of the price in the
local currency of the importer, we say this firm’s price exhibits “producer currency stability
(PCS)”. If the opposite relationship holds, the firm’s export price exhibits “local currency
stability (LCS)”. Now suppose the firm faces the same environment, but must set a price prior to
knowledge of the shocks. The main theorem of this paper is: It is optimal for the firm to set its
price in its own currency – “producer currency pricing (PCP)” – under precisely the conditions in
which the firm would be PCS if its price responded freely to shocks. The exporter will set price

1

Baron (1976), Giovannini (1988), Donnenfeld and Zilcha (1991), Friberg (1998), Devereux, Engel, and Storgaard
(2004), Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2002, 2003), Corsetti and Pesenti (2004b), and Goldberg and Tille (2004) are
examples.
2
Krugman (1987), Dornbusch (1987), Baldwin (1988), Froot and Klemperer (1989), Marston (1990), Goldberg
and Knetter (1999), Goldberg and Verboven (2001), Bergin (2003), Goldberg and Campa (2004), and Corsetti and
Dedola (2004) are examples.
3
Examples include Feenstra (1989), Feenstra and Kendall (1997), Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000), Obstfeld and
Rogoff (2002), Bergin and Feenstra (2001), and Corsetti and Pesenti (2004a).

1

in the importer’s local currency – “local currency pricing (LCP)” – if and only if the firm would
be LCS if its price were freely adjusted.4
The proof of this result also draws some interesting links. A firm that chooses between
PCP and LCP is a special case of a firm that chooses the optimal index of its export price to the
exchange rate. The PCP firm changes its export price (in the importer’s currency) one-for-one
with the exchange rate, while the LCP’s export price (in the importer’s currency) does not
change at all with the exchange rate. More generally, we consider a firm that indexes the log of
its export price to the log of the exchange rate with an affine function. We show that the slope
coefficient in this index function is equal to the slope coefficient from regressing the log of the
export price on the log of the exchange rate for the firm that adjusts its price freely to all shocks
(not just to the exchange rate.) This result is used as a lemma in the proof of the main theorem.5
There are perhaps three ways to view the contribution of this paper. First, from a
prescriptive standpoint, the main theorem in this paper might simplify the problem of a firm
trying to decide between invoicing in its own currency or the importer’s currency. The literature
that examines theoretically how exchange rate changes should pass-through to export prices can
be applied to choosing a currency for pricing. For example, it has been shown that exchange rate
pass-through should be low when demand becomes more elastic as the price rises, when
substantial costs are incurred in the importer’s currency, when the destination market is highly
competitive, etc. Under these same conditions, setting the price in the importer’s currency will
be optimal.
4

This result is demonstrated using a second-order approximation of the firm’s objective function under
uncertainty. Friberg (1998) also links the invoicing literature to the price-setting literature. This paper generalizes
Friberg’s result in a way that is clarified below.
5
Corsetti and Pesenti (2004a) build a general equilibrium model in which firms index to exchange rates, but the
degree of indexation is taken as given. Corsetti and Pesenti (2004b) and Goldberg and Tille (2004) build models in
which the degree of indexation is chosen optimally. Tille’s note to me linking an earlier version of this paper to
Goldberg and Tille (2004) is what led me to the lemma described here. Tille’s note shows that the relationship in
the lemma holds in the model of Goldberg and Tille (2004).

2

The second contribution is to clarify the links between the literature on pass-through, and
the literature on currency of pricing. Such a clarification might be particularly useful in the
context of some macroeconomic models. In a large class of macro models, business cycle
behavior is driven by nominal price stickiness. It is the slow adjustment of nominal prices that
leads monetary shocks to have real effects in these models, for example. But the behavior of the
macroeconomy depends on whether firms are PCP or LCP.6 Several recent macroeconomic
papers have endogenized the currency of pricing in different settings,7 but the main theorem in
this study might help organize these findings.
Third, the main theorem provides a caution in interpreting empirical work on the
relationship between exchange rates and prices. The theorem suggests that without further
refinement, finding that prices do not respond much to exchange rates is difficult to interpret
either as support or contradiction for the notion that nominal prices are “sticky”. This warning
cuts both ways. Export prices may respond very little to exchange rate changes even when firms
are free to adjust their prices continuously. That is, the firms might be LCS, not LCP.
Conversely, empirical confirmation of models in which there is LCS could also be interpreted as
evidence of LCP. For example, some recent studies have found support for models of firms with
freely-adjustable prices in which local distribution services are an important part of the cost of
exported goods.8 The studies conclude that the local-currency stability of the price of these
distribution services is a major explanation for local currency stability of export prices. Our
theorem says that under these same conditions, if export prices cannot be adjusted in response to
shocks, they should be set in the local-currency price. Without a more detailed study of the
6

This point has been emphasized especially by Devereux and Engel (2003) and Corsetti and Pesenti (2004a).
In particular, see Devereux, Engel, and Storgaard (2004), Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2002, 2003), Corsetti and
Pesenti (2004b), and Goldberg and Tille (2004).
8
For example, Goldberg and Verboven (2001), Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003), Burstein, Eichenbaum, and
Rebelo (2002), and Goldberg and Camap (2004).
7

3

adjustment of prices to distinguish the two types of models, the evidence could be consistent
with either LCS or LCP.9
As Friberg (1998) has pointed out, exporting firms do not reset prices at the same
frequency as asset markets reset exchange rates. In some sense, Friberg argues, the models in
which prices are set in advance must be the ones that are relevant in determining the effects of
exchange rates on export prices. But for macroeconomic models, the relevant distinction is not
whether goods prices change as quickly as asset prices, but whether the slow adjustment of
goods prices is relevant for understanding the business cycle. While the model presented here is
static, it suggests that the same factors that determine pass-through in a sticky-price setting
influence pass-through in a flexible-price setting. Then a careful study of the dynamics of price
adjustment is needed to determine whether price adjustment is slow enough to play a significant
role in macroeconomic adjustment. A snapshot of the pass-through elasticity cannot determine
this.

1. Models of Export Pricing
We consider the price setting decision for a monopolistic firm that sells in a single
foreign market. First we take the case in which the firm can choose the price for its product with
full information about demand, costs, etc. The firm sets a nominal price for its product in order
to maximize profits denominated in its own currency. Because prices can respond fully to all
information (that is, there is no price stickiness), finding the optimal nominal price and optimal
real price are equivalent problems, and it is irrelevant whether the objective function is stated in

9

Examples of empirical studies that have explicitly allowed for both slow nominal price adjustment and incomplete
long-run pass-through are Marston (1990) and Goldberg and Verboven (2005).

4

real or nominal terms. It is helpful, however, to express these in nominal terms to facilitate
comparison later with models in which prices are set without full information on the state.
The firm chooses p * , the log of the foreign currency price of its export to maximize the
twice-differentiable concave profit function π ( p*, x) . x is a vector of variables that affect the
firm’s profits but are exogenous to the firm. This vector might include the exchange rate.
The first-order condition is:
(1)

π p ( p*, x) = 0 .

Linearize this function around x = x , where x is the mean of x, and p* = p * , where p * is the
value of p * that satisfies π p ( p *, x ) = 0 . We get:
(2)

π pp ( p *, x ) ⋅ ( p * − p *) + π px ( p *, x )′ ⋅ (x − x ) = 0 ,

where π px ( p *, x ) is a vector whose ith element is ∂ 2π ( p*, x) ∂p * ∂xi . Alternatively, equation
(2) is the first-order condition for choosing p* to maximize a second-order approximation
(around x and p * ) of the objective function.10
Solving (2), we get:
(3)

pˆ * = p * −

π ′px ( p *, x )
⋅ (x − x ) ,
π pp ( p *, x )

where pˆ * is the optimal value of p* for this firm. The unconditional pass-through elasticity –
the coefficient in the projection of pˆ * on s (the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home
currency price of foreign currency) – satisfies
(4)

10

b p*s =

π ′px ( p *, x )
⋅b ,
π pp ( p *, x ) xs

Specifically, the second-order approximation (using π p ( p*, x) = 0 ) is given by

π ( p*, x) ≈ π ( p *, x ) + π x ( p *, x )′(x − x ) + .5{π pp ( p *, x )( p * − p *) 2 + (x − x )′π xx ( p *, x )(x − x ) + 2( p * − p *)π px ( p *, x )′(x − x )}

5

where the ith element of the vector b xs is equal to the coefficient in the projection of xi on s.
Now set aside this case in which the firm can set its price with knowledge of all the
components of x, and turn to the case in which the firm must set its price without knowledge of
any components of x. Suppose, though, that the firm can commit to setting p* as an affine
function of s: p* = p0 + β s . The firm is assumed to maximize a second-order approximation of
the profit function, discounting profits by the factor D. The expansion is around D (the mean of
D), and x and p * defined above:

EDπ ( p*, x) ≈ Dπ ( p *, x ) + π ( p *, x ) E ( D − D) + Dπ p ( p *, x ) E ( p * − p *) + Dπ x ( p *, x )′ E (x − x )
+.5 { Dπ pp ( p *, x ) E ( p * − p *)2 + DE (x − x )′π xx ( p *, x )(x − x ) + 2 DE ( p * − p *)π px ( p *, x )′(x − x )}

π xx ( p *, x ) is a matrix whose ijth element is ∂ 2π ( p*, x) ∂xi ∂x j . All of the first order terms in this
expansion drop out, because E ( D − D) = 0 , E ( x − x ) = 0 , and π p ( p *, x ) = 0 . Simplifying,
dropping the constant term, and then dropping D which multiplies all remaining terms, we can
write the objective as:
(5)

π pp ( p *, x ) E ( p * − p *) 2 + E (x − x )′π xx ( p *, x )(x − x ) + 2 E ( p * − p *)π px ( p *, x )′(x − x )
Notice that the discount factor has completely disappeared from the approximated

objective function. This arises from a fairly general assumption about D – that it is exogenous
for the firm, and so not a function of the firm’s price. For example, if the firm is simply
maximizing real profits (in terms of purchasing power of the firm’s owners), then D is the
inverse of the consumer price index for the firm’s owners. But firm owners might be risk averse,
so D could be the marginal utility of an increment to profit denominated in the currency of the
exporter. In short, this objective for the firm holds under a variety of possible assumptions about
the objectives of the firm managers and the structure of asset markets and possibilities for

6

hedging. The assumption that D is exogenous to the firm does rule out some possibilities,
however. Suppose a single household owns the firm, and the owner-manager discounts profits
by marginal utility. The outcome for the firm might directly affect the level of consumption of
the owner, and thus the marginal utility. The assumption that D is exogenous to the firm would
be violated. An exogenous discount factor is more sensible when, for example, there are many
owners of the firm, and there are many other sources of income for each owner. Thus our
assumption of an exogenous discount factor is violated in the models of Feenstra and Kendall
(1997) and the model of risk-averse firm owners in Friberg (1998), who assume in essence that
firm owners’ only income is from profits (so that the firm maximizes the expected utility of
profits.)
Replacing p* with p0 + β s , we find the first-order conditions for choosing p0 and β ,
respectively:

π pp ( p *, x ) E ( p0 + βˆ s − p *) = 0 ,
π pp ( p *, x ) Es( p0 + βˆ s − p *) + π px ( p *, x )′ Es (x − x ) = 0 ,
where βˆ is the value of β that maximizes the objective. From the first condition, we have

p0 = − βˆ s + p * . Substitute into the second condition to get:
ˆ ( p *, x ) Es ( s − s ) + π ( p *, x )′ Es (x − x ) = 0 .
βπ
pp
px
Solving for βˆ , we find
(6)

βˆ =

π ′px ( p *, x ) cov( s, x)
.
⋅
π pp ( p *, x ) var( s )

Comparison of equations (4) and (6) immediately gives us:

7

Lemma The unconditional pass-through elasticity when prices are set flexibly, b p*s , equals the
exchange-rate elasticity of the import price index, βˆ .
Intuitively, a firm that can commit to set the log of the price as a linear function of the log
of the exchange rate operates exactly like a firm that can observe the exchange rate when setting
its price. If that firm can observe only s, and not other elements of x, then it will form its optimal
linear forecast of pˆ * by taking the projection of pˆ * on s. So the indexing firm in essence is a
flexible-price firm that must set pˆ * as a linear function of s and nothing else.
We can now consider the more realistic case of a firm that must set a price for export
either in its own currency, or the currency of the importer. This firm can be thought of as
choosing an index function, p0 + β s , but with only two choices of β , 0 or -1. If β = 0 , the
export price is constant in the foreign currency, so the firm is local-currency pricing (LCP).

If

β = −1 , the price is constant in the producer’s currency, so the firm is producer-currency pricing
(PCP).
The main theorem draws a link between the choice facing this firm, and the firm that can
set price with full knowledge of x. For the full-knowledge firm, we say there is local-currency
price stability (LCS) when the variance of the price in the importer’s currency is less than the
variance in the producer’s currency: var( p*) < var( p * + s ) . In the opposite situation, there is
producer-currency price stability (PCS).
Theorem: When a firm must set its price in advance and choose between LCP or PCP, it
chooses LCP under exactly the same conditions in which the firm that prices with full
information has LCS pricing. Likewise, the firm that sets price in advance chooses PCP if and
only if the full-information firm chooses PCS pricing.

8

Proof: The objective function of the firm that sets price in advance is continuous in β . Because
the function is quadratic, it is symmetric around its unique maximum point, βˆ , given in
equation (6). Because the quadratic function is continuous, strictly concave and symmetric, the
value of the objective function is higher for β = 0 than for β = −1 (so LCP is preferred) when

βˆ > −0.5 , and PCP is preferred when βˆ < −0.5 .
But if βˆ > −0.5 , then from the Lemma, bps > −0.5 . This implies
Cov ( pˆ *, s ) + 0.5 ⋅ Var ( s ) > 0 . Add 0.5 ⋅ Var ( pˆ *) to each side of this inequality, and we get
0.5 ⋅ Var ( pˆ *) + Cov ( pˆ *, s ) + 0.5 ⋅ Var ( s ) > Var ( pˆ *) , which is equivalent to Var ( pˆ * + s ) > Var ( pˆ *) ,

the condition for LCS. ■
An alternative interpretation of the theorem, which is evident from the proof, is that the
invoicing firm will choose LCP when the unconditional pass-through elasticity is less than onehalf for the full-information price-setter. So, the firm that sets its price in advance will choose
zero pass-through exactly in the case in which the firm that sets prices freely allows only low
unconditional pass-through. Conversely, the pricing-in-advance firm chooses PCP, and hence a
pass-through elasticity of one, under the same conditions that the full-information firm chooses
high unconditional pass-through (elasticity greater than one-half.)

2. Discussion
As an example,11 consider a firm that faces a demand curve, Y D = G ( P* Z ) N . P* is the
foreign currency price of the firm’s product, Z is a price index of products that are substitutes for
our firm’s product, and N represents other factors that shift demand. We assume that the product

11

This example is worked out in great detail in an earlier draft of this paper, Engel (2003).

9

is produced using two variable inputs: one local and one foreign. The local input might be labor
used to produce the product, and the foreign input might be foreign labor used to distribute the
product, or to assemble imported intermediate goods into final products. The cost function takes
the form: C (Y ) ⋅ H (W1 , SW2* ) , C ′ > 0 . C ′′ may be positive or negative.12 Y refers to output for
the firm. We assume H (.,.) is homogeneous of degree 1. W1 , is the home-currency nominal
unit factor costs for the home input. W2* is the cost of the foreign-currency price of the foreign
input. S is the home currency cost of foreign currency.
Application of equation (3) in this case gives us:
p* =

ε + δγ (γ − 1)
∆

z+

δ (γ − 1)
∆

n+

ω (γ − 1)
∆

( w1 − s ) +

(1 − ω )(γ − 1) *
w2 ,
∆

where lower case letters are the logs of their upper-case counterparts. Here, we have

γ ≡ − P*G′ Z G (the elasticity of demand for the product), ε ≡ P*γ ' Z γ (the elasticity of the
elasticity of demand), δ ≡ C ′′Y C ′ (a measure of concavity or convexity of the cost function),

ω ≡ H1W1 H (factor 1’s share of costs), and ∆ ≡ γ − 1 + ε + δγ (γ − 1) .13
We have from this equation that b p*s is given by:
b p*s =

ε + δγ (γ − 1)
∆

bzs +

δ (γ − 1)
∆

bns +

ω (γ − 1)
∆

bw1s +

(1 − ω )(γ − 1)
ω (γ − 1)
bw* s −
.
2
∆
∆

It follows that PCP is optimal when
(7) [ε + δγ (γ − 1)]bzs + δ (γ − 1)bns + ω (γ − 1)bw1s + (1 − ω )(γ − 1)bw* s <
2

(2ω − 1)(γ − 1) − ε − δγ (γ − 1)
2

This example can be related to some of the literature on optimal currency of pricing:

12
13

There is a second-order conditions for a maximum to be satisfied (see below).
∆ > 0 by the second-order condition for profit maximization.

10

The necessary and sufficient condition derived in Devereux, Engel, and Storgaard (2004)
for PCP pricing is a special case of this condition when ε = 0 (so demand is constant elasticity),
δ = 0 (so the cost function is linear in output), ω = 1 (so only local inputs are used), and γ > 1 .

In that case, the condition reduces to bw1s <

1
2

(which corresponds to their Proposition 1.)

The necessary and sufficient condition for PCP pricing in the so-called “old-style” partial
equilibrium model of Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2002) is also a special case, when the
exchange rate is the only stochastic variable, ε = 0 , ω = 1 , and γ > 1 . In that case, equation (7)
becomes δγ < 1 (which corresponds to their Theorem 1.) The condition for PCP pricing in
Bachetta and van Wincoop’s more general model can also be interpreted as a special case of
equation (7). That model allows for the price of competing goods to covary with the exchange
rate – that is, bzs ≠ 0 , but still maintains ε = 0 , ω = 1 , and γ > 1 . Under these assumptions,
equation (7) reduces to δγ (1 + 2bzs ) < 1 .
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2003) consider a model in which there are two stages of
production: exporters sell intermediate goods to final producers, who in turn sell to consumers.
If the final producers are LCP, then the exporting firm’s problem is a special case of the one
considered here in which the only stochastic variable is the exchange rate, ε = 0 , ω = 1 , and

γ > 1 . (The input for exporters is the wage in the exporting country, and Z is the price of final
goods. Z is nonstochastic when final goods producers follow LCP.) The condition for the
exporter to price in its own currency is then the special case of equation (7) given by δ I γ I < 1 (as
in their Theorem 1), where δ I measures the curvature of the exporting firm’s production
function and γ I is the elasticity of demand faced by exporters. If the exporters are PCP, then the
final goods producers also have a problem that is the same special case. The input price is the

11

price of the export good which is priced in the exporter’s currency (so ω = 1 ), and only the
exchange rate is stochastic. The condition for LCP pricing is a special case of equation (7):

δ F γ F > 1 (as in their Theorem 2), but now δ F relates to the final goods producers’ technology,
and γ F is the elasticity of demand of final goods consumers. Bacchetta and van Wincoop then
conclude there is a Nash equilibrium in which exporters play PCP and final goods producers play
LCP if δ I γ I < 1 and δ F γ F > 1 .
Giovannini (1988) finds that the condition for PCP pricing in a partial equilibrium model
is that the profit function is convex in exchange rates. His model is the special case in which the
exchange rate is the only random variable (so the entire left-hand side of the inequality in
equation (7) is zero) and ω = 1 . In that case, the condition for PCP pricing reduces to
(1 − δγ )(γ − 1) − ε > 0 , which is precisely the condition that the profit function is convex in the

exchanger rate.
Friberg (1998), like this paper, compares pass-through under flexible prices to conditions
for PCP vs. LCP when nominal prices are set in advance. He, like Giovannini (1988), considers
the special case in which the exchange rate is the only random variable and ω = 1 . In this case,
in the flexible price model, we have −b p*s =

γ −1
. Since Friberg assumes γ > 1 and
γ − 1 + ε + δγ (γ − 1)

δ > 0 , a sufficient condition for the pass-through coefficient ( −b p*s ) to be less than one is ε > 0 .

An even stronger condition is ε > γ . Turning to the sticky-price models, under Friberg’s
assumptions, the condition for firms to choose LCP pricing is (1 − δγ )(γ − 1) − ε < 0 . This
condition is met when ε > γ . This is Friberg’s theorem: that when δ > 0 (and in the confines of
his set-up in which the exchange rate is the only random variable and ω = 1 ), then a sufficient
condition for both LCP pricing and a pass-through coefficient less than one is ε > γ . Friberg

12

does not fully characterize the conditions for LCP vs. PCP pricing (even in his set-up), and so
does not arrive at our theorem: a necessary and sufficient condition for LCP pricing is that the
pass-through coefficient be less than ½.
Finally, note the role of distribution costs incurred in the importing country. If prices are
set with full information about the exogenous variables affecting profits, then when distribution
costs are a large share of total costs (when 1 − ω is close to one) there will be a large elasticity of
p* with respect to w2* . If wages are very stable (have low variance and therefore a low
covariance with the exchange rate) and ω is close to zero, then the import price will tend to be
stabilized in the importer’s currency. That is the result noted by, for example, Goldberg and
Verboven (2001); Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003); Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo
(2002); and, Goldberg and Campa (2004). That result says that if distribution costs are
significant, and those costs are relatively stable in the importer’s currency, then the apparent
pass-through of the exchange rate to the final goods price will be low.
But under these same conditions, LCP will be optimal. That is, when distribution costs
are a large share of total costs, and when the wage in the importing cost is stable, it is optimal for
the exporting firm to set the price in the consumer’s currency.
To elaborate on this condition, consider the case in which the production function is CES,
1

so that H (W1 , SW2* ) = (λW11−α + (1 − λ )(SW2* )1−α ) 1−α . Then we have
1−ω =

(1 − λ )( SW2* )1−α

λW11−α + (1 − λ )( SW2* )1−α

.

In the Cobb-Douglas case ( α = 1) , we have 1 − ω = 1 − λ . In that case, the unconditional passthrough is lower the larger the share 1 − λ of foreign inputs into the production process. That is
also the case, as the theorem states, in which LCP is more likely. When foreign and domestic

13

inputs are combined in fixed proportions (as in the model of Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo
(2002) in which labor in the importing country is used to distribute the good), we find
1−ω =

(1 − λ ) SW2*

λW1 + (1 − λ ) SW2*

. Under flexible prices, pass-through will be low when the cost of

distribution services is high and 1 − λ is large, but again those are also the circumstances in
which the exporter that invoices prefers LCP.
Equation (7) is a general statement of a standard model of pass-through in the
international trade literature, and suggests empirically testable propositions. Pass-through should
be high when equation (7) is satisfied, and low otherwise. But empirical evidence of this link –
that, for example, pass-through is low when the distribution share is high, or when demand
becomes more elastic at higher prices ( ε > 0 ) – does not distinguish whether the flexiblenominal-price model or the sticky-nominal-price approach is appropriate for macroeconomic
modeling. The theorem of this paper shows that both types of models imply high pass-through
when the condition of equation (7) is met, and low pass-through when it is not. The work cited
above finding a link between high distribution shares and low pass-through, or the studies cited
in Goldberg and Knetter (1997) uncovering a link between variable elasticity of demand and
pass-through,14 do not help us draw inferences about the applicability of flex-price vs. stickyprice models of import pricing.
It is worth noting a few precautions in interpreting these results. First, all of the
discussion above pertains to the behavior or a single firm taking the economy as given. Some of
the papers mentioned cast the firm in a general equilibrium context, but condition (7) takes the
vector of regression coefficients, b xs , as given to the firm. In general equilibrium, these are

14

For example Aw (1993), and Goldberg and Knetter (1998) find such links.

14

endogenous. A related point is that the response of aggregate prices to the change in the
exchange rate is not determined by this condition.
Second, these results are derived for a second-order approximation to the profit function.
In some instances, third or fourth moments may not be small.
An obvious limit to the model presented here is that it is static. There is no claim that the
equivalence between the conditions for LCS and LCP (or PCS and PCP) carry through to a
dynamic model.
The question of whether nominal prices should be modeled as sticky in a macroeconomic
model is clearly a dynamic question. There are very few markets in which goods prices change
instantly, as they do in asset markets. But the question that is relevant for macroeconomic
modeling is whether prices adjust infrequently enough that slow-price adjustment becomes an
important determinant of business-cycle behavior. There is no consensus of how infrequently
prices must adjust before they can be labeled “sticky”.
One of the most contentious debates in macroeconomics is whether price stickiness is an
important feature of the macroeconomy that can explain, for instance, the persistence of output
or unemployment over the business cycle. In the open-economy context, some studies have
asked how infrequent price adjustment must be if slow nominal price adjustment is to explain the
persistence of deviations from purchasing power parity. Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002)
demonstrate in one sticky-price model that even when prices are set by firms only annually, the
persistence of the real exchange rate cannot be matched. In their data, the first-autocorrelation of
HP-filtered quarterly real exchange rates for OECD economies is around 0.8, but their model
produces an autocorrelation of only about 0.6. But Bergin and Feenstra (2001) have somewhat
more success in matching real exchange rate persistence in a model with translog preferences

15

that assumes prices are reset once per year. Benigno (2004) finds, on the other hand, that real
exchange rate persistence can be explained in a model with even more frequent price adjustment,
depending on the interest-rate rule applied by the monetary authorities.
The intuition of the result of this paper is that firms prefer to invoice in the importer’s
currency when their optimal price (if they could observe all factors affecting the pricing decision
when they set the price) is stable in the importer’s currency. But whether the local-currency
price stability that we observe is consistent with a degree of sluggishness that is relevant for
macroeconomic modeling would require testing a fully dynamic model of price setting that can
identify the speed of adjustment.15

15

Marston (1990), Goldberg and Verboven (2005), Choudhri, Faruqee, and Hakura (2003), and Devereux and
Yetman (2004) are examples of models that attempt to measure the speed of adjustment of prices using micro-based
models.

16

References
Aw, Bee-Yan, 1993, “Price Discrimination and Markups in Export Markets,” Journal of
Development Economics 42, 3156-336.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2000, “Does Exchange-Rate Stability Increase Trade
and Welfare,” American Economic Review 90, 1093-1109.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2002, “A Theory of the Currency Denomination of
International Trade,” National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 9039.
Forthcoming in Journal of International Economics.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2003, “Why Do Consumer Prices React Less Than
Import Prices to Exchange Rates,” Journal of the European Economics Association 1,
662-670.
Baldwin, Richard, 1988, “Hysteresis in Import Prices: the Beachhead Effect,” American
Economic Review 78, 773-385.
Baron, David P., 1976, “Fluctuating Exchange Rates and the Pricing of Exports,” Economic
Inquiry 14, 425-438.
Benigno, Gianluca, 2004, “Real Exchange Rate Persistence and Moentary Policy Rules,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 473-502.
Bergin, Paul R. 2003, “A Model of Relative National Price Levels under Pricing to Market,”
European Economic Review 47, 569-586.
Bergin, Paul R., and Robert C. Feenstra, 2001, “Pricing to Market, Staggered Contracts, and Real
Exchange Rate Persistence,” Journal of International Economics 54, 333-359.
Burstein, Ariel; Martin Eichenbaum; and, Sergio Rebelo, 2002, “Why is Inflation So Low After
Large Devaluations?” National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 8748.
Burstein, Ariel; Joao Neves; and, Sergio Rebelo, 2003, “Distribution Costs and Real Exchange
Rate Dynamics,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 1189-1214.
Chari, V.V.; Patrick J. Kehoe; and, Ellen McGrattan, 2002, “Can Sticky-Price Models Generate
Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?” Review of Economic Studies 69, 533-563.
Choudhri, Ehsan U.; Hamid Faruqee; and Dalia S. Hakura, “Explaining the Exchange Rate PassThrough in Different Prices,” Carleton University. Forthcoming in Journal of
International Economics.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Luca Dedola, 2004, “Macroeconomics of International Price
Discrimination,” European University Institute. Forthcoming in Journal of International
Economics.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti, 2004a, “International Dimensions of Optimal Monetary
Policy,” European University Institute, manuscript. Forthcoming in Journal of Monetary
Economics.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti, 2004b, “Endogenous Pass-Through and Optimal
Monetary Policy: A Model of Self-Validating Exchange Rate Regimes,” European
University Institute, manuscript.
Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel, 2003, “Monetary Policy in the Open Economy
Revisited: Price Setting and Exchange Rate Flexibility,” Review of Economic Studies 70,
765-783.
Devereux, Michael B.; Charles Engel; and Peter E. Storgaard, 2004, “Endogenous Exchange
Rate Pass-Through when Nominal Prices are Set in Advance,” Journal of International
Economics 63, 263-291.

17

Devereux, Michael B. and James Yetman, 2003, “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate PassThrough,” University of Hong Kong, manuscript.
Donnenfeld, S., and I. Zilcha, 1991, “Pricing of Exports and Exchange Rate Uncertainty,”
International Economic Review 32, 1099-1022.
Engel, Charles, 2003, “On the Relationship Between Pass-Through and Sticky Nominal Prices,”
University of Wisconsin, manuscript.
Feenstra, Robert C., 1989, “Symmetric Pass-Through of Tariffs and Exchange Rates under
Imperfect Competition: An Empirical Test,” Journal of International Economics 27, 2545.
Feenstra, Robert C., and Jon D. Kendall, 1997, “Pass-through of Exchange Rates and Purchasing
Power Parity,” Journal of International Economics 43, 237-261.
Friberg, Richard, 1998, “In Which Currency Should Exporters Set Their Prices?” Journal of
International Economics 45, 59-76.
Froot, Kenneth A., and Paul D. Klemperer, 1989, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through when Market
Share Matters,” American Economic Review 79, 637-654.
Giovannini, Alberto, 1988, “Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices,” Journal of International
Economics 24, 45-68.
Goldberg, Linda S., and José M. Campa, 2004, “Do Distribution Margins Solve the ExchangeRate Disconnect Puzzle?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, manuscript.
Goldberg, Linda S., and Cédric Tille, 2004, “Vehicle Currency Use in International Trade,”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, manuscript.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Michael M. Knetter, 1997, “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What
Have We Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature 35, 1243-1272.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Michael M. Knetter, 1999, “Measuring the Intensity of Competition
in Export Markets” Journal of International Economics 47, 27-60.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Frank Verboven, 2001, “The Evolution of Price Dispersion in the
European Car Market,” Review of Economic Studies 68, 811-48.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Frank Verboven, 2005, “Market Integration and Convergence to the
Law of One Price: Evidence from the European Car Market,” Journal of International
Economics 65, 49-73.
Krugman, Paul, 1987, “Pricing to Market when the Exchange Rate Changes,” in S.W. Arndt and
J.D. Richardson, eds., Real-Finanical Linkages Among Open Economies, Cambrdige:
MIT Press.
Marston, Richard, 1990, “Pricing to Market in Japanese Manufacturing,” Journal of
International Economics 29, 216-236.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2002, “Risk and Exchange Rates,” in Elhanan Helpman
and Effraim Sadka (eds.), Contemporary Economic Policy: Essays in Honor of Assaf
Razin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

18

