                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INTERNATIONAL BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
                    FINANCING AND ADJUSTMENT



                        Willem H. Buiter

                          Jonathan Eaton




                     Working Paper No. 1120




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                             May 1983




This paper is forthcoming in the book International Money, Credit,
and the SDR, edited by George M. von Furstenberg (International
Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., 1983). The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any- opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1120
                                                    May 1983




                      International   Balance of Payments

                             Financing and Adjustment



                                   ABSTRACT


         This paper explores some implications of the use of national

currencies as international reserves. First, a closed economy over-

lapping—generations model is developed to derive time—consistent tax

and inflation policies for a government that is financing a given

stream.of expenditures. Second, the effects of allowing a government

to hold a foreign currency as a reserve asset and to have its currency

held as a reserve asset abroad are considered. The use of national

currencies as currencies of denomination for international lending

creates an incentive for the governments whose currencies are used

to   alter their Inflation rates to extract resources from the rest
of the world. When reserves are constrained to be nonnegative the
use of national currencies   as international reserves raises the

inflation   rate In reserve issuing countries but does not effect
the   Inflation rate in reserve holders. The opposite result arises

when loans are denomInated in the borrowers' currencies.

Willem H. Buiter                                  Jonathan Eaton
Department of Economics                           Economic Growth Center
London School of Economics                        Yale University
Houghton Street                                   P.O. Box 1987, Yale Station
London WC2A 2AE                                   27 Hhlhouse Avenue
ENGLAND                                           New Haven, Conn. 06520

011/44/272—24161, x67                             203/436—8414
         INTERNATIONAL BALANCE OF PAYMENTS FINANCING AND ADJUSTMENT

                           Willem 11. Buiter
                       London School of Economics
                             Jonathan Eaton
                            Yale University



        With the decline in the role of gold in the international economy

the primary method that countries have used to finance payments imbalances

has been borrowing and lending denominated in terms of national currencies.
                                                                 while in this
In the last century sterling was the primary reserve currency

century it has been the U.S. dollar. Recently the currencies of a number

of additional countries have emerged as international stores of values.

These currencies have also served as the primary currencies of denomination

of international loans. The introduction of Special Drawing Rights (SDR's)

constitutes an attempt to replace national nneys with an international

money for use as an international reserve. Its adoption thus far has

been only partial, however, and its value remains tied to that of national

currencies, In the absence Of a credible cOmmitment to a commodity

exchange standard such as the gold exchange standard, the value of assets

and liabilities denominated in national currencies has been subiec.t to the

political control of the governments and central banks issuing those

currencies. The use of these currencies to finance payments imbalances

will depend upon the expectations held by international transactors about

the strength of these institutions' commitment to maintain the real values

of their currencies,

        Nevertheless, a currency's introduction into use as an international

store of value changes the context in which the issuers of currencies act.

First, the process whereby national currencies are distributed throughout

theworid economy requires an adjustment via   payments.itnbalances   that may.

have severe economic consequences for reserve issuers and holders alike.

Second the presence of large currency balances held outside the country

of   issue and of loans abroad denominated in local   currency has serious
                                                                           2

 implications for the effect of central bank policy on national welfare.

As a consequence, one might anticipate that being thrust Into the role

of a reserve issuer or international lender may significantly change the

issuing country's monetary policy.

       It is widely recognized that the use of a currency as an inter—

national reserve and currency of denomination of international assets and

liabilities requires trust in the issuer's willingness and ability to

maintain the real value of its currency. Triff in's (1961) discussion

of thedollar problem emphasized that the U.S. dollar's widespread use

as a reserve currency could, by itself, undermine belief in its long—run

stability. The incentives facing a reserve Issuer to undermine the

value of its currency by inflation have been discussed by Mundell (1971)

and Calvo (1978).

       The use of national moneys as international reserves raises a

number of questions: (i) What characteristics of a country make it

likely to emerge as a reserve issuer? (ii) How does becoming a

reserve issuer affect the inflation rate that is optimal from a national

perspective? (iii) If, in fact, the rate of return on a currency is

likely to fall if it is adopted as an international reserve, why are other

countries' central banks willing to hold this currency as a reserve if

they perceive this effect? and (iv) What are the costs and benefits of

becoming a reserve issuer and a reserve holder?

       Our purpose ifl this paper is to develop a mode]. of the inter-

action of national. monetary policy and international reserves to answer

these questions. The issue is considered from the perspective of both
                                                                           3

reserve issuers and reserve holders.

       To understand how the use of national moneys as international

reserves affects the conduct of monetary policy, one needs to specify

the objectives of the government and the technology and preferences

of the private sector. To generate a demand for currency at the

national level, the exact consumption loan model of Samuelson (1958) is

adopted. While this framework is very simple and highly stylized, it does

generate a demand for money based directly on an underlying technology

and individual preferences. Precise welfare comparisons across regimes

are therefore possible,1

       We assume that the government of each country must meet an exogen-

ous level of government spending each period. This expenditure may    be
financed via a nondistortionary tax imposed on the current younger

generation or by monetary issue. The government's objective is to

waximize a weighted average of the lifetime utilities of all generations

of its citizens.

       Section I of the paper presents a closed—economy version of the

nxdel, The tax rate and inflation rate that obtain in each period reflect

the government's weighting of the younger and older generations currently

alive, The greater the weight placed on the older generation, the lower

the inflation rate, and conversely. Only when equal weight is placed on

the representative member of each generation alive does the steady—state

rate of return on money balances equal the growth rate, achieving the golden

rule. Otherwise, the lifetime utility of the representative citizen in the

steady state is below the maximum possible level. When, in fact, this Is
                                                                          4

due to a rate of return on currency below the growth rate (when the govern—
Tnent places greater weight on the utility of the younger generation), the
outcome is not Pareto efficient. The problem arises because the government
in   any given period cannot credibly commit itself or its successor in the

next period to avoid inflating the currency at a faster rate, thereby

reducing the rate of return on savings to the current younger generation.

It constitutes an example of the problem of the time inconsistency of

optimal policy discussed by Kydland and Prescott (1977).

        •Section II introduces foreign reserves into the ndel. It in-

corporates both domestic holdings by the government of foreign currency

and foreign holdings of domestic currency. We assume that reserve holders

take current and future returns on foreign currencies as given, anticipating

them correctly,and that reserve issuers take current and future holdings

by foreigners of their currency as given, anticipating these correctly as

well. We show that holding a foreign currency as a reserve does not

affect the steady state inflation rate of the reserve holding country.

The demand for reserves depends not only upon the government's weighting

of the two generations currently alive but upon Its weighting of future

generations. When the government assigns future generations weights

that decline geometrically into the future, then foreign reserves are

demanded perfectly elastically at the rate of return on domestic currency.

When the government acts only in the interests of generations cur-

rently alive, the demand for reserves is also infinitely elastic, but at a

rate of return that is higher than that on domestic currency.
                                                                             5

            The rate of inflation in the reserve issuer is, however, affected

by changes in foreign holdings of domestic reserves. The effect of an

increasein foreign holdings on impact is ambiguous, but in the new steady

state, in which more reserves are held abroad, the rate of inflation in the

issuing country is necessarily higher.

            Section III considers global equilibrium in a world in which

there are two types of countries, one characterized by a low inflation

rate under financial autarky and another by a high inflation rate under

financiai. autarky. We distinguish two cases, one in which gross

international lending is always denominated in the currency of the

lender, in which case reserves are constrained to be nonnegative, and

the opposite case in which borrowing Is always denominated in the

currency of the borrower. The two cases generate quite different

equilibria. Our model does not predict which type of equilibrium will

emerge, or if it will be an intermediate one. This paper suggests, however,

that a theory of default combined with an assumption of convertibility

niay be incorporated into the model to endogenize this decision.'

            We show that when loans are denominated in the currency of   the borrower
countries with low rates of inflation under financial autarky become

borrowers, while countries with high inflation rates become lenders.

Becoming a borrower In Its own currency raises a country's steady—state

inflation     rate but has no   effect on the steady—state inflation

rate   of   the lender. Moving from financial autarky to trade In reserves

thus   raises the average world inflation rate. The effect during the
                                                                                6

 transition from one steady state to the other may be quite different,

 however, with the reserve issuer experiencing a lower inflation rate along

 the way. The opposite results with respect to inflation arise when loans

 are denominated in the lender's currency. In this case, the high—inflation

 countries lend to low—inflation ones in the former group's currencies.

These  loans then provide an incentive for lenders to lower their inflation
rates but have no effect on inflation in the second group. The average
world inflation rate is consequently lower in the long run.
          Our model allows one to compute the welfare effects of trade in
reserves. We find that in    the   steady state,   the   utility of the representa-
tive generation   is higher in lender countries but can be lower in borrower

countries. The effects on generations alive during the transition may be

quite different, however. The results thus suggest a justification for

attempts by some governments to prevent    their currencies from becoming
reserve   currencies.


          Section IV discusses some possible extensions of our analysis that

we believe would be especially worthwhile. Each of the issues raised

here can potentially be analyzed in the framework we have developed, but they

lie beyond the scope of a single paper. Section V provides a suitmmary of

the major results.
                                                                            7



                      I. The Closed Economy Model

         We illustrate our points in a very simple model. Our point of

departure is the Samuelson (1958) exact consumption—loan model. Individuals

live two periods, earning income only in the first period and saving a

fraction of that income in order to consume in the second period. Individuals

who enter the labor force in period t earn, before tax, an exogenously given

amount         in the first period of their lives, a fraction        of which is

taxed by the government. Domestic government debt, which is assumed to be

nonetary, is the only asset available to individuals as a store of value.

Output is nonstorable.


         We assume that the utility function of a representative individual

entering the labor force in period t is given by


            — Ln   C + 8Ln        0 < 8                                     (1)


where C denotes consumption in the first period of life, t, when the

individual is young, and          consumption when the individual is old,

period t + 1. While the Bernoulli assumption is special it provides a

number of restrictions that simplify the analysis substantially. We will

discuss the implication of relaxing some of these assumptions later on.

         Let       denote the price level in period t and let        denote the

real savings, and hence real money holdings at the end of period t of

an individual born in period t. In period t, then, the individual chooses

C and m to maximize              subject to the budget constraints
                             U
                                                                          8



        y(l—t —            —          >0
                   C                                                      (2)


                    0                    d
                   Ct+1        <it      m
                                     t+l t


Here we define the inverse of one plus the inflation rate from period t

to period t+l as


        -




                   - Pt
             ltt+l =


which equals one plus the rate of return on real money balances.

        First—order conditions for a maximum         imply


        C        (1—                                                      (3)




                 (1— t)y                                                  (3')




             't+i h-       ci-• t)Y                                       (3'')




        The government is required to meet a real expenditure path G.

It collects, in period t, a real amount TyLt in tax revenue where Lt

equals the number of young individuals in period t. The deficit is

financed by monetary issue. The government budget constraint is therefore


                       —       t                                          (
        G                          Pt

where       denotes is the nominal money supply at the end of period t.
   •



        Using the definition

                                               Md
                                                t
                                             t PL
                                                tt
                                                                                            9



and   dividing equation (4) by L yields, in per worker terms,

                                      d           —1
             —ty —                —




where    n denotes the growth in the labor force from period t—l to period t
and      denotes government spending per worker. The government's objective in
each period t     is to choose a tax rate                to maximize     a   weighted sum

of the utilities of all generations subject to equation (4) or (41) Thus, in

each period t, the government's objective function                       is given by



                     1
                         —
                              w1U                                                           ()

In   choosing        in period t, the government takes all past                     as given

and assumes that it or its successor will behave equivalently in the future.

Governments      are therefore assumed to behave in a time—consistent fashion
and to anticipate this behavior correctly.                   Solving the government budget

constraint (4') incorporatIng optimal private savings behavior characterized

by equation (3') yields, as an expression for the rate of return on currency

in period t,




             _               t)                                                             (6)




Substituting equations (6) and (3) into equation (1) yields, as an expression

for the utility of a representative member of the generation born in period t,



                                                                                            (it)
         U — k + (3. + )Ln Y (1+ ) Lit                 (1—       + BLn

         k       BLnB —      (l+)     Ln (1 + )
                                                                                          10



where          is as defined in (6.). Substituting equations (1') and (6)

into the government's objective function (5) and maximizing with respect

to r yields, from the first—order condition for a maximum,


                                 +    tS(l + 8)
        tt —  8(1 —

                      (8 +
                                                               Vt
                                                               Vt_i


which, from equation (6), Implies


               B(y
                 t —g) (l+n)
                         —                                                                (8)
                         dt
               (84) me_i


        Note from expression (7) that when S = 1 (generatiorborn at t                    and
at t+1 enter the government's objective function with equal weight) then:


                                                                                          (7')
                                            .

              g/y                                                       .




——that is, all government spending is tax financed. When                     >   1,   so that

greater weight is attached to the utility of the younger generation, then

   <          so that some government spending is financed by monetary issue.

Conversely, when             <   1,   80   that   greater weight is attached to the older

generation,      >
                      tY——that             is, taxes exceed expenditure——so that debt

is retired. If the government objective function is a Benthamite one, so

that the weight of each living generation is proportional to the number

of its members, then 6 (1 +                         in which case, if population growth

is positive, there is an ongoing deficit.
                                                                                    11

             From expression (8), observe that the inflation rate in period t

is higher: (1) the greater government spending is relative to income,

 (ii) the higher real money balances are at the end of the previous

period, and (iii) the lower the population growth rate..

             From equation (3),

               d
                      _Lti....
                      1+8          t—l' t—l

which, if optimal tax policy was pursued in period t—l


                            (1 +          —
                       =                                                        (10)
                               6       t—l —

When   the   two   living generations receive equal weight (6   =   1) and income
less   government spending Is equal across periods, then the rate of

return on money balances equals the population growth rate: the economy

is following the golden rule. If 6> 1 or if income less government spending

is decreasing, then the rate of return on money balances is less than the

population growth rate, and conversely. In the case of the Benthamite

utility function and constant population growth, the rate of return on

money is zero.
                                                                             12
          II.   An Open Economy !bdel with Reserves

          Consider now a situation in which the government of the country

being considered (i) has available to it a foreign money which can be

held as a reserve currency or (ii) finds that some of its money is held

abroad as a reserve currency. Denote foreign holdings of domestic money

denominated in domestic currency in period t as M and domestic holdings

of foreign currency denominated in foreign currency in period t as
                                                                     Mt
Let P      denote the price level in terms of foreign currency in period t

and    E the domestic currency price of one unit of foreign currency.

It is assumed that purchasing power parity obtains, so that

          EtPt/Pt                                                         (11)


          Allowing for these government holdings of assets modifies the

government budget constraint ,equation (4), so that it becomes

                                        f f
                                                     t t*d-M*t-.L)
                          .
                         ML_M
                          t t—l    +
                                       M
                                       t -Mt—l       E(M
                                                 —
                                                                             (12)
                              Pt                         Pt

It is assumed that no international transfers take place.

Defining real domestic currency holdings abroad per domestic worker as

          f      t                                                          (13)
                 tt
                PL
and   real foreign currency holdings by the domestic government per foreign

worker (where L denotes the number of foreign workers in period t) as


                                                                             (14)
                                                                                              13


     the       real    rate      of return on foreign currency as
                              *
                             P
                  *     -=    t—l
                 Irt          *
                             Pt
     and the ratio of foreign workers to domestic workers in period t as

                                 *

                  At

     the government budget constraint may be written


           =                 d       d
                                 — m1 7r(l+n)' + m —          m1 (l+n)
                                                     *       *    -•1
                                 —   A [*d    m*C
                                                —i       ( l+n)         1                    (17)


                  *
     where              denotes the growth in the number of foreign workers

     between period t—l and period t.



     The   Behavior of a Reserve Holder
              Consider first the situation of a country whose currency is
     not   held abroad, but which contemplates holding a foreign currency as a
     reserve. We assume that                 this country treats the rate of return on the
                                         *                    its own behavior for all j.
,1   reserve currency, nj as exogenous to
                                                                                       14


One reason is that this country may be one of a large number of small
countries that hold this reserve currency, and its contribution to total
demand is negligible. We assume that this country anticipates perfectly

the actual rate of return on foreign currency.

                         f
            Setting m 0 for all i in equation (17), this country chooses
in each period t a tax rate                  and   an amount of reserves *d
                                                                         A to
maximize its objective function                    which, it Is assumed, continues to be
                                             W,
given by equation (5), with                                   = 6
                                              wt/wt_l
        Defining

                        + En               (1 +                                      (18)



the optimal tax rate                 is   given by

                 6(1+8 )g + 8(1 —S )y
        t
            t                                                                        (19)
                             (6+8

The rate of Inflation is consequently

                                              -                                      (20)
                               (1
                                    + -)(
                         =


 Substituting       these expressions into            yields

                    =
        W-E                  W k + n (y -                      8
        t                                     •1
                                                     g
                                                     •j
                                                          )
                                                                       i.-
                                                                    Ln (y   +1
                                                                                 —
                                                                                       (21)




where
        k       —
                    (1 +B)L n (1 + 8) + Ln 6 + LnB + Ln(l+n,1)
                                                                                      15

Differentiating this expression with respect to m yields, as a first—

order condition for a maximum,




          —        +
                        Bwi)              + A+1(w÷1
                                                    + Bw) x÷1                         (22)
                       —                             —                —m
                                    x)
                                                                              xt+i)

                                      *d
   +               dW               dnk
                                                =0
        i=t+l       *
                   dTn              dn




where

         x ir (1
               *
                    +
                            —l




                       *d                            *d                               *d
Note that since m depends upon m_1, in general future values of in

viii be affected by the current reserve holding decision. The best choice
from the current perspective must incorporate the effect of that choice on

the country's own       future   policy response.

          This paper will now focus on two                  special   cases


csel. w — w1P1                              —   t,   ...,                       <1

In this case one may        write
  /   *d'\ —
                    8ki + wk)
Wmi) (wj                                   tn        —        +          (*d)         (23)
                                                                                              16


 If optimal policy is pursued in each period i>t                      then

            dW
                                         1>   t+l
            dm


and    expression (23) reduces to

                   (w + 8wi)            ______        (w+i+) x+i                              (23')
            —-                *d        *d
                                       m1 x)
                                                             *d
                                                               (m÷i —    t   x1)

           In the steady state
                          A1 A1 = A                           t+i t                 x41
                                                                                          =



       =    *d =     *d           *d
                              m         Therefore expression (23) can be obtained
only   if

           x =P —1


When    x     exceeds                  the demand for foreign reserves is infinite in
steady     state while if                is less than p1,deinand       equals negative
infinity. From Section I,che autarkic inflation rate is Cl + n)/ S
Consequently,since = p in this case, the demand for foreign reserves in the
steady state is bounded only when the rate of return on foreign reserves equals
the return on domestic money. In other words, the demand for reserves is
infinite1y       elastic at the domestic inflation rate.
Case 2.          w        0        i    t—1, t

In   this case, the current government only takes into account the welfare of
generations currently alive. It assumes that future governments will
act equivalently. The current government and future governments thus pursue
different objectives. In                particular,   the current   government   must incorporate
                                                                                                 17


the effect of its current policies on the future government's treatment

of the current younger generation.

          To solve for optimal reserve demand, it is assumed                        that at each period t,
foreign       reserves are held according to the formula

              *d              *d
                       + b nii                                                                   (24)


where a and b denote parameters to be determined.

Substituting       expression (24) into the objective function for m+i yields


                                                                   —
Vt —    (w1 Bkt1 + Wtkt)+(-f5)fl[;t — A(m                              mix)l
                         - At+l                 +
                                                    bt+l
                                    (a+i
Differentiating this expression with respect to m yields as a first—order

condition       for a maximum:

          -
                   —
                       A(84                           +                    (x1 b÷i)
                                                                                —
                                                                                                            = 0 (25)
                        *d     *d                                 —
dIne
               —
                             — —1 x)                                  At+1 (a+i + b+im —        x÷im    )




Solving       equation (25) for              one obtains


                                            —
         At+i 8(x —           b+i)y             X(8 +6)
                                                                       —
                                                                           A+1a+1)
 t
                                 At+l           (b+i —     x÷i)       (B +6 + 6B)


                                       68x
                                   +                  m1
                                                       tL                                        (26)
                                       8+

Since   an equivalent problem will be solved in period t + 1 one may set
          b       -                                                             (27)
              t+l + 6+68

Substituting this expression into equation (26), it is found that


                  X (B + 6+            —
          a                                               +a                    (28)



The steady state requires that                                        *
                        -                                       *d
                      = y,    =        X , A t+l
                                                   =A t   X,andmt    m
     yt+i =                       X1


Inspection of equation (26) shows that the steady state is only compatible with

a finite demand for reserves if


                                                                                (29)
                      68
or
                 (l+n) (8 +6 +68)
          w = ________________—                                                 (30)
                        68

If the rate of return on foreign reserves exceeds this level, demand will

grow to infinity and conversely. Thus, in the long run the demand for

foreign reserves is perfectly elastic at the rate of return (l+n) (8+6+86 )
                                                                          68

This rate of return will exceed the return on domestic money, which remains


(1-n) •       Therefore a country in which the government maximizes the welfare
of only generations currently alive will not hold reserves unless the.

return strictly exceeds the rate of return on domestic currency. The reason

is that an unborn generation,              the younger generation in period t+l, will

share the return from an investment in reserves in period t with the younger

generation in period t. The myopic government weights only the second gain in

making its decision. Consequently, a higher rate of return is required for an

investment in reserves to appear worthwhile.
                                                                                       19


The Behavior of a Reserve Issuer
          Consider noi the behavior of a country which holds no foreign

currencies, but which finds that foreign countries hold its currency as

a reserve. It is assumed that this country takes foreign holdings of its own

currency,          ,   as given in each period i. That is, when the government

makes its taxation decision, other countries have made their past and

contemporaneous reserve holding decisions. Because it raises a complicated,

but very Interesting, set of issues that lie beyond its scope, this paper

ignores      the possibility of a reputation effect whereby reserve holders'

expectations     of future inflation are determined by          past performance.

Rather,   reserve holders           form expectation of future inflation by calculating

the   optimal behavior of the reserve issuer each period.
                  *d
          Setting m1 =          0   for all i in equation (17), the   expression for

inflation,      given t, becomes
                 +- r)y — (1 +                + (l+8)m
                                                      f                             (31)
                 8(1 —
                         Tt_i)Yt_i + (1      + 8) me_i


Since equations (3)       and       (Y') continue to define consumption in each    period,

the   utility of   an   individual      entering the labor force in period t is


            =
                k + (1 +B)ln (1 -             - 81n
                                                      {8(1_Tt
                                                                  +   (l + B)tn]

                   + 81n            +           -   (1 + 8)g1 + (1                     (32)
                                                                      +8 )m+i

                 1n8— (1+8) £n(l+8) +L (l+n).
Continuing to assume a government objective function of the form of
equation (5),      the first—order condition for an optimal tax rate               is given by
                                                                                  20


                                                 2
dW
     W_1               't (l—)
                            (1+8)            8

                                             2t
                                                           0                      (33)




                 (8+ t)y — (1+ 8) + (1 + 8)


      2t (l        —   :'t + (1 + 8)m
       Note that the solution to equation (33) involves only contemporaneous
variables.       The effect of an increase in contemporaneous money holdings,
     is given by
           d2Wt
dT        dTdm            - (.i
                                  +   8) 8t (vt_i t ÷ 8w)
      —

           d2W                                                     w (l+8)2   2
                            8't (_ A                 —
                                                         82w
                                                               +
                                                                      '-



which is negative:                    the domestic tax rate falls as foreign holdings of
the domestic currency rise.

       Consider     now   the effect of an increase in foreign holdings of
domestic   currency on the rate of return on currency. Given current

holdings, m, an increase in the previous period's holdings,

lowers 11.    This result is evident from Inspection of expressIon (31).
The effect
                                 f          f
             of an increase in m, given ni1, is
                                                                               21


                       dt
            (1 + 'ttdt          + (1 + )
1
d1n
       =

                       2t—l
                                                                               (35)


which,       incorporating expression (34), has the same sign as


 (8   + 2)( -       1) (1 -    t)2y   2(1 + )2(1_ tt)ytm + (1 + 8) m           (36)


This       expression is   negative if      is    is less than one. For
                                                 small and
large values of m, it is positive. Therefore,an increase in foreign
reserve holdings has an ambiguous effect on the inflation rate that period.
       Consider an increase in foreign reserve holdings in period t from a
level      of zero to some positive permanent level, ;f• The effect on         on

impact is given by the sign of expression (36). The effect on ir, i >

assuming constant values of y and                    is given by

           (1 +          B)       + 2 + (1 + B)tn]
       =




which is necessarily negative. This result establishes the following proposition

        Proposition 1: A permanent increase in foreign holdings of domestic

currency      lowers the rate of return on the currency (i.e., raises the
inflation rate) in the steady state.
            All new foreign holders of the domestic currency will earn the
new steady        state rate of return on that currency, since increased holdings

in    period t raise                to the new steady state level. During period t
in which      new   reserves   are acquired, however, the rate of return will never fall by as

much as the steady—state change and may even rise. A permanent increase in re-

serves held abroad will consequently increase the permanent inflation rate, though

it    may iflitjallY lower the inflation rate.
                                                                                22

                          III. Multi—country Equilibrium

       Consider a world in which there are two types of countries,

type I and type II. Each type of country can be characterized by a steady

state inf].ation rate that would obtain under reserve autarky (4',        j= i,      ii)
and a rate     ir    at which the long—run demand for foreign reserves is infinitely

elastics            It is assumed that 4 <
                                             4;   that   is, type i countries

have higher inflation under autarky,                      and that ir <

that is, type I countries demand reserves at a rate of return below the

autarky rate of return on type II currency.3                        -




       This   section considers how the introduction of inter-

nationally held currencies will change the steady state of the-         world
economy. it focuses first on two extreme cases, one in which reserves

cannot be held in negative amounts and one in which reserves cannot

be held in positive amounts. The first case corresponds to one in which

loans are denominated in the borrower's currency and the second to one

in which they are denominated in the lender's currency. While the model

does not preclude a priori the possibility of two—way transfers of reserves,

attention will -focus      only on steady states in which net and gross

reserve positions are identical.


Nonnegative Reserves

     The following proposition can now be established;

     Proposition 2: In a steady state in which foreign reserves are held at a

positive, finite level, (i) type II (low—inflation) currency will be held by

type I (high—inflation) countries as a reserve, arid (ii) the rate of return on

type II currency will fall to ir1.
                                                                                             23


        If   the weights attached to future generations by each government

decline geometrically——so that
                                            =
                                                ir,   j   =   I,   Il——then the inflation rate

in type I countries does not change, while the inflation rate in type II
                                                                                 =                =
countries will rise to
                             r4.
                                     Thus, while under autarky

                                                                             =           =
(from   equation (lO) when reserve holdings are allowed,


introducing reserves has raised inflation everywhere to the level in the
high—inflation    countries. The superscript              R denotes steady—state rates
of return when international lending takes place. The reason is that type I

countries find type II currencies attractive at their autarky inflation

rates. An excess demand for these currencies will exist until the inflation

rate is driven up to the level in type II countries.                    As type I countries

accumulate reserves, the increased reserves provide an incentive for

type II countries to inflate at a higher rate, imposing an inflation

tax on type I countries. Since the welfare of foreign holders of its

currency, as opposed to domestic holders, does not enter the reserve

issuers' objective functions, they are less constrained to maintain

low inflation rates.

         The case in which lTj >            for   j       I or j =     II   is slightly more

complicated. If, say,        <   it1 <          then,     again, type II countries

will issue reserves to type I countries. In the new steady state,

Again, becoming reserve currency issuers has raised inflation rates in

.type II   countries,   but not as high as the autarky inflation                  rate   in type I


countries. Type II      countries   will again experience strictly higher

inflation rates in the new         steady   state.

           These results suggest how introducing liabilities denominated in the

borrower's currency can create more inflation in the world economy. The welfare
                                                                                                   24

 Implications     of introducing international reserves can be analyzed in terms

 of our model. This paper will not attempt a thorough discussion but will

 make the following points:

          (1) In a steady state with finite reserves, type I (high—inflation,

 reserve—holding) countries have as an additional source of government

revenue an amount Äñ                 —l
                             [ir1(l+n) —   1]        per worker where m                     denotes
                                                            t+i
steady—state reserve holdings. When                           w      I >    0,   this amount
                                                w1
equals Am*(hl) and when w = 0              (i        t—l, t),it equals Am* (&+)
Taxes are lower and the rate of return on currency has not changed:

The representative Individual in type I countries is better off in

the stead1 state. (Here 5I denotes type I countries' value of s..)

         (2)     In a steady state with finite reserves, type II (low—inflation,
                                                               f        *          —l
reserve—issuing) countries transfer an amount m [1 —                   , (1-I-n)        ]   to   type

I countries each period. The       representative          individual in type II

countries can be worse off in the steady state because the rate of

return on his savings has declined.

         (3) The older generation n the perIod in whIch reserves are

              in the reserve holding countries suffers from the transition.

The rate of return on their money holdings is lower than under autarky.
                                    *d
(This result may be seen by setting m1 =               0    in equation (18) and
observing the effect of increasing m on                71         in equation (20).)
         (4)    The   younger generation in the period in which reserves are
issued   by    the reserve currency country benefits from lower taxes in that
period but experiences a lower return on savings in the subsequent period.
The net effect on welfare Is therefore ambiguous.
         (5) The effect of the transition on the older generation in the
reserve—issuing country is ambiguous, depending whether                          rises or falls
as a consequence of issuing reserves.
                                                                                 25

         Thus,   the long—run effect of a move from reserve autarky to
trade in currencies raises steady—state welfare in the reserve—holding
countries but can lower steady—state welfare in the issuing countries.
The effects during the transition, however, may          go in the opposite
direction.
         One   remaining    question is how much currency of a typical type II
                                                                     that
country will be held abroad at the point where the rate of return on
                                             all type llcountries are identical in
country's currency equals          tr1. If
                                                 size each type II country will have
all respects except relative population

the same         worker money stock held abroad as a reserve currency in the

reserve equilibrium. The contribution of each type II country 'to total

international reserves will therefore be proportional to that country's

population.


Nonpositive      Reserves


         The following proposition can also be established:

         Proposition 3: In any steady state in which international borrow-

ing   takes the form of issuing foreign—currency—denominated liabilities
at a finite, positive level, (i)        type II (low—inflation) countries will

borrow   from type I (high—inflatior1) countries, and (ii) the rate of
return type I currency will        rise to it11.
                                                         A
         Consider first the case in which            =       i=I       II. If type

II countries can issue liabilities denominated in type I currency, they

will do so tntil            rises to 4. Thus, when positive, rather than
negative, reserve holdings are precluded, international financial

integration reduces, rather than increases, inflation. The reason is

that when countries lend in their own currency, rather than borrow by

issuing reserves denominated in their own          currency,   their
                                                                          26

governments have an incentive to reduce, rather than to increase, their
inflation rates.

          The welfare effects of international financial integration when

borrowing is foreign—currency denominated, both on impact and in the steady

state, can be analyzed as well. The effects are substantially similar, so

that issue will not be discussed here.

Relaxing the Nonegativity Constraints

          If no constraint is imposed on the sign of reserve issue our model

admits     an infinite number of solutions. While borrowing in both   domestic

and   foreign currency denominated assets occurs in international financial
markets, the possibility of outright default may place     an upper bound on

the   extent to which foreign currency denominated borrowing occurs. De-
fault    on   such liabilities can occur without affecting the value of domestic
agents'savings.      As long as currency is internationally mobile, default on

domestic currency held abroad could only occur if domestic households were

defaulted upon as well. This ramification is likely to limit the incentive

of a national government to default o its domestic currency or to destroy

its value through inflation.

Introducing     a Nominal Interest Rate on Borrowing
         It has been assumed that money pays a zero nominal rate of return.
Introducing a nonzero nominal     interest rate would not affect the results,

except  that the inflation rate would equal the nominal rate minus the
real rate of return derived here, Whatever nominal return a reserve
issuer offers its creditors ex ante, it determines the real rate of
return ex post through its inflation policy.
                                                                            27


                          IV. Possible Extensions

          This paper has developed a model for analyzing the effects of

introducing reserve currencies on inflation and welfare in the world

economy. In order to obtain concrete results the analysis has been kept very

simple. We conclude with a discussion of some issues that we believe are

of considerable interest that could be analyzed in terms of the framework

we develop      here.

Non—Bernoulli Preferences

         The assumption of the model that utility is logarithmic in consumption

levels    leads to savings behavior and private currency demand that is independent of
the rate of return on the   currency. The analysis is enormously simplified

by this assumption. Alternative specifications would lead to much more

complicated responses to alternative policies. In particular, the effect

of expectations of future policy on the current private demand for currency

would have to be incorporated into the model. Introducing non—Bernoulli

preferences would consequently introduce a much richer set of dynamics

as well as an additional source of potential time inconsistency of optimal

policy.

Distortioriary Taxation

         Our model assumes that the government has access to proportional

income taxes as a means of raising government revenue. Since income is

exogenous in our model, such taxes are nondistortionary. If taxes do, in

fact, impose an excess burden, then an additional role for seigniorage

arises, as an alternative distortionary source of revenue. Differences

in autarky inflation rates may then reflect differenct financing needs

among countries as well as different valuations of generations by govern—

ments. The role of• seigniorage as a form of optimal taxation in an open
                                                                        2g

 economy has been analyzed in a small, open economy context by Calvo (1978)

 and Eaton (1982), but the role of reserves in redistributing tax burdens

 internationally has yet to be studied.

 Default Risk

        Our model does not introduce formally the possibility of outright

 default on foreign debt. The issue of default has by now been investigated

extensively. See, for example Eaton and Gersovitz (l981a, 1981b), Sachs

and Cohen (1982), or Kletzer (1982). One topic of potential interest

would be to integrate analytic models of default into our paper's

framework here. As suggested earlier, one important issue that such

research might shed light upon is the currency of denomination of

international debt.

Productive Capital

       No role for productive capital exists in the model. The effects

of international capital market integration on the allocation of capital

has been analyzed in a nonmonetary overlapping generations model by

Buiter (1981). It would be of considerable interest to investigate how

the monetary phenomena considered here would interact with the inter-

national allocation of capital in the steady state, In particular, it

would he interesting to determine to what extent the trading of

monetary assets can substitute for trade in physical capital.

Uncertainty

      Our model assumes perfect certainty. Introducing uncertainty

about future values of exogenous variables would provide insight Into a
                                                                               29



number of issues. For example, the effects on uncertainty on the rates

of return of alternative currencies could be examined. Optimal reserve

portfolios could then be characterized,which could presumably include

more than one reserve held simultaneously. The role of government policy

in redistributing risk between generations domestically and the role of

reserves in reallocating risk internationally could be examined. Lapan

and Enders (1980), Aizenman (1981), and Eaton (1982) have considered the

implications of alternative exchange rate regimes for the International

allocation of risk. The implications of their analysis for reserve

positions in a multicountry context have yet to be drawn out.

Strategic Behavior

          In   our model governments make decisions taking other countries'
inflation rates and reserve positions as given. While this assumption
can be justified in a competitive context     in   which the numbers of   countries

of   different types arelarge,it Is   less appropriate in a world where some
countries      are unique in their relevant characteristics. One possibility

is that strategic competition among potential reserve issuers wiU arise. The

country   which is nest successful at establishing a reputation as providing
a high and stable     return on currency might then emerge as   the sole reserve
issuer.
                                                                          30


                                 V. Conclusion
         The major conclusions of our analysis can be summarized in the
following     points:

         (1) Under financial autarky, inflation rates in different countries

can be explained by their monetary authorities' attitudes toward the

welfare of the younger and older generations. The probl2m of time consistency

may   yield   an inflation rate that is not optimal.

         (2) A government's demand for a foreign currency as a reserve

in the long run may be infinitely elastic at a rate of return that is

equal to or higher than the rate of return on that country's currency.

Holding a foreign currency as a reserve does not affect the steady—state

inflation rate of the reserve holder.

         (3) The steady—state inflation rate of a country increases when

foreign demand for that country's currency as a reserve rises to a higher

permanent level.

         (4) Trade in borrower—currency—denominated assets raises the

average steady—state world inflation rate, while trade in lender—currency—

denominated assets has the opposite effect.

        (5) Trade in assets raises steady—state lifetime welfare in

reserve—holding countries but can lower    it in reserve—issuing countries,
although   the effect on the welfare of generations alive during the

transition from autaky to the new steady state may be reversed. Govern-

ments may therefore be justified In acting to prevent their currencies'

use as International reserves,
                                                                             3].

                                  FOOTNOTES


       1"Recently, Townsend (1980) has shown that the exact consumption

loan specification can be generated by a much larger class of transactions

technologies than that suggested by the Saniuelson model and subsequent

literature.


               generally, as Kareken and Wallace (1981) have pointed out,

the multicountry model of the type we are dealing with is characterized

by multiple equilibria. The paper restricts its attention to equilibria

in which gross and net reserve positions are equal, and in which there is

either a nonnegativity constraint or nonpositivity constrain on reserve

positions. These restrictions identify a unique steady—state equilibrium.

       1Reca11 from the first subsection of Section I that when

weights on the utilities of each generation in the government's objective

function   in period t are of the form w1 =                for all t and i
then            while if w = 0,   t #   t,   t—l,   then    >
                                                                1T.
                                                                              32

                                  REFERENCE

Aizenman, Joshua, "The Use of the Balance of Payments as a Shock

       Absorber in Fixed and Managed Float System," Journal of International

       Economics, Vol. 11 (November 1981) pp. 479—486.

Buiter, Willem H,, "Time Preference and International Lending and

       Borrowing in an Overlapping——Generations Model," Journal of Political

       Economy, Vol. 89 (August 1981) pp. 769—979.

Calvo, Cuillermo A., "Optimal Seigniorage from Money Creation: An

       Analysis in Terms of the Optimum Balance of Payments Deficit

       Problem," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 4 (August 1973).

       pp. 503—518.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, "Debt with Potential Repudiation:

       Theoretical and Empirical Analysis", Review of Economic Studies,

       Vol. 48 (April 1981a) pp. 289—310.

___________________________________    "Poor Country Borrowing In Private

       Financial Markets and the Repudiation Issue" Princeton Studies on

       International Finance No. 47, International Finance Section,

       Princeton University, (June 1981b).

_______________   "Optimal   and Time Cons tent Exchange Rate Management in

       an Overlapping Generations Economy" Economic Growth Center

       Discussion Paper No. 413, Yale University, (July 1982).

Kareken, John and Nell Wallace, "On the Indeterminacy of Equilibrium

       Exchange Rates," Quarterli Journal of Economics, Vol. 96 (May

       1981) pp. 207—222.
                                                                                33

Kletzer,   Ken, "A Model   of   International Lending with Default Risk"

       University    of California, Davis, inimeo,   June   (Revised November

       1982).

Kydiand, Fynn E. and Edward C. Prescott, "Rules Rather than Discretion:

       The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans" Journal of Pc,litical Economy,

       Vol. 85 (June 1977) pp. 473—491.

Lapan, Harvey E. and Walter Enders, "Random Disturbances and the Choice

       of Exchange Rate Regime in an Intergenerational Model", Journal

       of International Economics, Vol. 10 (May 1980) pp. 263—284.

Mundell, Robert A., Monetary Theory (Pacific Palisades, Ca1if. Goodyear

       Publishing, 1971).

Sachs, Jeffrey and David Cohen, "LDC Borrowing and Default Risk"

       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 925,

      (July 1982).

Samuelson, Paul A., "An Exact Consumption Loan Model of Interest with or

       without the Social Contrivance of Money", Journal of Political

       Economy, Vol. 66 (December 1958) pp. 467—482.

Townsend, Robert H., "Models of Money with Spacially Separated Agents"

       Models of Monetary Economics ed. by John H. Kareken and Neil Wallace

       (Federal   Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 1980).
Triffin, Robert, Gold and the Dollar Crisis, Revised Edition (New Haven:
       Yale University Press, 1961).
