NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCOME AND DEMOCRACY
Daron Acemoglu
Simon Johnson
James A. Robinson
Pierre Yared
Working Paper 11205
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11205
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

We thank David Autor, Robert Barro, Jason Seawright, Sebastián Mazzuca, and seminar participants
at the Banco de la República de Colombia, Boston University, the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research,
the CEPR annual conference on transition economics in Hanoi, MIT, and Harvard for comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Income and Democracy
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared
NBER Working Paper No. 11205
March 2005
JEL No. P16, O10
ABSTRACT
We revisit one of the central empirical findings of the political economy literature that higher income
per capita causes democracy. Existing studies establish a strong cross-country correlation between
income and democracy, but do not typically control for factors that simultaneously affect both
variables. We show that controlling for such factors by including country fixed effects removes the
statistical association between income per capita and various measures of democracy. We also
present instrumental-variables using two different strategies. These estimates also show no causal
effect of income on democracy. Furthermore, we reconcile the positive cross-country correlation
between income and democracy with the absence of a causal effect of income on democracy by
showing that the long-run evolution of income and democracy is related to historical factors.
Consistent with this, the positive correlation between income and democracy disappears, even
without fixed effects, when we control for the historical determinants of economic and political
development in a sample of former European colonies.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
Simon Johnson
Sloan School of Management
MIT, 50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
sjohnson@mit.edu

James A. Robinson
Department of Government
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu
Pierre Yared
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
yared@mit.edu

1

Introduction

One of the most notable empirical regularities in political economy is the relationship
between income per capita and democracy. Today all OECD countries are democratic,
while many of the nondemocracies are in the poor parts of the world, for example subSaharan Africa and Southeast Asia. This positive relationship is not only confined to a
cross-country comparison. Most countries were nondemocratic before the modern growth
process took oﬀ at the beginning of the 19th century. Democratization came together
with growth. Barro (1999, S160), for example, summarizes the findings from his detailed
study as: “increases in various measures of the standard of living forecast a gradual rise
in democracy. In contrast, democracies that arise without prior economic development ...
tend not to last.”1
This statistical association between income and democracy is the cornerstone of the
influential modernization theory, which sees a direct causal link between economic growth
and democracy. According to this theory, economic growth engenders “a culture of democracy” and provides the foundations for democratic political institutions. This thesis is
clearly articulated in Lipset (1959), who argued that “only in a wealthy society in which
relatively few citizens lived in real poverty could a situation exist in which the mass of the
population could intelligently participate in politics and could develop the self-restraint
necessary to avoid succumbing to the appeals of irresponsible demagogues” (p. 75). It
is also reproduced in all the major works on democracy (e.g., Dahl, 1971, Huntington,
1991).
In this paper, we revisit the relationship between income per capita and democracy.
Our starting point is that existing work, based on cross-country relationships, does not
establish causation. First, there is the issue of reverse causality; perhaps democracy
causes income rather than the other way round. Second, and more important, there is
the potential for omitted variable bias. Some other factor may determine both the nature
of the political regime and the potential for economic growth.
We utilize two strategies to investigate the causal eﬀect of income on democracy. Our
first strategy is to control for country-specific factors aﬀecting both income and democracy by including country fixed eﬀects. While fixed eﬀect regressions are not a panacea
against omitted variable biases,2 they are well-suited to the investigation of the relation1

Also see, among others, Lipset (1959), Londregan and Poole (1996), Przeworski and Limongi (1997),
Barro (1997), Przeworski, Alvarez, Cheibub, and Limongi (2000), and Papaioannou and Siourounis
(2004).
2
Fixed eﬀects would not help inference if there are time-varying omitted factors aﬀecting the dependent
variable and correlated with the right-hand side variables (see the discussion below). They may also make

1

ship between income and democracy. Major sources of potential bias in a regression of
democracy on income per capita are country-specific, historical factors influencing both
political and economic development. If these omitted characteristics are, to a first approximation, time-invariant, the inclusion of fixed eﬀects will remove them and this source of
bias. Consider, for example, the comparison of the United States and Colombia. The
United States is both richer and more democratic, so a simple cross-country comparison,
as well as the existing empirical strategies in the literature which do not control for fixed
eﬀects, would suggest that there is a relationship between democracy and income. The
idea of fixed eﬀects is to move beyond this comparison and investigate the “within-country
variation”; i.e., whether as Colombia becomes relatively richer, it also tends to become
more democratic relative to the United States. In addition to improving inference on
the causal eﬀect of income on democracy, this approach is also more closely related to
modernization theory as articulated by Lipset (1959), which claims that countries should
become more democratic as they become richer, not simply that rich countries should be
more democratic.
Our main finding from this strategy is that once fixed eﬀects are introduced, the
positive relationship between income per capita and various measures of democracy disappears. Figures 1 and 2 show this diagrammatically by plotting changes in our two
measures of democracy, the Freedom House and Polity scores (see below for data details),
for each country between 1970 and 1995 against the change in GDP per capita over the
same period. There appears to be no relationship between changes in income per capita
and democracy.
This basic finding holds with various indicators for democracy, with diﬀerent econometric specifications and estimation techniques, in diﬀerent subsamples, and is robust to
the inclusion of additional covariates. Moreover, these results are not driven by large
standard errors. In many cases, two-standard error bands include only very small eﬀects
of income on democracy, and often exclude the OLS estimates. These results therefore
shed considerable doubt on the claim that there is a strong causal eﬀect of income on
democracy.3
While the fixed eﬀects estimation is useful in removing the influence of long-run deterproblems of measurement error worse because they remove a significant portion of the variation in the
right-hand side variables. Consequently, fixed eﬀects are certainly no substitute for using an instrumentalvariables approach with a valid instrument.
3
It remains true that over time there is a general tendency towards greater incomes and greater
democracy across the world. In our regressions, time eﬀects capture these general (world-level) tendencies.
Our estimates suggest that these world-level movements in democracy are unlikely to be driven by the
causal eﬀect of income on democracy.

2

minants of both democracy and income, it does not necessarily estimate the causal eﬀect
of income on democracy. An instrumental-variables (IV) strategy with a valid instrument
would be a superior approach, but it is diﬃcult to find valid instruments for income that
could not aﬀect democracy through other channels.4 Our second strategy is to use IV regressions. We experiment with two potential instruments. The first is to use past savings
rates, while the second is to use changes in the incomes of trading partners. The argument
for the first instrument is that variations in past savings rates aﬀect income per capita,
but should have no direct eﬀect on democracy. The second instrument, which we believe
is of independent interest, creates a matrix of trade shares, and constructs predicted income for each country using a trade-share-weighted average income of other countries.
We show that this predicted income has considerable explanatory power for income per
capita, and argue that it should have no direct eﬀect on democracy. Both IV strategies
confirm our basic findings and show no evidence of a causal eﬀect of income on democracy. We recognize that neither instrument is perfect, since there are some reasonable
scenarios in which our exclusion restrictions could be violated (e.g., saving rates might
be correlated with future anticipated regime changes; or democracy scores of a country’s
trading partners, which are correlated with their income levels, might have a direct eﬀect
on its democracy). To alleviate concerns about the validity of the instruments, we show
that the most likely sources of correlation between our instruments and the error term in
the second stage are not present.
These results naturally raise the following important question: what is the source of
the cross-sectional correlation between income and democracy? Why are rich countries
democratic today? One possible explanation is that there is a causal eﬀect of income on
democracy, but it works at much longer horizons than the existing literature posited, that
is, over 50 or even 100 years rather than 10 or 20 years. Another hypothesis, suggested by
approaches that emphasize the importance of historical factors in long-run development,5
is that the cross-sectional relationship reflects the persistent influence of these historical
factors. Put diﬀerently, events during certain crucial junctures impact the economic and
political “development path” of a society, leading to persistent, though not permanent,
influences on economic and political outcomes. Both of these hypotheses suggest that the
within-correlation between income and democracy should be stronger when we look at
4

A recent creative attempt is by Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti (2004), who use the weather conditions
as an instrument for income in Africa for investigating the impact of income on civil wars. Unfortunately,
weather conditions are only a good instrument for relatively short-run changes in income, thus not
necessarily ideal to study the relationship between income and democracy.
5
See, among others, North and Thomas (1973), North (1981), Jones (1981), Engerman and Sokoloﬀ
(1997), Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001, 2002).

3

longer horizons.
We investigate this possibility by looking at the relationship between income and
democracy over the past 160 years, and over the past 500 years. We find little evidence
for an eﬀect of income on democracy in samples that span 100 or 160 years. In contrast,
over the past 500 years there seems to be a very strong correlation. Our interpretation
is that this pattern is consistent with the second hypothesis, because the 500 years in
question spans the period of divergence of national development paths (e.g., the emergence
of constitutional monarchies, the rise of the modern nation state, industrialization, and
the colonial experience).
In addition, we also provide direct evidence consistent with the second hypothesis by
looking at the sample of former European colonies. This sample is useful since it enables
us to exploit the quasi-natural experiment provided by the colonization of many diverse
societies by European powers after 1492, where diﬀerences in the colonization experience
led to significant divergence in the economic and political development paths of these societies (see, e.g., Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001, 2002, and Engerman and Sokoloﬀ,
1997). We document that in this sample, the fixed eﬀects in the democracy regressions
are closely linked to the potential determinants of European colonization strategy (in particular, the density of the indigenous population at the time of colonization and potential
mortality rates of European settlers), date of independence and measures of institutions
in the early independence era. The positive correlation between income and democracy
disappears, even without fixed eﬀects, when we control for these historical determinants.
This evidence further supports the second hypothesis.
Finally, we document that there are some income-related determinants of democracy
in the postwar sample. In particular, contrary to the implications of modernization theory,
we find that economic crises lead to democracy. We show that this result is driven entirely
by the fact that dictatorships are more likely to collapse in the face of economic crises
than democracies are likely to revert back to dictatorship.6
The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we describe the data. In Section 3 we
discuss our econometric approach and present the basic results. Section 4 presents our IV
results. Section 5 discusses potential interpretations for these results. Motivated by these
interpretations, Section 6 investigates the longer-run relationship between income and
democracy, and Section 7 looks at the historical determinants of economic and political
6

In passing, we also show that income per capita does not appear to have a causal eﬀect when we look
separately at transitions to and from democracy, contrary to the findings in Przeworski et al. (2000).
Since we do not have space in this paper, we leave a more detailed investigation of transitions to future
work.

4

development in the sample of former European colonies. Section 8 looks at the eﬀect of
crises on democracy. Section 9 concludes. The Appendix contains some additional results
and further information on the construction of the instruments used in Section 4.

2

Data and Descriptive Statistics

We follow much of the existing research in this area in adopting a Schumpeterian definition
based on a number of institutional conditions.7 Our first and main measure of democracy
is the Freedom House Political Rights Index. A country receives the highest score if
political rights come closest to the ideals suggested by a checklist of questions, beginning
with whether there are free and fair elections, whether those who are elected rule, whether
there are competitive parties or other political groupings, whether the opposition plays an
important role and has actual power, and whether minority groups have reasonable selfgovernment or can participate in the government through informal consensus.8 Following
Barro (1999), we supplement this index with the related variable from Bollen (1990, 2001)
for 1950, 1955, 1960, and 1965. As in Barro (1999), we transform both indices so that
they lie between 0 and 1, with 1 corresponding to the most democratic set of institutions.
The Freedom House index, even when augmented with Bollen’s data, only enables us
to look at the postwar era. The Polity IV dataset, on the other hand, provides information for all countries since independence starting in 1800. Both for pre-1950 events and
as a check on our main measure, we also look at the other widely-used measure of democracy, the composite Polity index, which is the diﬀerence between Polity’s Democracy and
Autocracy indices (see Marshall and Jaggers, 2004). The Polity Democracy Index ranges
from 0 to 10 and is derived from coding the competitiveness of political participation, the
openness and competitiveness of executive recruitment and constraints on the chief executive. The Polity Autocracy Index also ranges from 0 to 10 and is constructed in a similar
way to the democracy score based on scoring countries according to competitiveness of
political participation, the regulation of participation, the openness and competitiveness
of executive recruitment and constraints on the chief executive. To facilitate compari7

Schumpeter (1950, p. 250) argued that democracy was: “the institutional arrangement for arriving
at political decisions in which individuals acquire the power to decide by means of a competitive struggle
for the people’s vote.”
8
The main checklist includes 3 questions on the electoral process, 4 questions on the extent of political
pluralism and participation, and 3 questions on the functioning of government. For each checklist question,
0 to 4 points are added, depending on the comparative rights and liberties present (0 represents the least,
4 represents the most) and these scores are combined to form the index. See Freedom House (2004),
http://www.freedomhouse.org/research/freeworld/2003/methodology.htm

5

son with the Freedom House score, we also normalize the composite Polity index to lie
between 0 and 1.
Using the Freedom House and the Polity data, we construct five-yearly, ten-yearly,
and annual panels. For the five-year panels, we take the observation every fifth year.
We prefer this procedure to averaging the five-yearly data, since averaging introduces
additional serial correlation, making inference and estimation more diﬃcult (see footnote
12). For the ten-yearly panels, we take the observation every tenth year for similar reasons.
For the Freedom House data which begins in 1972, we follow Barro (1999) and assign the
1972 score to 1970 for the purpose of the five-year and ten-year regressions.
The GDP per capita (in PPP) and savings rate data for the postwar period are from
Heston, Summers, and Atten (2002), and GDP per capita (in constant 1990 dollars) for the
longer sample are from Maddison (2003). The trade-weighted world income instrument is
built using data from International Monetary Fund Direction of Trade Statistics (2005).
Other variables we use in the analysis are discussed later (see also Appendix Table A1 for
detailed data definitions and sources).
Table 1 contains descriptive statistics for the key variables both for the whole world
and for former European colonies, the sample we focus on for some of the historical
regressions. It shows that there is significant variation in all the variables for both the
entire sample and the former colonies sample. Countries in the former colonies sample are
somewhat less democratic and substantially (about 30 percent) poorer than the average
country in the whole sample.

3
3.1

Main Results
Basic Specifications and Interpretation

Our basic regression model is:
dit = αdit−1 + γyit−1 + x0it−1 β + µt + δ i + uit ,

(1)

where dit is the democracy score of country i in period t. The lagged value of this variable
on the right hand side is included to capture persistence in democracy and also potentially
mean-reverting dynamics (i.e., the tendency of the democracy score to return to some
equilibrium value for the country). The main variable of interest is yit−1 , the lagged value
of log income per capita. The parameter γ therefore measures whether income has an
eﬀect on democracy. All other potential covariates are included in the vector xit−1 . In
addition, the δ i ’s denote a full set of country dummies and the µt ’s denote a full set of
6

time eﬀects, which capture common shocks to (common trends in) the democracy score
of all countries. uit is an error term, capturing all other omitted factors, with E (uit ) = 0
for all i and t. The sample period is 1960-2000 and time periods correspond to five-year
intervals.
The standard regression in the literature, for example, Barro (1999), is pooled OLS,
which is identical to (1) except for the omission of the fixed eﬀects, δ i ’s. In our framework,
these country dummies capture any time-invariant country characteristic that aﬀect the
equilibrium democracy level.
As is well known, when the true model is given by (1) and the δ i ’s are correlated with
yit−1 or xit−1 , then pooled OLS estimates are biased and inconsistent. More specifically,
¡
¢
if either Cov(yit−1 , δi + uit ) 6= 0 or Cov xjit−1 , δ i + uit 6= 0 for some j, the OLS estimator

will be inconsistent (where xjit−1 refers to the jth component of the vector xit−1 , and
covariances refer the population covariances). In contrast, even when these covariances are
¡
¢
nonzero, the fixed eﬀects estimator will be consistent if Cov(yit−1 , uit ) =Cov xjit−1 , uit = 0

for all j (as T → ∞, see below). This structure of correlation is particularly relevant in
the context of the relationship between income and democracy because of the possibility
of underlying political and social forces shaping both equilibrium political institutions and
the potential for economic growth. Nevertheless, there should be no presumption that
fixed eﬀects regressions will necessarily estimate the causal eﬀect of income on democracy.
To illustrate this point and as a preparation for the discussion in Section 5, consider a

simplified version of (1), without the lagged dependent variable and the other covariates
and with contemporaneous income per capita on the right hand side. Let us also add
another error component, η dit , which admits a unit root, such that:
dit = γyit + δ di + η dit + udit ,

(2)

where η dit = η dit−1 + υ dit .
Moreover suppose that the statistical process for income per capita also admits a unit
root,
yit = δ yi + η yit + uyit ,

(3)

where η yit = η yit−1 + υ yit .
While δ di and δ yi correspond to fixed diﬀerences in levels of democracy and income across
countries, η dit and η yit capture factors aﬀecting the evolution of democracy and income
across countries. As before, the parameter γ represents the causal eﬀect of income
on democracy.

Denote the variance of υ yi by σ 2υy and of uyi by σ 2uy .
7

Assume that

¡
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
Cov udit , uyit+k =Cov υ yit , υ yit+k =Cov υ dit , υ dit+k = 0 for all i and k 6= 0. Now imag-

ine that we have data for two time periods. Then the probability limit of the fixed eﬀects
estimator γ̂ F E in a panel with only two periods is:
¢
¡
Cov η dit − η dit−1 , η yit − η yit−1
FE
¡
¢
= γ+
plimγ̂
Var η yit − η yit−1 + uyit − uyit−1
¢
¡
Cov υ dit , υ yit
= γ+ 2
,
σ υy + 2σ 2uy

where the second equality uses the assumptions on the ui ’s and the υ i ’s together with the
definitions in (2) and (3).
This expression shows that the fixed eﬀects estimator will lead to consistent estimates
only if υ dit and υ yit are orthogonal, i.e., if there are no correlated shocks influencing the
¢
¡
evolution of income and democracy. Nevertheless, if, plausibly, Cov υ dit , υ yit > 0 so that

such shocks are positively correlated, the fixed eﬀects estimator will be biased upwards
and will provide an upper bound on the causal eﬀect of income on democracy.

In addition to the conceptual issues, there is also an econometric problem involved in
the estimation of (1). The regressor dit−1 is mechanically correlated with uis for s < t,
so the standard fixed eﬀect estimator is not consistent (e.g., Wooldridge, 2002, chapter
11). However, it can be shown that the fixed eﬀects OLS estimator becomes consistent
as the number of time periods in the sample increases (i.e., as T → ∞). We discuss and

implement a number of strategies to deal with this problem below.

3.2

Results

Table 2 uses the Freedom House data and Table 3 uses the Polity data, in both cases
for our entire (base) sample, over the period 1960-2000. All standard errors in the paper (unless indicated otherwise) are robust against arbitrary heteroscedasticity in the
variance-covariance matrix, and allow for clustering at the country level.9
We start with a column showing the most parsimonious pooled OLS regression of
the democracy score on its (five-year) lag and log income per capita. Lagged democracy
is highly significant, and shows a considerable degree of persistence (mean reversion) in
democracy. Log income per capita is also significant and illustrates the well-documented
positive relationship between income and democracy. Though statistically significant, the
9

Clustering is a simple strategy to correct the standard errors for potential correlation across observations both over time and within the same time period. See for example Moulton (1986) or Bertrand,
Duflo and Mullainathan (2004). The heteroscedasticity correction takes care of fact that the democracy
index takes discrete values.

8

eﬀect of income is quantitatively small. For example, the coeﬃcient of 0.072 (standard
error = 0.010) in column 1 of Table 2 implies that a 10 percent increase in GDP per capita
is associated with an increase in the Freedom House score of less than 0.007, which is very
small (for comparison, the gap between the United States and Colombia today is 0.5). If
this pooled cross-section regression identified the causal eﬀect of income on democracy,
then the long-run eﬀect would be larger than this, because the lag of democracy on the
right hand side would be increasing over time, causing a further increase in the democracy
score. Since lagged democracy has a coeﬃcient of 0.706, the long-run eﬀect of a 10%
increase in GDP per capita would be 0.007/(1-0.706)≈0.024, which is still quantitatively
small.
The remainder of Table 2 presents our basic results with fixed eﬀects. Column 2
shows that the relationship between income and democracy disappears once fixed eﬀects
are included. Now the estimate of γ is 0.010 with a standard error of 0.035, which makes
it highly insignificant. With the Polity data in Table 3, the estimates have in fact the
wrong (negative) sign, -0.006 (standard error=0.039).
One might be worried that the lack of relationship in the fixed eﬀects regressions is
a consequence of the imprecision of the estimates resulting from the inclusion of fixed
eﬀects. This does not seem to be the case. Although, as pointed out above, the pooled
OLS estimate of γ is quantitatively small, the two standard error bands of the fixed
eﬀects estimates almost exclude it. More specifically, with the Freedom House estimate,
two standard error bands exclude short-run eﬀects greater than 0.008 and long-run eﬀects
greater than 0.013 on the democracy index (the implied long-run eﬀect of 0.024 in the
pooled cross-sectional regression is comfortably outside this interval because the coeﬃcient
on lagged democracy is smaller with fixed eﬀects).
That these results are not driven by some econometric problems or some unusual
feature of the data is further shown in Figures 1 and 2 above, which plot the change in
the Freedom House and Polity score for each country between 1970 and 1995 against the
change in GDP per capita over the same period. These scatterplots correspond to the
estimation of the fixed eﬀects equation (1) with contemporaneous income as the righthand side regressor, without any covariates and using only two data points, 1970 and
1995.10 They show clearly that there is no strong relationship between income growth
and changes in democracy over this period.
10

These two dates are chosen to maximize sample size. The regression of the change in Freedom House
score between 1970 and 1995 on change in log income per capita between 1970 and 1995 yields a coeﬃcient
of 0.032, with a standard error of 0.058, while the same regression with Polity data gives a coeﬃcient
estimate of -0.024, with a standard error of 0.063.

9

These initial results show that once we allow for fixed eﬀects, per capita income is not
a major determinant of democracy. The remaining columns of the tables consider alternative estimation strategies to deal with the potential biases introduced by the presence
of the lagged dependent variable discussed above.
Our first strategy, adopted in column 3, is to use the methodology proposed by Anderson and Hsiao (1982), which is to time diﬀerence equation (1), to obtain
∆dit = α∆dit−1 + γ∆yit−1 + ∆x0it−1 β + ∆µt + ∆uit ,

(4)

where the fixed country eﬀects are removed by time diﬀerencing. Although equation
(4) cannot be estimated consistently by OLS, in the absence of serial correlation in the
original residual, uit (i.e., no second order serial correlation in ∆uit ), dit−2 is uncorrelated
with ∆uit , so can be used as instrument for ∆dit−1 to obtain consistent estimates and
similarly, yit−2 is used as an instrument for ∆yit−1 . We find that this procedure leads to
negative estimates (e.g., -0.104, standard error = 0.107 with the Freedom House data),
and shows no evidence of a positive eﬀect of income on democracy.
Although the instrumental variable estimator of Anderson and Hsiao (1982) leads to
consistent estimates, it is not eﬃcient, since, under the assumption of no further serial
correlation in uit , not only dit−2 , but all further lags of dit are uncorrelated with ∆uit ,
and can also be used as additional instruments. Arellano and Bond (1991) develop a
Generalized Method-of-Moments (GMM) estimator using all of these moment conditions.
When all these moment conditions are valid, this GMM estimator is more eﬃcient than
the Anderson and Hsiao’s (1982) estimator. We use this GMM estimator in column 4.
The coeﬃcients are now even more negative and more precisely estimated, for example
-0.129 (standard error = 0.076).11 With this estimate, the two standard error bands
now comfortably exclude the corresponding OLS estimate of γ (which, recall, was 0.072).
In addition, the presence of multiple instruments in the GMM procedure allows us to
investigate whether the assumption of no serial correlation in uit can be rejected and
also to test for overidentifying restrictions. With the Freedom House data, the AR(2)
test and the Hansen J test indicate that there is no further serial correlation and the
overidentifying restrictions are not rejected.12
11

In addition, Arellano and Bover (1995) also use time-diﬀerenced instruments for the level equation,
(1). Nevertheless, these instruments would only be valid if the time-diﬀerenced instruments are orthogonal
to the fixed eﬀect. Since this is not appealing in this context (e.g., five-year income growth is unlikely to
be orthogonal to the democracy country fixed eﬀect), we do not include these additional instruments.
12
We also checked the results with five-year averaged data rather than our data set which uses only
the democracy information every fifth year. The results are very similar, but in this case, the AR(2) test
shows evidence for additional serial correlation, which is not surprising given the serial correlation that
averaging introduces. This motivates our reliance on the five-yearly or annual data sets.

10

With the Polity data, both the Anderson and Hsiao (1982) and Arellano and Bond
(1991) procedures lead to more negative (and statistically significant) estimates. However,
in this case, though there continues to be no serial correlation in uit , the overidentification
test is rejected, so we need to be more cautious in interpreting the results with the Polity
data.
Column 5 shows a simpler specification in which lagged democracy is dropped. With
either the Freedom House or Polity measure of democracy there is again no evidence
of a significant eﬀect of income on democracy, and in this case, the corresponding OLS
estimate is easily outside the two standard error bands (the OLS estimate without lagged
democracy, which is not shown in the table, is 0.235 with a standard error of 0.012).
Column 6 estimates (1) with OLS using annual observations. This is useful since the
fixed eﬀect OLS estimator becomes consistent as the number of observations becomes
large. With annual observations, we have a reasonably large time dimension. However,
estimating the same model on annual data with a single lag would induce significant
serial correlation (since our results so far indicate that five-year lags of democracy predict
changes in democracy). For this reason, we now include five lags of both democracy and
log GDP per capita in these annual regressions. The table reports the p value of an F-test
for the joint significance of these variables. The results show no evidence of a significant
positive eﬀect of income on democracy (while democracy is strongly predicted by its lags,
as was the case in earlier columns).
Finally, columns 7 and 8 present regressions using a dataset consisting of ten-year
observations. This is useful to investigate whether the relationship between income and
democracy will be stronger with lower-frequency data. The results are similar to those
with five-year observations and to the patterns in Figures 1 and 2, which show no evidence
of a positive association between changes in income and democracy between 1970 and
1995.
Overall, the inclusion of fixed eﬀects proxying for time-invariant country specific characteristics removes the cross-country correlation between income and democracy. These
results shed considerable doubt on the conventional wisdom that income has a strong
causal eﬀect on democracy.

3.3

Robustness

Table 4 investigates the robustness of these results in alternative samples. To save space,
we only report the robustness checks for the Freedom House data (the results with Polity
are similar and are available upon request). Columns 1-3 show the regressions correspond11

ing to columns 2, 4 and 6 of Table 2 for a balanced sample of countries from 1970 to 2000.
This is useful to check whether entry and exit of countries from the base sample of Tables
2 and 3 might be aﬀecting the results. All three columns provide very similar results.
For example, using the balanced sample of Freedom House data and the fixed eﬀects OLS
specification, the estimate of γ is -0.031 (standard error= 0 .049), and the two standard
error bands now exclude the OLS estimate.
Columns 4-6 exclude sub-Saharan Africa, where many countries became democratic
immediately after independence and later lapsed into nondemocracy. The results in this
sample are also similar and show no evidence of a significant positive eﬀect of income on
democracy in any of the specifications. Columns 7-12 report regressions excluding Muslim
countries and former socialist countries, again with very similar results.
Table 5 investigates the influence of various covariates on the relationship between
income and democracy. To save space, we again report results only with the Freedom
House data. We start with the pooled OLS regressions for comparison. Columns 1-3
includes log population and age structure, and columns 4-6 add education. Columns
7-9 include the full set of covariates from Barro’s (1999) baseline specification.13 In all
cases, there is a positive and significant estimate of γ in the pooled cross section, which
is smaller than the baseline estimate in column 1 of Table 2. The rest of the table
shows that the presence of these covariates does not aﬀect the (lack of) relationship
between income and democracy when fixed eﬀects are included. Age structure variables
are significant in the specification that excludes education, but not when education is
included. Education is itself insignificant with a negative coeﬃcient. The causal eﬀect of
education on democracy, which is the other basic tenet of the modernization hypothesis,
is therefore also not robust to controlling for country fixed eﬀects. We investigate this
issue in greater detail in Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2005).
In addition, in regressions not reported here, we checked for non-linear and nonmonotonic eﬀects of income on democracy and for potential non-linear interactions between income and other variables, and found no evidence of such relationships.14
13

Age structure variables are from United Nations Population Division (2003) and include median age
and variables corresponding to the fraction of the population in the following four age groups: 0-15, 15-30,
30-45, and 45-60. Total population is from World Bank (2002). In our regressions we measure education
as total years of schooling in the population aged 25 and above. In columns where we add covariates
from Barro (1999), we follow Barro’s strategy by measuring education as primary years of schooling in
the population aged 25 and above. Both education variables are from Barro and Lee (2000). Additional
covariates from Barro (1999)’s regression are urbanization rate, male-female education gap, and a dummy
for major oil producer (used in the pooled cross-section only). For detailed definitions and sources see
Appendix Table A1.
14
The only subsample where we find a positive association between income per capita and democracy

12

4

Instrumental Variable Estimates

As discussed above, fixed eﬀects estimators do not necessarily identify the causal eﬀect of
income on democracy. The estimation of such causal eﬀects requires us to exploit a source
of exogenous variation. While we do not have an ideal source of exogenous variation, there
are two promising potential instruments and we now present IV results using these.

4.1

The Savings Rate Instrument

The first instrument is the savings rate in the previous five-year period, denoted by sit .
The corresponding first stage for log income per capita, yit−1 , in regression (1) is
yit−1 = πF sit−2 + αF dit−1 + x0it−1 β F + µFt−1 + δ Fi + uFit−1 ,

(5)

where all the variables are the same as defined above, and the only excluded instrument
is sit−2 . The identification restriction is that Cov(sit−2 , uit | xit−1 , µt , δ i ) = 0, where uit is

the residual error term in the second-stage regression, (1).

We naturally expect the savings rate to influence income in the future. What about
excludability? While we do not have a precise theory suggesting that the savings rate
should have no direct eﬀect on democracy, it seems plausible to expect that changes in
the savings rate over periods of 5-10 years should have no direct eﬀect on the culture of
democracy, the structure of political institutions or the nature of political conflict within
society.
Nevertheless, there are a number of channels through which savings rates could be
correlated with the error term in the second-stage equation, uit . First, the savings rate
itself might be influenced by the current political regime, for example, dit−2 , and could be
correlated with uit if all the necessary lags of democracy are not included in the system.
Second, the savings rate could be correlated with changes in the distribution of income or
composition of assets, which might have direct eﬀects on political equilibria. Below, we
provide evidence that these concerns are unlikely to be important in practice.
With these caveats in mind, Table 6 looks at the eﬀect of GDP per capita on democracy
in IV regressions using past savings rates as instruments and the Freedom House data
(results using Polity data are in Appendix Table A2 and are similar). The savings rate
is defined as nominal income minus consumption minus government expenditure divided
conditional on fixed eﬀects is the postwar sample with 18 West European countries. However, this
relationship holds only with the Freedom House data, and not with the Polity data, and also disappears
when we look at a longer sample than the postwar period alone. Details are available upon request.

13

by nominal income.15
We report a number of diﬀerent specifications, with or without a lag of democracy,
and with or without GMM. The first three columns show the OLS estimates in the pooled
cross section, the fixed eﬀects estimates without lagged democracy on the right hand side,
and the fixed eﬀects estimates with lagged democracy on the right hand side. Without
fixed eﬀects, there is a strong association between income per capita and democracy
(the relationship in column 1 is stronger than before because it does not include lagged
democracy on the right hand side). With fixed eﬀects, this relationship is no longer
present. The remaining columns look at IV specifications, and the bottom panel shows
the corresponding first stages.
Column 4 shows a strong first-stage relationship between income and the savings rate,
with a t-statistic of almost 5. The 2SLS estimate of the eﬀect of income per capita on
democracy is -0.035 (standard error = 0.094). Column 5 adds lagged democracy on the
right hand side. The first stage is very similar, and now the estimate of γ is -0.020
(standard error = 0.081). Column 6 uses the GMM procedure, again with the savings
rate as the excluded instrument for income. Now the estimate of γ is relatively large and
negative, and significant at 5%. These results, therefore, show no evidence of a positive
causal eﬀect of income on democracy.
The remaining columns investigate the robustness of this finding and the plausibility
of our exclusion restriction. Column 7 shows a very similar estimate when sub-Saharan
African countries are excluded. Column 8 adds labor share as an additional regressor,
to check whether a potential correlation between the savings rate and inequality might
be responsible for our results.16 The first stage shows no significant eﬀect of labor share
on income per capita, and the 2SLS estimate of γ is similar to the estimate without the
labor share. Column 9 includes further lags of democracy to check whether systematic
diﬀerences in savings rates between democracies and dictatorships might have an eﬀect on
the results. The estimate of γ is similar to before and, if anything, a little more negative in
this case. Finally, column 10 adds a further lag of the savings rate as an instrument. This
is useful since it enables a test of the overidentifying restriction (namely, a test of whether
the savings rate at t-3 is a valid instrument conditional on the savings rate at t-2 being
a valid instrument). The 2SLS estimate of γ is again similar and the overidentification
15

We calculate savings using nominal, not PPP, numbers from the Penn World Tables. The first stage
is weaker and the second stage has a larger standard error if we use PPP data. The first and second
results are similar if we use an “investment rate” which is this measure of savings minus net exports.
16
This is the labor share of gross value added from Rodrik (1999). We use these data rather than the
standard Gini indices, because they are available for a larger sample of countries. The results with Gini
coeﬃcients are very similar and are available upon request.

14

restriction is accepted comfortably (the χ2 -statistic for a Hausman, 1978, test takes the
value of 0.00, which is accepted at the p-value of 1.00).

4.2

The Trade-Weighted World Income Instrument

Our second instrument exploits the existence of trade relationships across countries. To
develop this instrument, let Ω = [ωij ]i,j denote the N × N matrix of (time-invariant)

trade shares between countries in our sample, where N is the total number of countries.

Namely, ωij is the share of trade between country i and country j in the GDP of country i.
In practice, we use two measures of Ω. The first is actual trade shares between 1980-1989
(which is chosen to maximize coverage). The second is a measure of predicted average
trade shares from a standard gravity equation used in Frankel and Romer (1999). The
Appendix provides details on data sources and construction.
The transmission of business cycles from one country to another through trade (e.g.,
Baxter, 1995, Kraay and Ventura, 2001) implies that we can think of a statistical model
for income of a country as follows:
Yit−1 = ζ

N
X

ω ij Yjt−1 + εit−1 ,

(6)

j=1,j6=i

for all i = 1, ..., N , where Yit−1 denotes log income, so yit−1 = Yit−1 − Pit−1 where Pit−1 is

the log population of i at t − 1. The parameter ζ measures the eﬀect of the trade-weighted
world income on the income of each country.

Given equation (6), the identification problem in the estimation of (1) can be restated
as follows: the error term εit−1 in (6) is potentially correlated with uit in equation (1),
and if so, the estimates of the eﬀect of income on democracy, γ, will be inconsistent. The
idea of the approach in this section is to purge Yit−1 , and hence yit−1 , from εit−1 to achieve
consistent estimation of γ. For this purpose, we construct
Ybit−1 = ζ

N
X

ωij Yjt−1 ,

(7)

j=1,j6=i

to use as an instrument for yit−1 . Here Ybit−1 is a weighted sum of world income for each

country, with weights varying across countries depending on their trade pattern. Given
Ybit−1 , we can consider a model for income per capita of the form: yit−1 = π̃ F Ybit−1 +
αF dit−1 + x0it−1 βF + µFt−1 + δ Fi + uFit−1 . Substituting for (7), we obtain our first-stage
relationship:

yit−1 = π F

N
X

ω ij Yjt−1 + αF dit−1 + x0it−1 βF + µFt−1 + δ Fi + uFit−1 ,

j=1,j6=i

15

(8)

where the parameter π F corresponds to ζ π̃ F (we do not need separate estimates of ζ and
π̃ F ). The identification assumption for this strategy is for Ybit−1 to be orthogonal to uit .

A suﬃcient condition for this is that Yjt−1 be orthogonal to uit for all j 6= i.

There are two problems with this strategy, however. First, there may be “economic”

reasons for this identification assumption to be violated. For example, Yjt−1 may be
correlated with democracy in country j at time t, djt , which may influence dit through
other, political, social or cultural channels. Although we have no way of ruling this
out a priori, we test for this in our empirical specifications below by controlling for the
direct eﬀect of the democracy of trading partners, and find no evidence to support such
a channel.
Second, there is an econometric problem, arising from the general equilibrium nature
of equation (6).17 Since this equation also applies for country j, the disturbance term εit−1 ,
which determines Yit−1 , will be correlated with Yjt−1 , inducing a correlation between Yjt−1
and εit−1 , and thus between Ybit−1 and εit−1 . To see this, let Yt−1 be the N × 1 vector of

log incomes, and let εt−1 be the N × 1 vector of errors in (6). Then
Yt−1 = Ybt−1 + εt−1 = ζΩYt−1 + εt−1 =

££
¤
¤
(I − ζΩ)−1 − I εt−1 + εt−1 .

££
££
¤
¤
¤
¤
(I − ζΩ)−1 − I ii , i.e., the diagonal elements of (I − ζΩ)−1 − I , are not necessarily zero, εit−1 will be mechanically correlated with Ybit−1 . If we had a consistent estima-

Since

tor for ζ, ζ̂ (i.e., with plimζ̂ = ζ), then by implication we would also have plimε̂t−1 = εt−1

(where the probability limit applies as N → ∞). This would enable us to construct an
ADJ
, such that
adjusted instrument Ybit−1
ADJ
Ybit−1
= Ybit−1 −

¸
∙∙³
´−1 ¸
− I ε̂it−1 .
I − ζ̂Ω

(9)

ii

Using the Continuous Mapping Theorem (see, for example, van der Vaart, 1998, Theorem
ADJ
would be uncorrelated with εit−1 . In other words, this transformation would
2.3), Ybit−1

remove the indirect eﬀect of εit−1 on yit−1 working through the general equilibrium interactions across countries as well as the direct eﬀect in (6). Obtaining a consistent estimate

of ζ is not straightforward, however.18 Here we take a number of approaches to deal with
this problem. First, under some regularity conditions, the problem disappears as N → ∞,

so appealing to asymptotics on the number of countries, our first strategy is to ignore this
17

We refer to this as “general equilibrium”, since it would result from an equilibrium model of crosscountry income determination as in Baxter (1995), Kraay and Ventura (2001), or Acemoglu and Ventura
(2002).
18
This problem is investigated in current work, Acemoglu, Kursteiner and Yared (2005).

16

problem and use (7). Our second strategy is to estimate ζ and perform the adjustment in
(9) (more details on this are given in the Appendix). Our third strategy is to construct
(7) with lagged values of Yjt−1 , which also removes the source of correlation between Ybjt−1

and uit in equation (1) if εit−1 ’s are serially uncorrelated. All three strategies give very
similar results.

The main results using the Freedom House data are presented in Table 7 (results using
the Polity data are in Appendix Table A2). In the bottom panel we report the first stage.
Similar to Table 6, the first three columns report OLS regressions with and without fixed
eﬀects, and the patterns are similar to those presented before. Column 4 shows our basic
2SLS estimate with the trade-weighted instrument. The instrument is constructed as in
(7) using the actual average trade shares between 1980 and 1989. The bottom panel shows
a strong first-stage relationship with a t-statistic of almost 5. The 2SLS estimate of γ is
-0.213 (standard error= 0.150). When we add lag democracy in column 5, the estimate
is slightly less negative and more precise, -0.120 (standard error = 0.105), and becomes a
little more precise with GMM in column 6, -0.133 (standard error = 0.077).
Column 7 shows a similar, though slightly less precise, estimate without sub-Saharan
Africa. Column 8 investigates whether the democracy of trading partners might have
an eﬀect, influencing inference with this instrumental variable. We construct a world
democracy index, d˜it using the same trade shares as in equation (7), and include this
both in the first and second stages. This democracy index, d˜it , also varies across countries
because of the diﬀerences in weights. We find that d˜it has no eﬀect either in the first or
the second stages, consistent with our identification assumption that Ybit−1 should have no

eﬀect on democracy in country i except through its influence on yit−1 .
Column 9 uses Ybit−2 instead of Ybit−1 on the right-hand side of (7) as an alternative
strategy to remove the mechanical correlation between Ybit−1 and εit−1 . Finally, column 10

performs an overidentification test similar to that in column 10 in Table 6 by including
both Ybit−1 and Ybit−2 . The estimate of γ is similar to the baseline estimate in column 4,

and the overidentifying restriction that the twice-lagged instrument is valid conditional on
the first instrument being valid is easily accepted (the χ2 -statistic for a Hausman, 1978,
test takes the value of 0.14, which is accepted at the p-value of 1.00).
Table 8 presents further robustness checks. Columns 1-3 exclude Singapore, which is
an outlier in the first stage. The first-stage relationship is weaker but still significant,

and the second-stage coeﬃcient remains negative and insignificant. Columns 4-6 adjust
Ybit−1 using (9), which has little eﬀect on the estimates. Columns 7-9 present specifications
using the gravity equation to construct Ω, which yield similar results to those in Table 7.
17

Overall, our two IV strategies give results consistent with the fixed eﬀects estimates
and indicate that there is no evidence for a strong causal eﬀect of income on democracy.

5

Interpretation

The above results raise the following question: if there is no causal eﬀect of income on
democracy, what explains the strong cross-sectional relationship between the two variables? This strong cross-country relationship is shown in Figure 3 using the Freedom
House data and is the source of the positive and significant estimates in the pooled crosssectional regressions.
Two hypotheses naturally present themselves.

5.1

Hypothesis 1: Long Lags

The first possibility is that there is a causal eﬀect of income on democracy, but it works
with such long and variable lags that it is impossible to detect this causal channel in the
postwar data. Although the issue of lags is not discussed explicitly in Lipset (1959), this is
a natural extension of his thesis, since it may take a long time for a culture of democracy
to emerge, or because political institutions change only slowly.
According to this hypothesis, we need to look at longer time spans. The key question
is what the right horizon should be. Figures 1 and 2 show that there is no eﬀect when we
look at a 25-year period (1970-95) during the recent past. We believe that any reasonable
version of this hypothesis should predict some eﬀect when we look at a 50-year horizon
or perhaps, at the longest, a 100-year horizon.
We next investigate the longer-run relationship between income and democracy. But
before doing this, we discuss an alternative explanation for our results.

5.2

Hypothesis 2: Divergent Development Paths

The second possible explanation, which we find more appealing than hypothesis 1, is that
the positive cross-sectional relationship reflects relatively time-invariant, historical factors
that have influenced the economic and political development path of societies. There are
reasons to expect that economic and political development processes should be related.
For example, economic institutions encouraging economic growth are unlikely to develop
and endure in societies where political power is in the hands of a small elite, who can
exercise it to further their interests, even if this is at the cost of aggregate economic
growth.
18

Moreover, events during certain critical junctures may have large and persistent effects on income and democracy because of their influence on the economic and political
development paths of societies. Consequently, part of the variation in both prosperity and
political institutions that we observe today may be the result of some societies having embarked on a path of development based on relatively democratic political and economic
institutions encouraging growth, while other societies ended up with repressive regimes
controlled by narrow elites, which engendered neither prosperity nor democracy.
The contrast between European colonies in Latin America, such as Peru and Bolivia,
and the North American colonies illustrates the potential eﬀects of key events during
critical junctures. All of these societies were colonized by Europeans after 1492, but the
exact colonization strategy diﬀered a great deal. While smallholder societies, with the
majority of the population enjoying access to land, secure property rights, and economic
opportunities soon developed in the North American colonies, a highly coercive society,
based on the exploitation and enslavement of the indigenous peoples, emerged in Peru and
Bolivia (potential reasons for these diﬀerences in the colonization experience are discussed
in Section 7). Moreover, these early diﬀerences in economic and political institutions have
shown a considerable degree of persistence. While the United States and Canada have
remained democratic and grown rapidly over the past 300 years, the political and economic
record of Peru and Bolivia has been much more checkered. Hypothesis 2 implies that to
understand the relationship between income and democracy, we need to look at the events
and factors influencing institutional equilibria at critical junctures, in this case during the
early phases of colonialism.

5.3

Implications and Discussion

Which of these two hypotheses is closer to the truth? We are unable to answer this
question definitively at the moment, but two empirical exercises are informative. The first
strategy is to look at the longer-run relationship between income and democracy, while
the second strategy is to look directly at potential determinants of divergent historical
development paths, which we turn to in Section 7.
Both hypotheses suggest that the longer-run relationship should be more positive, but
for very diﬀerent reasons, and potentially at very diﬀerent horizons. In particular, according to hypothesis 2, the source of the correlation is the events during critical junctures,
so the time interval should include dates spanning these junctures. In the context of
the modern economic and political development experience, this means that the positive
long-run relationship should emerge (or become more pronounced) in a data set covering
19

the era before the 19th century rather than a window of 50 or 100 years during the recent
past.
To clarify the main issues, let us return to the statistical model in equations (2) and (3).
In the context of these equations, our emphasis on political and economic development
paths diverging at some critical juncture corresponds to large and correlated shocks υ dit and
υ yit at some t = T ∗ , which will then have a persistent eﬀect on democracy and prosperity
because of the unit root in η dit and η yit (the implicit assumption that these shocks happen
at some common date t = T ∗ for all countries is only for simplicity).
Now imagine we have data for two time periods again, t = T − S and t = T . Time-

diﬀerencing equations (2) and (3), we obtain:

diT − diT −S = γ (yiT − yiT −S ) + η diT − η diT −S + udiT − udiT −S ,

(10)

and
yiT − yiT −S = η yiT − η yiT −S + uyiT − uyiT −S .

¡
¢
Recall that the variances of υ yi and uyi are denoted by σ 2υy and σ 2uy , and we have Cov udit , uyit+k =
¢
¡
¢
¡
0, Cov υ yit , υ yit+k = 0, and Cov υ dit , υ dit+k = 0 for all i and k 6= 0. Moreover, let
¢
¡
Cov υ diT ∗ , υ yiT ∗ = σ 2T ∗ be positive and large, capturing the importance of a major event
aﬀecting both economic and political outcomes at this critical juncture. To contrast with
¢
¡
this, suppose that Cov υ dit , υ yit = σ 2∼T ∗ for t 6= T ∗ , which we presume to be small and
¡
¢
positive, and in particular much smaller than σ 2T ∗ . Suppose also that Cov υ dit , υ yit+k = 0
for all i and k 6= 0. Now consider the fixed eﬀects estimator γ̂ FS E , where the time span is

given by S. Standard arguments imply that the probability limit of this estimator using
these two data points is:
plimγ̂ FS E

³P
´
PT
T
y
d
Cov
υ
,
υ
t=T −S it
t=T −S it
´
³P
= γ+
¡ d
¢
T
y
d
Var
t=T −S υ it + Var uiS − ui0
=

½

γ+

σ 2∼T ∗
2
σ υy +2σ 2uy /S
σ 2T ∗ −σ2∼T ∗ /S+σ2∼T ∗
σ 2υy +2σ 2uy /S

γ+
(

)

(11)

if T ∗ ∈
/ [T − S, T ]
,
∗
if T ∈ [T − S, T ]

where the second equality exploits the fact that υ i ’s and ui ’s are serially uncorrelated.
Equation (11) has three important implications. First, as S increases, the bias of the
fixed eﬀects estimator and the predicted positive relationship between income and democracy increases (and as S becomes smaller, plimγ̂ FS E approaches γ). This is because, as S
increases, the non-persistent shocks to income, which are uncorrelated with democracy,
become less important relative to the component correlated with democracy, υ yit , and this
20

reduces the denominator through the term 2σ 2uy /S. Second, and more important, when
the time span from t = T − S to t = T includes the critical juncture T ∗ , we expect a

stronger positive relationship between income and democracy, since σ 2T ∗ − σ 2∼T ∗ > 0. This
is relevant in interpreting why we see a positive relationship between these two variables
during some horizons but not others. Finally, under hypothesis 2, the bias of (11) will

be reduced if we are able to control variables that proxy for or are correlated with the
common component in υ diT ∗ and υ yiT ∗ (in practice, historical determinants of divergent
development paths).

6

Democracy and Income in the Long Run

6.1

Democracy and Income Over the past 160 Years

Although historical data are typically less reliable than postwar data, the Polity IV dataset
extends back to the beginning of the 19th century (for countries that were then independent), and Maddison (2003) gives estimates of income for many countries from around
1820. Using these data, we construct a 5-yearly and a 10-yearly dataset between 1840 and
1940. Countries that gained and maintained independence before 1900 and have more
than 5 observations in the 1840 to 1940 data period are included in this dataset. The
result is an unbalanced panel with a country entering when there are observations from
both Polity and Maddison.19
Table 9, Panel A reports some basic regressions with this dataset. In column 1,
pooled cross-sectional OLS regressions again show the conventional result, with income
per capita having a positive and significant sign. Column 2 adds fixed eﬀects and similar
to our results above, the coeﬃcient estimate on income per capita becomes insignificant.
Column 3 uses GMM and column 4 excludes lagged democracy, again with similarly
insignificant results.
Columns 5 and 6 repeat the regressions from columns 2 and 3 using ten-year instead of
five-year intervals. We use this strategy to check whether the lack of a significant eﬀect of
income on democracy is caused by measurement error or country noise in democracy over
the five-year horizon, and also to investigate whether there could be an eﬀect of income
on democracy at lower frequencies than over 5 years. The basic results are identical to
those in the first four columns of the table.
19

The countries in this section are Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Japan, México, Netherlands, Norway,
Perú, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela.

21

The conclusion from this investigation is that the pre-1940 evolution of countries in
Europe and Latin America is similar to the results from the post-1960 sample. Once we
control for fixed eﬀects, there is no significant relationship between income per capita and
democracy.
We further investigate these ideas in Panels B and C by taking the same sample of
countries and extending the dataset to 2000 (thus constructing a 160-year panel with 28
countries). Without fixed eﬀects, higher per capita income is again strongly associated
with greater democracy. In this 160-year sample, there is also a positive coeﬃcient on
log GDP per capita when we control for fixed eﬀects, though this relationship is not
robust to estimation via GMM in the five-year sample. Figure 4 depicts the change in the
Polity composite index versus the change in log GDP per capita between 1870 and 1995
(dates chosen to maximize sample size), and shows a positive but insignificant relationship
between these dates.20
Further investigation suggests that the results in the 1840-2000 panel are partly driven
by one country, Venezuela, especially the postwar correlation between income per capita
and democracy in Venezuela.21 Further investigation suggests that the correlation between
the Venezuelan GDP and democracy over the relevant period is related to increases in oil
revenues–not the type of income variation generally thought to promote democratization.
In particular, there is a close association between oil income and democracy in Venezuela,
but not between non-oil income and democracy (details are available upon request). Panel
C therefore repeats the regressions in Panel B without Venezuela. In this case, though
the estimate of the coeﬃcient on income per capita remains positive, it is no longer
statistically significant.

6.2

Democracy and Income Over the past 500 Years

Next we push the reasoning in equation (11) further. Our discussion of hypothesis 2
suggests that if we could construct a longer dataset, spanning the critical junctures for
divergent development paths, we should obtain a stronger relationship. Although no
existing dataset spans more than 160 years of political development, there exist rough
estimates of income per capita for almost all areas of the world in 1500. Moreover, we
20

The corresponding regression yields the coeﬃcients of 0.076, with a standard error of 0.123. Parallel
with our treatment of the very long run below, we also looked at the relationship over the period 18701995 assigning the lowest Polity score to countries without Polity data. We found only a small and
marginally significant coeﬃcient on income in the full sample, and a small and insignificant coeﬃcient
for former European colonies, which we discuss further below. Details are available upon request.
21
In Tables 2-8, Venezuela did not have a disproportionate eﬀect on the results because these regressions
included a considerably larger set of countries than Table 9.

22

also have information about the variation in political institutions around the turn of the
16th century. While no country was fully “democratic” according to current definitions,
there were significant diﬀerences in the political institutions of countries around the world
even at this date. In particular, most countries outside Europe were ruled by absolutist
regimes while some European countries had developed certain constraints on the behavior
of their monarchs.
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2004b) provide a coding of constraint on the executive for European countries (based on the Polity definition) going back to 1500 from
various sources. It also appears reasonable to assume that constraint on the executive for
non-European countries and the other components of the Polity index (competitiveness
of executive recruitment, openness of executive recruitment, and competitiveness of political participation) both for European and non-European countries should take the lowest
score in 1500. Based on this information, we can construct the Polity Composite index
for 1500 (details available upon request). Combining these data with estimates of income
per capita, we can get a glimpse of the relationship between income and democracy over
this 500-year interval.
This is done in Figure 5 using Maddison’s (2003) estimates of income per capita in
1500.22 The figure shows a strong positive relationship between changes in democracy
and changes in income for 143 countries (1995 is used as the end date in the plot and in
Table 10 to maximize sample size). This plot corresponds to a fixed eﬀect regression from
1500 to 1995 with only two time periods, of the form:
∆di,1995−1500 = γ 0 + γ∆yi,1995−1500 + ∆ui .
This regression is reported in column 1 of Table 10, and yields a large and statistically
significant estimate of γ, 0.139 (standard error = 0 .033). Column 2 estimates the same
relationship this time assigning the lowest democracy score to all countries in 1500, and
shows a very similar estimate. The rest of Table 10 will be discussed below.
Overall, the very long-run evidence shows an association between democracy and
income, but this correlation is not present or quite weak when we look at samples of 100
years or so. We interpret this evidence as consistent with hypothesis 2. Hypothesis 1
would have suggested a strong eﬀect even in the 100- or 140-year data sets. In contrast,
22
For this exercise, when Maddison (2003) provides estimates for individual countries, we use these
estimates. When he provides estimates for broad geographic areas, we assign this estimate to all countries
now occupying these territories without country-level data. We take into account the cross-correlation
in the right hand side variable by clustering the standard errors at the data aggregation level for each
country.

23

hypothesis 2 would suggest the stronger relationship should emerge once we consider
a time interval suﬃciently long to span the critical junctures leading to the divergent
development paths. In this case, the fact that a strong relationship emerges when we look
at a 500-year period, but not when we only go back to the mid-19th century, is consistent
with this view.

7

Understanding the Fixed Eﬀects

We now directly investigate the potential determinants of divergent development paths.
If we can pinpoint these potential determinants and their influence on the relationship
between income and democracy, this would be evidence supporting hypothesis 2. Moreover, as suggested in Section 5, if we can directly control for these historical factors or
their proxies, the positive correlation between income and democracy should weaken.

7.1

Divergent Development Paths Among the Colonies

Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001, 2002) document that factors aﬀecting the profitability of diﬀerent institutional structures for European colonizers had a major impact
on early institutions, and on subsequent political and economic development. They emphasize that two factors aﬀecting colonial strategies, and therefore the subsequent development paths, were the mortality rate faced by potential European settlers and the population density of indigenous peoples before colonization (in practice around 1500). Higher
mortality rates discouraged Europeans from settling, and made an extractive strategy,
associated with coercive and non-participatory institutions, more likely. More denselysettled areas also discouraged European settlements, and even conditional on settlements,
encouraged the establishment of coercive institutions designed to control the indigenous
population and to transfer resources from them.
We next use these ideas in the sample of former European colonies, where European
intervention created a potentially exogenous source of divergence in political and economic
development paths. We examine the eﬀects of both the density of the indigenous population in 1500 (population density in 1500, for short) and of settler mortality.23 We expect
countries with high rates of settler mortality and higher indigenous population density
in 1500 to have experienced greater extraction of resources and repression by Europeans,
23

Population density in 1500 is calculated by dividing the historical measures of population from
McEvedy and Jones (1975) by the area of arable land (see Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2002).
Finally, data on settler mortality are from Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001), who constructed it
based on research by Philip Curtin and other historians (e.g., Curtin, 1989, 1998, and Gutierrez, 1986).

24

and consequently to be less democratic today. However, both population density in 1500
and European settler mortality rates are subject to a large amount of measurement error,
and are only some of the influences on the ultimate development path. For example, for
various reasons, Europeans opted for extractive institutions in many areas, such as Brazil,
with low population density. Therefore, a direct measure of institutions immediately after
the end of the colonial period is also useful to gauge the eﬀect of the historical conditions
on current outcomes. For this reason, we look at the measure of constraint on the executive from the Polity IV dataset right at (soon after) independence for each former colony,
measured as the average score during the first ten years after independence.24 This is the
closest variable we have to a measure of institutions during colonialism. We normalize
this score to a 0 to 1 scale like democracy, with 1 representing the highest constraint on
the executive.
Finally, we also control for the date of independence. This is useful because constraint
on the executive at diﬀerent dates of independence may mean diﬀerent things, so it is
important to control for the date of independence. In addition and potentially more
important, countries where Europeans settled and developed secure property rights and
more democratic institutions typically gained their independence earlier than colonies
with extractive institutions. Another important eﬀect of the date of independence on
political and economic development might be that former colonies undergo a relatively
lengthy period of instability after independence, adversely aﬀecting both growth prospects
and democracy.

7.2

Historical Variables and Fixed Eﬀects

Figures 6-9 show that the fixed eﬀects in the democracy regressions are closely linked to
the historical determinant and proxies for divergent development paths among the former
European colonies.25 In particular, they show a strong association between the fixed
eﬀects, and respectively, settler mortality rates, the density of the population in 1500,
constraint on the executive at (shortly after) independence, and year of independence.
These figures suggest that the fixed eﬀects are indeed related to the conditions which
contributed to the divergent development paths of these countries.
24

Data on date of independence are from the CIA World Factbook (2004). For detailed data definitions
and sources see Appendix Table A1. The data on constraint on the executive from Polity begins in 1800
or at the date of independence. In our former colonies sample only one country, the United States became
independent before 1800. The United States broke with Britain in 1776 and was recognized as a new
nation following the Treaty of Paris in 1783. We code the U.S. date of independence as 1800.
25
These fixed eﬀects are from the regression for the former colonies sample in column 2 of Table 11.

25

Tables 11 further documents this point using regression evidence. The first two
columns show the pooled OLS and fixed eﬀects relationship between income and democracy in the sample of former European colonies.26 As in the other samples, there is a
strong cross sectional relationship between income and democracy, but no evidence of a
causal eﬀect with fixed eﬀects in the sample of former European colonies.
The remaining columns of Tables 11 show that when the four proxies for the evolution
of the development path are included in regressions without fixed eﬀects, the influence of
income per capita on democracy is substantially weakened and in many specifications, it
disappears. For example, when all four of settler mortality, population density in 1500,
constraint on executive at independence and independence year are included in column 6,
or when only the last three variables are included, there is no longer a significant eﬀect of
income per capita on democracy.27 Table A3 in the Appendix shows similar results using
the Polity data set.
These results suggest that the fixed eﬀects, which account for the cross-sectional relationship between income and democracy, are closely related to colonial history in the
sample of former European colonies. As such, they lend support to hypothesis 2, which
emphasizes the importance of divergent economic and political development paths.

7.3

Revisiting the Very Long Run

In the light of these findings, we now return to the positive relationship in the 500-year
sample shown in Table 10. We have so far argued that this relationship was consistent
with hypothesis 2, since it was precisely during this period that countries embarked upon
divergent development paths. A further check on hypothesis 2 would be that when we
include the historical variables emphasized in the previous section, the 500-year relationship between income and democracy in the former European colonies sample should again
26

We adopt the definition of former European colonies used in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001,
2002), which excludes the Middle Eastern countries that were briefly colonized by European powers during
the 20th century. This definition is motivated by our interest in former colonies as a sample where the
process of institutional development, in particular during the 19th century and earlier, was shaped by
European intervention (see Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2002). The results are robust to including
the Middle Eastern countries.
27
We also investigated whether other time-invariant characteristics that have been emphasized in the
previous literature, in particular, identity of the colonizer, legal origin, religion or latitude, have explanatory power for democracy once the fixed eﬀects are removed in the sample of former colonies. We found
that none of them have any eﬀect on democracy when the historical determinants emphasized in this
section are included in the regressions. Furthermore, we added more lags of democracy on the right hand
side, and constraint on the executive at independence remained significant, suggesting that this variable
does not capture some slow dynamics in democracy, but is instead related to the political and economic
development path of the former colonies. Results are available upon request.

26

weaken or even disappear. This is investigated in the rest of Table 10.
Column 3 shows a similar relationship between change in income and change in democracy to that shown in Figure 5 and in column 1 among the former European colonies.
The remaining columns show that the positive relationship disappears when we include
the historical variables emphasized in the previous section. For example, in column 7
when all four of population density in 1500, settler mortality, constraint on executive at
independence and independence year are included, the coeﬃcient on ∆y1500,1995 becomes
essentially zero (-0.006, standard error = 0.054) instead of 0.126 in column 3. This is
illustrated in Figure 10 which depicts the relationship between changes in democracy and
changes in income in former colonies conditional on these four historical factors. This
evidence also supports hypothesis 2.

8

Economic Crises and Democracy

Our analysis so far shows that income seems to have little predictive power for the overtime variation (at the five- or ten-year frequencies) in democracy in the postwar sample.
In this section, we document that there are some predictable movements in changes in
democracy.
A number of theories, including Haggard and Kaufman (1995) and Acemoglu and
Robinson (2004), emphasize economic crises as events destabilizing both democratic and
nondemocratic regimes, and leading to regime transitions. The overall eﬀect on the level of
democracy is ambiguous, and depends on whether the destabilizing eﬀect on democracies
or nondemocracies is greater.28
We investigate this issue in Table 12. We define an economic crisis as a sudden and
sharp decline in growth relative to five years ago. More specifically, there is an economic
crisis at time t − 1 if the change in the five-yearly average growth rate of GDP per capita

in any year in the five-year period between t − 1 and t − 2 is less than a certain threshold
−∆y.29 We choose the threshold ∆y as 3 percent (columns 1 and 2), 4 percent (columns

3 and 4) or 5 percent (columns 5 and 6). These thresholds are motivated by the fact that
28

Various empirical papers in the political science literature, for instance Gasiorowski (1995) and Przeworski et al. (2000) have investigated the impact of crises on regime transitions. However, this research
has not attempted to control for omitted variables or for the endogeneity of income.
29
Recall that the time period, t, refers to five year intervals. The years s between t − 2 and
P t − 1 are s ∈
[5t − 10, 5t − 6]. We denote the forward average five-year growth rate in year s by ∆ỹs = 5j=1 ∆ys+j /5,
and define a crisis during year s as occuring if ∆ỹs − ∆ỹs−5 < −∆y. This means that we need 15 years
of data on income per capita preceding the democracy observation, and our sample in Table 12 starts in
1965.

27

one standard deviation of this variable is equal to 4 percent.
The dependent variable in Panel A is the Freedom House democracy score. The results
in Panel A show that, again contrary to the predictions of modernization theory, economic
crises make democracy more likely. This result at first looks paradoxical. How could crises
make democracy more likely?
Panels B and C show why this is so: economic crises have a small, and typically not
statistically significant, eﬀect on transitions away from democracy, but a large eﬀect on
transitions away from nondemocracy to democracy. In other words, economic crises cause
dictatorships to fall, thus increasing the likelihood of democracy. To document this, we
take a simple approach and create two variables measuring movements towards and away
from democracy. In particular, equation (1) is modified as follows:
0
d+
it = αdit−1 + γyit−1 + xit−1 β + µt + δ i + uit

(12)

for transitions to democracy and
0
d−
it = αdit−1 + γyit−1 + xit−1 β + µt + δ i + uit

(13)

−
30
for transitions from democracy, where d+
it = max {dit , dit−1 } and dit = min {dit , dit−1 }.

This procedure implies that for d+
it , we only consider upward movements in the democracy
score and ignore declines in democracy, whereas d−
it only considers deterioration in the
democracy score. A full analysis of democratic transitions is beyond the scope of this
paper. For our purposes here, it is suﬃcient to note that estimation of these equations with
fixed eﬀects (OLS or GMM) finds no evidence that income per capita has a causal eﬀect
on either transitions to or transitions away from democracy. However, these estimates
suggest that economic crises which enter into x0it−1 do have an eﬀect on transitions to
democracy.31
Using these definitions, in Panels B and C, we investigate the relationship between
economic crises and transitions to and away from democracy. The estimates show that
economic crises make dictatorships more likely to transition to democracy, but have a
much smaller eﬀect on transitions away from democracy. These two results combined
together explain why economic crises are found to lead to greater democracy in Panel
A.32
30

Although (12) and (13) are non-linear equations, the fixed eﬀects, the δ i ’s, enter additively and can
be diﬀerenced out to achieve consistent estimation.
31
We did not find any robust results using this definition of crises on the 160 year sample discussed in
Section 6.
32
A natural question is whether growth accelerations have a similar eﬀect on regime change. A recent

28

9

Conclusion

The conventional wisdom in the political economy literature that income per capita has
a causal eﬀect on democracy. In this paper, we argue that, though income and democracy are positively correlated, there is no evidence of a causal eﬀect. Instead, omitted,
most probably historical, factors appear to have shaped the divergent political and economic development paths of various societies, leading to the positive association between
democracy and economic performance. Consequently, regressions that include country
fixed eﬀects and/or instrumental variable regressions show no evidence of a causal eﬀect of
income on democracy. These results shed considerable doubt on the conventional wisdom
both in the academic literature and in the popular press that income causes democracy,
and a general increase in income per capita will bring improvements in institutions.
This result immediately leads to an important question: why are richer countries more
democratic today? We provided evidence that this is likely to be because the political and
economic development paths are interwoven. Some countries appear to have embarked
upon a development path associated with democracy and economic growth, while others
pursued a path based on dictatorship, repression and more limited growth. Consistent
with this, in the sample of former European colonies where we have good measures of
the historical sources of variation in development paths, we showed that the fixed eﬀects
indeed capture the impact of these historical diﬀerences.
In emphasizing the importance of historical development paths, we do not want to
suggest that there is a historical determinism in political institutions. The fixed eﬀects
in the regressions, and the development paths in theory, create a tendency, but many
other factors influence equilibrium political institutions. In the last section, we showed
how severe economic crises lead to the collapse of dictatorships, making democracy more
likely. The most important area for future research is a further investigation of the
eﬀect of these time-varying and human factors on the evolution of equilibrium political
institutions.
paper by Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik (2004) emphasizes the importance of growth accelerations.
We also investigated the eﬀect of growth accelerations in a symmetric way to economic crises by creating
a dummy for acceleration if the change in the five-yearly average growth rate of GDP per capita in any
year between t − 2 and t − 1 is above a certain threshold ∆y (again 3 percent, 4 percent or 5 percent).
None of these specifications showed any eﬀect of growth accelerations on democracy.

29

10

Appendix

This Appendix describes the construction of the trade-weighted world income instrument
used in Section 4. First, we describe the instrument constructed from actual trade shares.
Second, we describe the instrument derived from gravity-predicted trade shares. Finally,
we describe our method of adjusting for the potential bias caused by the general equilibrium nature of equation (6).
First, we measure the matrix Ω = [ω ij ]i,j using actual trade shares between 1980 and
1989. These dates are chosen to maximize coverage. Bilateral trade data are from from
the International Monetary Fund Direction of Trade Statistics (DoT) (2005) CD-ROM.
Let Xijs denote the total trade flow between i and j in year s, meaning the sum of exports
from i to j and exports from j to i in year s. We calculate Xijs for all country pairs in
year s for which both flows from i to j and from j to i are available. These flows can be
measured using either FOB exports from i to j or CIF imports by j from i. When both
are available, we take the average, and otherwise we use whichever measure is available.
All trade data are deflated into 1983 US dollars using the US CPI from International
Financial Statistics (2004).
Let Yis∗ denote the total GDP of country i in year s in 1983 US dollars obtained from
Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002), and Iij be the number of years between 1980 and 1989

for which bilateral data between i and j are available. Our main measure of Ω = [ωij ]i,j
is:

where Xiis = 0 by definition.

¶
1989 µ
1 X Xijs
ω ij =
,
Iij s=1980 Yis∗

Since we have an unbalanced panel, we construct our instrument defined in (7) as
follows. Define Ijt−1 = {0, 1} as an indicator for Yjt−1 being available in the dataset.
Then

Ybit−1 = ζ

Ã

N
X

ω ij Ijt−1 Yjt−1

j=1,j6=i

!Ã

PN

PN

j=1,j6=i

ω ij

j=1,j6=i Ijt−1 ω ij

!

,

(14)

where Yjt−1 is log income as before. The third term in (14) ensures that the sum of
the weights ωij are the same across time for a given country i, and this adjustment
term is equal to 1 in a balanced panel. We measure trade-weighted democracy d˜it in an
analogous fashion using (14), where we substitute djt for Yjt−1 and let Ijt−1 now represent
an indicator referring to the availability of the variable djt .
Second, we generate an alternate measure of Ω, ΩG , from the following gravity equation

30

as in Frankel and Romer (1999):
log (ω ij ) = β 0 + β 1 IijB + β 2 Zij + β 3 IijB Zij +

ij ,

(15)

where Zij is a vector of country-pair level covariates, IijB is a dummy variable which equals
1 if the two countries share a land border, and

ij

is an error term where E ( ij ) = 0. Zij

includes the following covariates: dummy if i is landlocked, dummy if j is landlocked,
log distance between i and j, log area of i, log area of j, log population of i, and log
b0 , β
b1 , β
b2 , and β
b3 ,
population of j.33 We estimate (15) using OLS. With our estimates of β
£
¤
we construct ΩG = ω G
ij i,j where:
´
³
B
b0 + β
b1 I B + β
b2 Zij + c
ωG
,
=
exp
β
β
I
Z
ij
3 ij
ij
ij

bG
We can use ωG
ij in an analogous fashion to build an alternate instrument Yit−1 now using
gravity estimated weights:

G
=ζ
Ybit−1

Ã

N
X

ωG
ij Yjt−1

j=1,j6=i

!Ã

PN

PN

j=1,j6=i

ω ij

G
j=1,j6=i Ijt−1 ω ij

!

,

(16)

where second and third terms of (16) represent a gravity-weighted average of world income
P
34
where the sum of the weights is actual trade openness N
j=1,j6=i ω ij .

Finally, for the adjustment in (9), we estimate (6) using actual trade shares in a

specification which includes a full set of time and country dummies and using the same
sample in the second stage in Table 7 column 4:
Yit−1 = ζ

N
X

ω ij Yjt−1 + εit−1 , where εit−1 = µ0t−1 + δ 0i + u0it−1 .

j=1,j6=i

This provides us with an estimate of³ζ̂ and ε̂´it−1 . We then use (9) to create an adjusted
instrument. In inverting the matrix I − ζ̂Ω , we drop the ith row and ith column of Ω
whenever ω ij is unavailable for any j.

33
As in Frankel and Romer (1999), we constrain the coeﬃcients on the two landlocked dummies to
be the same. For this exercise, area is from CIA (2004). Population is the average log population from
1980 to 1989 from WDI (2002). Landlocked, contiguity, and distance are from Glick and Rose (2002).
Detailed results are available upon request.
34
Results are similar if the sum of the weights is predicted openness. Results are available upon request.

31

11

Bibliography

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001) “The Colonial
Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic
Review, December, 91, 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2002) “Reversal
of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income
Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1231-1294.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2004a) “Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth,” NBER Working Paper #10481,
forthcoming in Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf eds. Handbook of Economic Growth,
Amsterdam; North-Holland.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2004b) “Rise
of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Economic Growth” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson and Pierre Yared
(2005) “From Education to Democracy?” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, forthcoming.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2004) Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.
Acemoglu, Daron and Jaume Ventura (2002) “The World Income Distribution,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 659-694.
Anderson, Theodore W. and Cheng Hsiao (1982) “Formulation and Estimation
of Dynamic Models using Panel Data,” Journal of Econometrics, 18, 67-82.
Arellano, Manuel and Stephen R. Bond (1991) “Some Specification tests for
Panel Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Studies, 58, 277-298.
Arellano, Manuel and Olympia Bover (1995) “Another Look at the Instrumental
Variables Estimation of Error-Component Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 68, 29-51.
Barro, Robert J. (1997) The Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country
Empirical Study, Cambridge; MIT Press.
Barro, Robert J. (1999) “The Determinants of Democracy,” Journal of Political
Economy, 107, S158-S183.
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee (2000) “International Data on Educational
Attainment: Updates and Implications,” CID Working Paper #42.

32

Baxter, Marianne (1995) “International Trade and Business Cycles,” in Gene M.
Grossman and Kenneth Rogoﬀ eds. Handbook of International Economics, Amsterdam;
North-Holland.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004) “How
Much Should we Trust Diﬀerences-in-Diﬀerences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 249 - 275.
Bollen, Kenneth A. (1979) “Political Democracy and the Timing of Development,”
American Sociological Review, 44, 572-587.
Bollen, Kenneth A. (1990) “Political Democracy: Conceptual and Measurement
Traps,” Studies in Comparative International Development, 25, 7-24.
Bollen, Kenneth A. (2001) “Cross-National Indicators of Liberal Democracy, 19501990,” [Computer file]. 2nd ICPSR version. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina
[producer], 1998. Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor].
Central Intelligence Agency (2004) CIA World Factbook, Website and Book.
Washington, DC.
Curtin, Philip D. (1989) Death by Migration: Europe’s Encounter with the Tropical
World in the Nineteenth Century, Cambridge University Press, New York NY.
Curtin, Philip D. (1998) Disease and Empire: The Health of European Troops in
the Conquest of Africa, Cambridge University Press, New York NY.
Dahl, Robert A. (1971) Polyarchy: Participation and Opposition, New Haven; Yale
University Press.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloﬀ (1997) “Factor Endowments,
Institutions, and Diﬀerential Paths of Growth among New World Economies,” in Stephen
H. Haber ed. How Latin America Fell Behind, Stanford; Stanford University Press.
Frankel, Jeﬀrey A. and David Romer (1999) “Does Trade Cause Growth?,”
American Economic Review, 89, 379-399.
Freedom House (2004) Freedom in the World, Website and Book. Washington,
DC.
Gasiorowski, Mark J. (1995) “Economic Crises and Political Regime Change: An
Event History Analysis,” American Political Science Review, 89, 882-897.
Glick, Reuven and Andrew K. Rose (2002) “Does a Currency Union Aﬀect
Trade?: The Time-Series Evidence,” European Economic Review, 46, 1125-1151.
Gutierrez, Hector (1986) “La Mortalite des Eveques Latino-Americains aux XVIIe
et XVIII Siecles,” Annales de Demographie Historique, 29-39.
33

Haggard, Stephan and Robert R. Kaufman (1995) The Political Economy of
Democratic Transitions, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten (2002) Penn World Tables
Version 6.1. Center for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania
(CICUP).
Hausman, Jerry (1978) “Specification Tests in Econometrics,” Econometrica, 46,
1251-1271.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Lant Pritchett and Dani Rodrik (2004) “Growth Accelerations,” NBER Working Paper #10566.
Huntington, Samuel P. (1991) The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late
Twentieth Century, University of Oklahoma Press, Norman OK.
International Monetary Fund (2005) Direction of Trade Statistics, Database and
Browser CD-ROM. Washington, D.C.
International Monetary Fund (2004) International Financial Statistics, Database
and Browser CD-ROM. Washington, D.C.
Jones, Eric L. (1981) The European Miracle: Environments, Economies, and Geopolitics in the History of Europe and Asia, Cambridge University Press, New York.
Kraay, Aart and Jaume Ventura (2001) “Comparative Advantage and the CrossSection of Business Cycles,” NBER Working Paper #8104.
Lipset, Seymour M. (1959) “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic
Development and Political Legitimacy,” American Political Science Review, 53, 69-105.
Londregan, John B. and Keith T. Poole (1996) “Does High Income Promote
Democracy?” World Politics, 49, 1-30.
Maddison, Angus (2003) The World Economy: Historical Statistics, Development
Centre of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris, France.
Marshall, Monty G. and Keith Jaggers (2004) “Political Regime Characteristics
and Transitions, 1800-2002,” Polity IV Project. University of Maryland.
McEvedy, Colin and Richard Jones (1975) Atlas of World Population History,
Facts on File, New York.
Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti (2004) “Economic
Shocks and Civil Conflict: An Instrumental Variables Approach,” Journal of Political
Economy, 112, 725-753.
Moulton, Brent R. (1986) “Random Group Eﬀects and the Precision of Regression
Estimates,” Journal of Econometrics XXXII, 385-397.
North, Douglass C. (1981) Structure and Change in Economic History, New York;
34

W.W. Norton & Co.
North, Douglass C. and Robert P. Thomas (1973) The Rise of the Western
World: A New Economic History, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
Papaioannou, Elias and Gregorios Siourounis (2004) “Economic and Social
Factors Driving the Third Wave of Democratization” mimeo, London Business School.
Przeworski, Adam, Michael Alvarez, José A. Cheibub and Fernando Limongi
(2000) Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and material well-being in the
world, 1950-1990, Cambridge University Press, New York NY.
Przeworski, Adam and Fernando Limongi (1997) “Modernization: Theory and
Facts,” World Politics, 49, 155-183.
Rodrik, Dani (1999) “Democracies Pay Higher Wages,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 707-738.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1950) Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, New York,
Harper & Brothers.
United Nations Population Division (2003) World Population Prospects: The
2002 Revision, Disk. New York.
Vaart, A. W. van der (1998) Asymptotic Statistics, Cambridge University Press;
Cambridge.
Wooldridge, Jeﬀery M. (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel
Data, MIT Press; Cambridge.
World Bank (2002) World Development Indicators, CD-ROM and Book. Washington, DC.

35

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics

All countries
(1)

Former
Colonies
(2)

High Income
Countries
(3)

Low Income
Countries
(4)

Freedom House Measure
of Democracyt

0.57
(0.36)

0.47
(0.34)

0.78
(0.30)

0.36
(0.30)

Polity Measure
of Democracyt

0.57
(0.38)

0.50
(0.35)

0.80
(0.30)

0.36
(0.31)

8.16

7.85

9.02

7.30

(1.02)

(0.89)

(0.56)

(0.53)

Log GDP per Capita t-1
(1990 dollars )

7.92
(1.05)

7.62
(0.93)

8.84
(0.61)

7.08
(0.55)

Savings Rate t-2

0.17
(0.13)

0.16
(0.14)

0.22
(0.10)

0.11
(0.14)

Trade-Weighted World
Log GDP t-1

11.61
(8.43)

11.09
(9.30)

13.02
(9.83)

10.28
(6.60)

473

472

Log GDP per Capita t-1
(Chain Weighted 1996 Prices)

Constraint on the Executive
at Independence

0.38
(0.35)

Independence Year

1911
(65)

Log Population Density in 1500

0.41
(1.60)

Log Settler Mortality

4.75
(1.20)

Observations

945

541

Values are averages during sample period, with standard deviations in parentheses. All countries are those for which
democracy, lag democracy, and lag income in five-year intervals are available at least once during 1960-2000, for the
Freedom House measure of democracy. A country must be independent for at least 5 years. Column 1 refers to the sample in
the regression in Table 2, column 1. Column 2 refers to the sample in Table 11 column 1. Columns 3 and 4 split the sample in
column 1 by the median income (from Penn World Tables 6.1) in the sample of column 1. Freedom House Measure of
Democracy is the Political Rights Index, augmented following Barro (1999). Polity Measure of Democracy is Democracy
Index minus Autocracy Index from Polity IV. GDP per capita in 1996 prices with PPP adjustment is from the Penn World
Tables 6.1; GDP per capita in 1990 Geary-Khamis dollars is from Maddison (2003). Nominal Savings Rate is from Penn
World Tables 6.1 and is defined as nominal income minus consumption minus government expenditure divided by nominal
income (not PPP). Trade-Weighted World log GDP is constructed as in equation (7) using data from IMF Direction of Trade
Statistics (2005) and Penn World Tables 6.1. Constraint on the Executive at Independence is from Polity. Year of
independence is from the CIA World Factbook. Log Population Density in 1500 is from Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
(2002). Log Settler Mortality is from Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001). Former colonies is the subsample colonized
by European powers before 1900. For detailed definitions and sources, see Appendix Table A1.

Table 2
Fixed Effects Results using Freedom House Measure of Democracy
Base Sample, 1960-2000
5-year data

Annual data
Arellano-Bond Fixed Effects
Fixed Effects
GMM
OLS
OLS
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable is Democracy
0.489
[0.00]
(0.085)

Pooled OLS
(1)

Fixed Effects
OLS
(2)

AndersonHsiao IV
(3)

Democracy t-1

0.706
(0.035)

0.379
(0.051)

0.469
(0.100)

Log GDP per Capita t-1

0.072
(0.010)

0.010
(0.035)

-0.104
(0.107)

-0.129
(0.076)

838
127

[0.26]
[0.45]
838
127

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries
R-squared

945
150
0.73

945
150
0.80

0.054
(0.046)

958
150
0.76

[0.33]

2895
148
0.93

10-year data
Fixed Effects Arellano-Bond
OLS
GMM
(7)
(8)
-0.025
(0.088)

0.226
(0.123)

0.053
(0.066)

-0.318
(0.180)

457
127
0.77

[0.07]
[0.96]
338
118

Pooled cross-sectional OLS regression in column 1, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in columns 2, 5, 6, and 7, with country
dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Column 3 uses instrumental variables method of Anderson and Hsiao (1982), with clustered standard errors, and
columns 4 and 8 use GMM of Arellano and Bond (1991), with robust standard errors; in both methods we instrument for income using a double lag. Year dummies are included in all
regressions. Dependent variable is augmented Freedom House Political Rights Index. Base sample is an unbalanced panel, 1960-2000, with data at 5-year intervals, where the start date of the
panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); column 6 uses annual data from the same sample; a country must be independent for 5 years before it enters the panel.
Columns 7 and 8 use 10-year data from the same sample, where as before the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1950); a country must be independent
for 10 years before it enters the panel. In column 6, each right hand side variable has five annual lags; we report the p-value from an F-test for the joint significance of all 5 lags. For detailed
data definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.

Table 3
Fixed Effects Results using Polity Measure of Democracy
Base Sample, 1960-2000
5-year data

Annual data
Arellano-Bond Fixed Effects
Fixed Effects
GMM
OLS
OLS
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable is Democracy
0.590
[0.00]
(0.106)

Pooled OLS
(1)

Fixed Effects
OLS
(2)

AndersonHsiao IV
(3)

Democracy t-1

0.749
(0.034)

0.449
(0.063)

0.582
(0.127)

Log GDP per Capita t-1

0.053
(0.010)

-0.006
(0.039)

-0.413
(0.163)

-0.351
(0.127)

747
114

[0.03]
[0.39]
747
114

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries
R-squared

854
136
0.77

854
136
0.82

-0.011
(0.055)

880
136
0.77

[0.53]

3701
134
0.96

10-year data
Fixed Effects Arellano-Bond
OLS
GMM
(7)
(8)
0.060
(0.091)

0.309
(0.134)

0.007
(0.070)

-0.368
(0.190)

419
114
0.77

[0.01]
[0.38]
302
107

Pooled cross-sectional OLS regression in column 1, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in columns 2, 5, 6, and 7, with country
dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Column 3 uses instrumental variables method of Anderson and Hsiao (1982), with clustered standard errors, and
columns 4 and 8 use GMM of Arellano and Bond (1991), with robust standard errors; in both methods we instrument for income using a double lag. Year dummies are included in all
regressions. Dependent variable is Polity Composite Democracy Index. Base sample is an unbalanced panel, 1960-2000, with data at 5-year intervals, where the start date of the panel refers to
the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); column 6 uses annual data from the same sample; a country must be independent for 5 years before it enters the panel. Columns 7 and 8 use
10-year data from the same sample, where as before the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1950); a country must be independent for 10 years before it
enters the panel. In column 6, each right hand side variables has five annual lags; we report the p-value from an F-test for the joint significance of all 5 lags. For detailed data definitions and
sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.

Table 4
Fixed Effects Results using Freedom House Measure of Democracy: Alternate Samples

Balanced Panel, 1970-2000
Annual
data
5-year data
Fixed
ArellanoFixed
Effects
Bond
Effects
OLS
GMM
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
Democracy t-1

0.283
(0.058)

0.472
(0.092)

[0.00]

Log GDP per Capita t-1

-0.031
(0.049)

-0.262
(0.128)

[0.52]

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries
R-squared

630
90
0.80

[0.40]
[0.73]
567
81

2328
97
0.93

Base Sample, 1960-2000, without Base Sample, 1960-2000, without
Sub-Saharan African Countries
Muslim Countries
Annual
Annual
data
data
5-year data
5-year data
Fixed
ArellanoFixed
Fixed
ArellanoFixed
Effects
Bond
Effects
Effects
Bond
Effects
OLS
GMM
OLS
OLS
GMM
OLS
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Dependent Variable is Democracy
0.410
0.520
[0.00]
0.397
0.563
[0.00]
(0.060)
(0.096)
(0.051)
(0.080)
0.069
(0.043)

660
107
0.78

0.044
(0.084)
[0.31]
[0.83]
591
85

[0.80]

1943
105
0.93

0.030
(0.035)

774
122
0.81

-0.070
(0.074)
[0.25]
[0.91]
693
104

[0.54]

2358
122
0.94

Base Sample, 1960-2000, without
Former Socialist Countries
Annual
data
5-year data
Fixed
ArellanoFixed
Effects
Bond
Effects
OLS
GMM
OLS
(10)
(11)
(12)
0.362
(0.052)

0.436
(0.085)

[0.00]

0.005
(0.035)

-0.151
(0.078)

[0.25]

908
128
0.79

[0.34]
[0.49]
823
124

2766
127
0.93

Fixed effects OLS regressions in columns 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, and 12 with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Columns 2, 5, 8, and 11 use GMM of Arellano
and Bond (1991), with robust standard errors; in this method we instrument for income using a double lag. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is augmented Freedom House
Political Rights Index. Base sample is an unbalanced panel, 1960-2000, with data at 5-year intervals in levels where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955);
columns 3, 6, 9, and 12 use annual data from the same sample; a country must be independent for 5 years before it enters panel. In columns 3, 6, 9, and 12 each right hand side variables has five annual
lags; values in brackets are the p-value from an F-test of the joint significance of all 5 lags. Columns 1-3 use a balanced panel from 1970 to 2000. Columns 4-6 exclude sub-Saharan African countries.
Columns 7-9 exclude countries where the percent of the population which is Muslim in 1980 exceeds 40 percent. Columns 10-12 exclude Soviet bloc countries. For detailed data definitions and sources see
Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.

Table 5
Fixed Effects Results using Freedom House Measure of Democracy: Alternate Covariates
Base Sample, 1960-2000
5-year data

Pooled OLS
(1)

Fixed Effects
OLS
(2)

ArellanoBond GMM
(3)

Democracy t-1

0.687
(0.039)

0.353
(0.053)

0.480
(0.087)

Log GDP per Capita t-1

0.066
(0.014)

0.015
(0.041)

-0.008
(0.139)

0.047
(0.020)

-0.001
(0.049)

Log Population t-1

0.001
(0.005)

-0.109
(0.100)

-0.001
(0.113)

-0.001
(0.006)

Education t-1

Age Structure t-1
Barro (1999) Covariates
Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries
R-squared

Fixed Effects
ArellanoPooled OLS
OLS
Bond GMM
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable is Democracy
0.625
0.351
0.499
(0.044)
(0.055)
(0.097)

Pooled OLS
(7)

Fixed Effects
OLS
(8)

ArellanoBond GMM
(9)

0.619
(0.042)

0.352
(0.050)

0.475
(0.088)

-0.121
(0.182)

0.061
(0.017)

-0.042
(0.045)

-0.126
(0.130)

-0.042
(0.108)

0.049
(0.143)

0.005
(0.006)

-0.070
(0.112)

-0.016
(0.163)

0.012
(0.005)

-0.007
(0.020)

-0.020
(0.026)

0.022
(0.007)

-0.006
(0.038)

-0.011
(0.052)

YES

YES

YES

[0.00]

[0.05]

[0.63]

[0.06]

[0.19]

[0.27]

NO

NO

NO

NO

NO

NO

863
142
0.72

863
142
0.80

[0.08]
[0.43]
731
120

676
95
0.70

676
95
0.77

[0.15]
[0.88]
589
92

676
96
0.70

676
96
0.76

[0.25]
[0.75]
588
92

Pooled cross-sectional OLS regressions in columns 1, 4, and 7, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in columns 2, 6, and 8, with country
dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. GMM of Arellano-Bond in columns 3, 6, and 9, with robust standard errors; in this method we instrument for income using
a double lag. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is augmented Freedom House Political Rights Index. Base sample is an unbalanced panel, 1960-2000, with data at
5-year intervals, where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); a country must be independent for 5 years before it enters the panel. Education is
average years of total schooling in the population in columns 4-6. Education is average years of primary schooling in the population in columns 7-9. Columns 1-6 include but do not display the
median age of the population at t-1 and 4 covariates corresponding to the percent of the population at t-1 in the following age groups: 0-15, 15-30, 30-45, and 45-60. The age structure F-test is
gives the p-value for the joint significance of these variables. Columns 7-9 include but do not display additional covariates used by Barro (1999): male-female education gap and urbanization rate,
and significant oil producer dummy (the last is in column 7 only). For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.

Table 6
Fixed Effects Results using Freedom House Measure of Democracy: Two Stage Least Squares with Savings Rate Instrument
Base Sample, 1960-2000

Pooled OLS
(1)
Panel A
Democracy t-1
Log GDP per Capita t-1

0.233
(0.013)

Without SubSaharan Africa
All Countries
Fixed Effects Fixed Effects Fixed Effects Fixed Effects
ArellanoFixed Effects
OLS
OLS
2SLS
2SLS
Bond GMM
2SLS
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Dependent Variable is Democracy
0.359
0.363
0.427
(0.054)
(0.056)
(0.100)
0.044
(0.051)

0.009
(0.038)

-0.035
(0.094)

-0.020
(0.081)

-0.228
(0.102)

-0.045
(0.130)

Labor Share t-1

All Countries
Fixed Effects Fixed Effects Fixed Effects
2SLS
2SLS
2SLS
(8)
(9)
(10)
[0.00]

-0.036
(0.191)

-0.074
(0.113)

0.250
(0.199)

Panel B
Democracy t-1

First Stage for Log GDP per Capita

t-1

0.144
(0.066)

[0.24]

Labor Share t-1

0.329
(0.187)

Savings Rate t-2

1.356
(0.277)

1.343
(0.270)

1.483
(0.320)

1.202
(0.315)

1.173
(0.254)

Savings Rate t-3
Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries
R-squared in First Stage

0.016
(0.095)

1.022
(0.218)
0.720
(0.182)

900
134

900
134

891
134

900
134
0.96

891
134
0.96

[0.34]
[0.72]
764
124

627
92
0.96

471
98
0.98

733
124
0.97

796
125
0.97

Pooled cross-sectional OLS regression in column 1, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in columns 2 and 3 with country dummies and robust standard errors
clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects 2SLS regressions in columns 4, 5, 7, 8, and 9 with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses; first stage regressions are displayed in
Panel B and include all second stage covariates (apart from income) on the right hand side with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. GMM of Arellano-Bond in column 6 with robust standard errors; in
this method we instrument for income in the first differenced equation with the first difference of the instrument. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is augmented Freedom House Political
Rights Index. Base sample is an unbalanced panel, 1960-2000, with data at 5-year intervals, where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); a country must be independent for 5
years before it enters the panel. Column 7 excludes sub-Saharan African countries. Columns 4-10 instrument for Log GDP per Capitat-1 with Savings Rate t-2. Column 10 includes Savings Rate t-3 as an additional instrument.
Column 9 includes but does not display Democracyt-1 , Democracyt-2, and Democracyt-3 ; we report the p-value from an F-test for the joint significance of all 3 lags. For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and
Appendix Table A1.

Table 7
Fixed Effects Results using Freedom House Measure of Democracy: Two Stage Least Squares with Trade-Weighted World Income Instrument
Base Sample, 1960-2000

Pooled OLS
(1)
Panel A
Democracy t-1

Log GDP per Capita t-1

0.233
(0.013)

Without SubSaharan
Africa
All Countries
Fixed Effects Fixed Effects Fixed Effects Fixed Effects
ArellanoFixed Effects
OLS
OLS
2SLS
2SLS
Bond GMM
2SLS
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Dependent Variable is Democracy
0.376
0.393
0.478
(0.051)
(0.057)
(0.094)
0.038
(0.045)

0.001
(0.034)

-0.213
(0.150)

-0.120
(0.105)

-0.133
(0.077)

-0.219
(0.178)

Trade-Weighted World Democracy t

All Countries
Fixed Effects Fixed Effects Fixed Effects
2SLS
2SLS
2SLS
(8)
(9)
(10)

-0.202
(0.130)

-0.217
(0.149)

-0.137
(0.635)
First Stage for Log GDP per Capita

Panel B
Democracy t-1

t-1

0.169
(0.063)

Trade-Weighted World Democracy t

-1.195
(0.959)

Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-1

0.402
(0.083)

0.421
(0.082)

0.320
(0.063)

0.441
(0.070)

Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-2

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries
R-squared in First Stage

-0.198
(0.160)

906
124

906
124

895
124

906
124
0.95

895
124
0.96

[0.19]
[0.50]
812
122

616
81
0.95

906
124
0.95

0.529
(0.180)
0.341
(0.090)

-0.127
(0.206)

906
124
0.95

906
124
0.95

Pooled cross-sectional OLS regression in column 1, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in columns 2 and 3 with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in
parentheses. Fixed effects 2SLS regressions in columns 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses; first stage regressions are displayed in Panel B and include all second stage
covariates excluding income on the right hand side with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. GMM of Arellano-Bond in column 6 with robust standard errors; in this method we instrument for income in the first differenced
equation with the first difference of the instrument. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is augmented Freedom House Political Rights Index. Base sample is an unbalanced panel, 1960-2000, with data at 5-year
intervals, where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); a country must be independent for 5 years before it enters the panel. Column 7 excludes sub-Saharan African countries. Columns 5-8
instrument for Log GDP per Capita t-1 with Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-1. Column 9 uses Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-2 as an alternative instrument. Column 10 includes both Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-1 and TradeWeighted World Log GDP t-2 as instrument. For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1. See Appendix for details on the construction of the instruments.

Table 8
Fixed Effects Results using Freedom House Measure of Democracy: Two Stage Least Squares with Trade-Weighted World Income Instrument Robustness Checks
Base Sample, 1960-2000 without
Singapore
Fixed
Fixed
ArellanoEffects
Effects
Bond
2SLS
2SLS
GMM
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A
Democracy t-1

Log GDP per Capita t-1

-0.348
(0.326)

Panel B
Democracy t-1

Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-1

0.410
(0.069)

0.482
(0.093)

-0.215
(0.217)

-0.124
(0.079)

Base Sample, 1960-2000
Fixed
Fixed
ArellanoFixed
Effects
Effects
Bond
Effects
2SLS
2SLS
GMM
2SLS
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Dependent Variable is Democracy
0.393
0.478
(0.057)
(0.094)
-0.213
(0.151)

-0.119
(0.105)

-0.133
(0.078)

ArellanoBond
GMM
(9)

0.394
(0.057)

0.478
(0.095)

-0.127
(0.107)

-0.134
(0.082)

First Stage for Log GDP per Capita t-1
0.170
(0.063)
0.394
(0.182)

0.169
(0.063)

0.173
(0.063)

0.422
(0.182)

Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-1 with 2 Step Adjustment for Bias

0.403
(0.085)

0.421
(0.083)

Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-1 with Gravity Estimated Weights

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries
R-squared in First Stage

-0.237
(0.168)

Fixed
Effects
2SLS
(8)

0.396
(0.101)

899
123
0.95

888
123
0.95

[0.30]
[0.50]
805
121

906
124
0.95

895
124
0.96

[0.19]
[0.50]
812
122

906
124
0.95

0.418
(0.099)

895
124
0.96

[0.22]
[0.50]
812
122

Fixed effects 2SLS regressions in columns 1, 2, 4, 5, 7 and 8 with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses; first stage regressions are displayed in Panel B and include all second stage
covariates excluding income on the right hand side with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. GMM of Arellano-Bond in columns 3, 6, and 9 with robust standard errors; in this method we instrument
for income in the first differenced equation with the first difference of the instrument. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is augmented Freedom House Political Rights Index. Base sample is an
unbalanced panel, 1960-2000, with data at 5-year intervals, where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); a country must be independent for 5 years before it enters the panel.
Columns 1-3 exclude Singapore. Columns 1-3 instrument for Log GDP per Capita t-1 with Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-1. Columns 4-6 instrument for Log GDP per Capita t-1 with Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-1
with a 2 Step Adjustment for Bias; this is constructed using the same sample as Table 7, column 4 and following a procedure described in Section 4.2 of the text and in the Appendix. Columns 7-9 instrument for Log GDP
per Capita t-1 with Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-1 with Gravity Estimated Weights (using Frankel and Romer, 1999 specification). For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1. See
Appendix for details on the construction of the instruments.

Panel A: All Countries
Democracy t-1

Log GDP per Capita t-1

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries
R-squared
Panel B: All Countries
Democracy t-1

Log GDP per Capita t-1

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries
R-squared
Panel C: Without Venezuela
Democracy t-1

Log GDP per Capita t-1

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries
R-squared

Table 9
Polity Measure of Democracy in the Long Run
5-year data
10-year data
Fixed Effects Arellano-Bond Fixed Effects
Fixed Effects Arellano-Bond
Pooled OLS
OLS
GMM
OLS
OLS
GMM
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable is Democracy, 1840-1940
0.841
0.652
0.433
0.455
0.230
(0.039)
(0.089)
(0.121)
(0.136)
(0.238)
0.072
(0.017)

358
28
0.78

-0.076
(0.064)

-0.183
(0.090)

-0.109
(0.107)

-0.035
(0.135)

[1.00]
[0.40]
297
27

-0.092
(0.287)
[1.00]
[0.05]
142
28

0.772
(0.043)

358
370
188
28
28
28
0.81
0.69
0.75
Dependent Variable is Democracy, 1840-2000
0.682
0.443
0.407
(0.070)
(0.096)
(0.082)

0.287
(0.104)

0.081
(0.015)

0.066
(0.032)

0.176
(0.112)

656
28
0.79

-0.041
(0.033)

0.135
(0.072)

0.134
(0.070)

[1.00]
[0.83]
578
28

[1.00]
[0.93]
285
28

0.771
(0.045)

656
682
342
28
28
28
0.80
0.63
0.70
Dependent Variable is Democracy, 1840-2000
0.673
0.427
0.400
(0.074)
(0.099)
(0.085)

0.244
(0.105)

0.078
(0.015)

0.041
(0.030)

0.099
(0.147)

637
27
0.78

637
27
0.80

-0.058
(0.034)
[1.00]
[0.91]
562
27

0.104
(0.079)

662
27
0.63

0.076
(0.068)

331
27
0.69

[1.00]
[0.96]
276
27

Pooled cross-sectional OLS regression in column 1, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in
columns 2, 4, and 5, with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Column 3 and 6 use GMM of Arellano and Bond
(1991), with robust standard errors; in both methods we instrument for income using a double lag. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent
variable is Polity Composite Democracy Index. Base sample is all countries with at least 5 observations in the 5-year data between 1840 and 1900 and
which are independent by 1900. Columns 1-4 use 5-year data where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1840, so t-1=1835); a
country must be independent for 5 years before it enters the panel. Columns 5 and 6 use 10-year data where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent
variable (i.e., t=1840, so t-1=1830); a country must be independent for 10 years before it enters the panel. Panel A uses a long sample, 1840-1940, Panels B
and C use 1840-2000. Panel C drops Venezuela. GDP per capita is from Maddison (2003). For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and
Appendix Table A1.

Table 10
Polity Measure of Democracy in the Very Long Run
Base Sample, 1500-1995
Former European Colonies, 1500-1995
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Dependent Variable is Change in Democracy Over Sample Period

OLS
(8)

All countries in 1500 assumed to have the lowest possible democracy score

Change in Log GDP per Capita Over Sample Period

0.139
(0.033)

0.148
(0.035)

0.126
(0.025)

0.097
(0.019)

0.048
(0.024)

-0.006
(0.054)

-0.002
(0.047)

Constraint on the Executive at Independence

0.131
(0.075)

0.139
(0.109)

0.154
(0.077)

Independence Year/100

-0.222
(0.020)

-0.211
(0.028)

-0.204
(0.013)

-0.047
(0.043)

-0.057
(0.044)

Log Population Density in 1500

-0.066
(0.042)

Log Settler Mortality

Observations
R-squared

0.065
(0.042)

-0.053
(0.016)
143
0.17

143
0.18

78
0.15

65
0.23

-0.030
(0.030)
78
0.22

78
0.28

65
0.41

78
0.33

Cross-section OLS regression in all columns, with robust standard errors clustered by aggregation level of the region for GDP per Capita in 1500. In columns 3-8 data represents all available values
in the former colonies sample for which Constraint on the Executive at Independence, Independence Year, and Log Population Density in 1500 are available. Changes are total differences between
1500 and 1995. GDP per capita is from Maddison (2003), and democracy is calculated using the Polity Composite Democracy Index, which comprises in part constraint on the executive. Column 1
assumes some democracy in 1500 in a few European countries, following Acemoglu et al (2004b). Democracy in 1500 is assigned to lowest possible score for all countries in columns 2-8. For
detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.

Table 11
Effect of Historical Factors on Democracy: Former Colonies, using Freedom House Measure of Democracy
Former European Colonies
Balanced
Panel 19702000

Unbalanced Panel, 1960-2000
Pooled OLS
(1)

Fixed Effects
(2)

Democracy t-1

0.672
(0.048)

Log GDP per Capita t-1

0.059
(0.014)

(7)

(8)

0.283
(0.062)

Pooled OLS
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable is Democracy
0.636
0.668
0.573
0.538
(0.050)
(0.050)
(0.047)
(0.049)

0.567
(0.047)

0.471
(0.064)

-0.088
(0.050)

0.039
(0.017)

0.025
(0.013)

0.016
(0.018)

0.012
(0.014)

0.008
(0.020)

Constraint on the Executive at Independence

0.170
(0.030)

0.178
(0.030)

0.175
(0.028)

0.212
(0.036)

Independence Year/100

-0.101
(0.016)

-0.101
(0.018)

-0.098
(0.016)

-0.135
(0.022)

-0.011
(0.007)

-0.013
(0.006)

-0.019
(0.010)

541
80
0.65

336
48
0.63

Log Population Density in 1500

-0.013
(0.007)

Log Settler Mortality

Observations
Countries
R-squared

0.046
(0.015)

-0.033
(0.011)
541
80
0.62

541
80
0.72

486
68
0.63

-0.009
(0.010)
541
80
0.62

541
80
0.65

486
68
0.66

Pooled cross-sectional OLS in columns 1 and 3-8, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in column 2, with country
dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is augmented Freedom House
Political Rights Index. Data are at 5-year intervals, for former European colonies. Columns 1-7 are an unbalanced panel in levels where the start date of the panel refers to the
dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); a country must be independent for 10 years before it enters the panel. Column 8 is a balanced panel from 1970 to 2000; a
country must be independent by 1960 to enter the panel and first lagged value is 1965. In all columns, data represents all available values in the former colonies sample for
which Constraint on the Executive at Independence, Independence Year, and Log Population Density in 1500 are available. For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1
and Appendix Table A1.

Panel A
Democracy t-1

Table 12
Fixed Effects Results for Crises, using Freedom House Measure of Democracy
Base Sample, 1965-2000
Fixed Effects Arellano-Bond Fixed Effects Arellano-Bond Fixed Effects Arellano-Bond
OLS
GMM
OLS
GMM
OLS
GMM
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Crisis threshold is -3%
Crisis threshold is -4%
Crisis threshold is -5%
Dependent Variable is Democracy
0.347
0.493
0.356
0.495
0.354
0.496
(0.056)
(0.090)
(0.056)
(0.089)
(0.055)
(0.089)

Log GDP per Capita t-1

-0.003
(0.047)

-0.141
(0.088)

0.003
(0.047)

-0.148
(0.091)

0.009
(0.047)

-0.155
(0.092)

Crisis t-1

0.044
(0.019)

0.057
(0.024)

0.059
(0.021)

0.063
(0.026)

0.074
(0.025)

0.096
(0.029)

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
R-squared
Panel B
Democracy t-1

[0.41]
[0.73]

[0.58]
[0.74]

0.602
(0.038)

0.79
0.79
Dependent Variable is Transition toward Democracy
0.697
0.609
0.698
0.607
(0.062)
(0.039)
(0.062)
(0.038)

0.699
(0.062)

Log GDP per Capita t-1

-0.004
(0.034)

-0.067
(0.062)

0.001
(0.034)

-0.071
(0.064)

0.005
(0.034)

-0.079
(0.066)

Crisis t-1

0.038
(0.014)

0.045
(0.016)

0.045
(0.016)

0.051
(0.018)

0.049
(0.020)

0.067
(0.021)

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
R-squared
Panel C
Democracy t-1

0.79

[0.46]
[0.57]

[0.05]
[0.23]
0.89

[0.04]
[0.35]

[0.04]
[0.18]

0.744
(0.038)

0.89
0.89
Dependent Variable is Transition away from Democracy
0.796
0.747
0.796
0.747
(0.054)
(0.038)
(0.054)
(0.038)

0.797
(0.053)

Log GDP per Capita t-1

0.001
(0.023)

-0.074
(0.057)

0.002
(0.022)

-0.076
(0.058)

0.003
(0.022)

-0.076
(0.058)

Crisis t-1

0.006
(0.011)

0.012
(0.014)

0.014
(0.011)

0.013
(0.015)

0.025
(0.011)

0.029
(0.017)

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
R-squared

[0.14]
[0.51]
0.93

Observations
Countries

739
124

[0.16]
[0.47]
0.93

659
122

739
124

[0.21]
[0.48]
0.93

659
122

739
124

659
122

Fixed effects OLS with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in columns 1, 3, and 5; GMM of Arellano-Bond in columns
2, 4, and 6, with robust standard errors; in this method we instrument for income and for crises using a double lag. Year dummies are included in all
regressions. The dependent variable in Panel A is the augmented Freedom House Political Rights Index, in Panel B, Transition towards Democracy,
calculated as max(d it,d it-1) from this Index, and in Panel C Transition away from Democracy, calculated as min(d it,d it-1) from this Index. Base
sample is an unbalanced panel, 1965-2000, with data at 5-year intervals in levels where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable
(i.e., t=1965, so t-1=1960). Countries must be independent for 15 years before they enter the panel. Crisis is a dummy variable corresponding to a
change in the growth rate by more than a threshold. In columns 1 and 2 the threshold is –3%, in columns 3 and 4 the threshold is –4%, and in
columns 5 and 6 the threshold is –5%. See text for details. For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.

Appendix Table A1
VARIABLE
Freedom House Political
Rights Index, also refered to
here as Freedom House
Measure of Democracy

SOURCE
DESCRIPTION
Data for 1972-2000 in Freedom House Political Rights Index, original range http://www.freedomhouse.org/ratings/, and Bollen (2001)
1,2,3,…,7 normalized 0-1. Data for 1972 used for 1970. Data for 1950, 1955, "Cross National Indicators of Liberal Democracy 19501960 and 1965, in Bollen, original range 0.00,0.01,…0.99,1. Transitions to
1990" available on ICPSR
democracy are calculated as max((d it,d it-1) and transitions to non-democracy
are calculated as min(d it,d it-1).

Polity Composite
Democracy Index, also
refered to here as the Polity
Measure of Democracy
Polity Composite
Democracy Index in 1500

Data for 1840-2000 in Polity IV. The composite index is the democracy score http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/
minus the autocracy score. Original range -10,-9,...10, normalized 0-1.

GDP per Capita (Chain
Weighted 1996 Prices)
GDP per Capita (1990
dollars)
Population
Education

Age Structure

Male-Female Education
Gap
Urbanization Rate
Significant Oil Producer
Savings Rate

Labor Share

Constructed using constraint on the executive score from Acemoglu, Johnson,
and Robinson (2004) for the sample of European countries. Components of
the index other than constraint on the executive are assigned a value of zero
for all countries.
Data for 1950-2000 measured as Log Real GDP per Capita (Chain Method in
1996 prices) from Penn World Tables 6.1.
Data for 1800-2000 measured as Log Real GDP per Capita (1990 GearyKhamis dollars) from Maddison (2003).
Total population in thousands.
Average total years of schooling in the population aged 25 and over. Data for
1960, 1965,…, 1995 from Barro and Lee. We include average years of
primary schooling in the population aged 25 and over in specifications which
include the same covariates as Barro (1999).
Data for 1950, 1955,…, 2000 from United Nations Population Division
(2002). These variables are median age of the population and fraction of the
population 5 different age ranges: 0 to 15, 15 to 30, 30 to 45, 45 to 60, and 60
and above.
Gap between male and female primary schooling in the population aged 25
and over. Data for 1960, 1965,…,1995 from Barro and Lee.
Percent of population living in urban areas, 0-1 scale.
"1" if country is described by IMF as oil exporting. This is used as opposed to
OPEC in line with Barro (1999).
Data for 1950-2000 measured as (Y-G-C)/Y from Penn World Tables 6.1
where Y is nominal income, C is nominal consumption, and G is nominal
government spending.
Labor share of value added from Rodrik (1999). 0-1 scale.

Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2004)

http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/
http://www.eco.rug.nl/~Maddison/
World Bank (2002)
Barro and Lee (2000) available at
http://www.cid.harvard.edu/ciddata/ciddata.html

United Nations Population Division (2003)

Barro and Lee (2000) available at
http://www.cid.harvard.edu/ciddata/ciddata.html
World Bank (2002)
following Barro (1999)
http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/

Rodrik (1999)

VARIABLE
DESCRIPTION
Trade-Weighted World Log Constructed using GDP per Capita from Penn World Tables 6.1 and average
GDP
trade shares between 1980 and 1989 from International Monetary Fund
Direction of Trade Statistics (2005) according to procedures described in
Appendix.

SOURCE
http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/ and IMF DoTS CD-ROM
(2005)

Trade-Weighted World
Democracy

http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/, IMF DoTS CD-ROM (2005),
and http://www.freedomhouse.org/ratings/, and Bollen
(2001) "Cross National Indicators of Liberal Democracy
1950-1990" available on ICPSR

Constructed using Freedom House Political Rights Index, GDP per Capita
from Penn World Tables 6.1, and average trade shares between 1980 and
1989 from International Monetary Fund Direction of Trade Statistics (2005)
according to procedures described in Appendix.

Trade-Weighted World Log Constructed using GDP per Capita from Penn World Tables 6.1 and average
GDP with Gravity
trade shares between 1980 and 1989 from International Monetary Fund
Estimated Weights
Direction of Trade Statistics (2005) according to procedures described in
Appendix. Additional data for estimation of the gravity equation from CIA
World Factbook (2004), World Development Indicators (2002), and Glick and
Rose (2002). Using the same specification as in Frankel and Romer (1999).
See Appendix for more details.

http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/, IMF DoTS CD-ROM (2005),
http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/, World
Bank (2002), and
http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/arose/RecRes.htm#Softw
are

Constraint on the Executive Data in Polity IV, original range 1,2,3...7, normalized 0-1. Calculated as the http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/
at Independence
average of constraint on the executive in a country during the first 10 years
after its independence (ignoring missing data). If data for the first 10 years
after independence is missing, we find the first year these data are available in
Polity, then average over the following ten years (ignoring missing data).
Year when country became independent, with any year before 1800 coded as CIA World Factbook (2004) available at
http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/
1800. We coded Taiwan's independence year to 1948 and changed
Zimbabwe's independence year to 1964. Classification of countries follows
Polity.
Population Density in 1500 Indigenous population divided by arable land in 1500.
Acemoglu et al (2002)
Independence year

Settler mortality
Religion

Historical mortality rates of potential European settlers.
Percent of population in 1980 which is (1) Catholic, (2) Protestant, or (3)
Muslim.

Acemoglu et al (2001)
La Porta et al (1999)

Appendix Table A2
Fixed Effects Results using Polity Measure of Democracy: Two Stage Least Squares
Base Sample, 1960-2000
Fixed Effects Fixed Effects Fixed Effects Fixed Effects
Pooled OLS
OLS
OLS
2SLS
2SLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: Savings Rate Instrument
Dependent Variable is Democracy
Democracy t-1
0.452
0.451
(0.064)
(0.064)
Log GDP per Capita t-1

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries
Panel B: Trade-Weighted World Income Instrument
Democracy t-1

Log GDP per Capita t-1

Hansen J Test
AR(2) Test
Observations
Countries

0.225
(0.014)

827
121

0.227
(0.014)

839
113

-0.009
(0.059)

827
121

-0.035
(0.052)

839
113

-0.003
(0.042)

-0.029
(0.084)

-0.020
(0.075)

804
827
804
121
121
121
Dependent Variable is Democracy
0.440
0.432
(0.063)
(0.070)
-0.022
(0.037)

815
113

-0.417
(0.198)

839
113

ArellanoBond GMM
(6)
0.638
(0.110)
-0.290
(0.127)
[0.02]
[0.38]
673
113
0.589
(0.108)

-0.264
(0.128)

-0.260
(0.117)

815
113

[0.03]
[0.39]
730
112

Pooled cross-sectional OLS regression in column 1, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in columns 2 and 3 with country
dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects 2SLS regressions in columns 4 and 5 with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered
by country in parentheses; first stage regressions are not displayed but are similar in Panel A to Table 6, Panel B, columns 4 and 5, and are similar in Panel B to Table 7, Panel B,
columns 4 and 5. GMM of Arellano-Bond in column 6 with robust standard errors; in this method we instrument for income in the first differenced equation with the first difference of
the instrument. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is Polity Composite Democracy Index. Base sample is an unbalanced panel, 1960-2000, with data at
5-year intervals, where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); a country must be independent for 5 years before it enters the panel. Panel
A, columns 4-6 instrument Log GDP per Capita t-1 with Savings Rate t-2. Panel B, columns 4-6 instrument Log GDP per Capita t-1 with Trade-Weighted World Log GDP t-1. For
detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1. See Appendix for details on the construction of the instruments.

Appendix Table A3
Effect of Historical Factors on Democracy: Former Colonies, using Polity Measure of Democracy
Former European Colonies
Balanced
Panel 19702000

Unbalanced Panel, 1960-2000
Pooled OLS
(1)

Fixed Effects
(2)

Democracy t-1

0.723
(0.047)

Log GDP per Capita t-1

0.043
(0.014)

(7)

(8)

0.354
(0.078)

Pooled OLS
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable is Democracy
0.711
0.720
0.643
0.622
(0.050)
(0.048)
(0.054)
(0.057)

0.637
(0.053)

0.549
(0.083)

-0.056
(0.060)

0.032
(0.017)

0.015
(0.012)

0.009
(0.018)

0.004
(0.013)

-0.010
(0.020)

Constraint on the Executive at Independence

0.131
(0.037)

0.153
(0.037)

0.137
(0.036)

0.169
(0.050)

Independence Year/100

-0.083
(0.016)

-0.087
(0.018)

-0.081
(0.016)

-0.119
(0.029)

-0.009
(0.008)

-0.011
(0.007)

-0.019
(0.010)

514
80
0.70

273
39
0.71

Log Population Density in 1500

-0.010
(0.006)

Log Settler Mortality

Observations
Countries
R-squared

0.032
(0.014)

-0.019
(0.010)
514
80
0.68

514
80
0.76

462
68
0.70

-0.001
(0.010)
514
80
0.69

514
80
0.70

462
68
0.71

Pooled cross-sectional OLS in columns 1 and 3-8, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in column 2, with country
dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is Polity Composite Democracy
Index. Data are at 5-year intervals, for former European colonies. Columns 1-7 are an unbalanced panel in levels where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent
variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); a country must be independent for 10 years before it enters the panel. Column 8 is a balanced panel from 1970 to 2000; a country must be
independent by 1960 to enter the panel and first lagged value is 1965. In all columns, data represents all available values in the former colonies sample for which Constraint on
the Executive at Independence, Independence Year, and Log Population Density in 1500 are available. For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table
A1.

Appendix Table A4
Codes Used to Represent Countries in Figures
Country

Code

Country

Code

Country

Andorra
Afghanistan
Angola
Albania
United Arab Emirates
Argentina
Armenia
Antigua
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Burundi
Belgium
Benin
Burkina Faso
Bangladesh
Bulgaria
Bahrain
Bahamas
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Belarus
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Barbados
Brunei
Bhutan
Botswana
Central African Republic
Canada
Switzerland
Chile
China
Cote d'Ivoire
Cameroon
Congo, Rep.
Colombia
Comoros
Cape Verde
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Germany
Djibouti
Dominica
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Algeria
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Eritrea
Spain
Estonia
Ethiopia
East Timor
Finland
Fiji
France
Gabon
United Kingdom
Georgia

ADO
AFG
AGO
ALB
ARE
ARG
ARM
ATG
AUS
AUT
AZE
BDI
BEL
BEN
BFA
BGD
BGR
BHR
BHS
BIH
BLR
BLZ
BOL
BRA
BRB
BRN
BTN
BWA
CAF
CAN
CHE
CHL
CHN
CIV
CMR
COG
COL
COM
CPV
CRI
CUB
CYP
CZE
DEU
DJI
DMA
DNK
DOM
DZA
ECU
EGY
ERI
ESP
EST
ETH
ETM
FIN
FJI
FRA
GAB
GBR
GEO

Ghana
Guinea
Gambia, The
Guinea-Bissau
Equatorial Guinea
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
Croatia
Haiti
Hungary
Indonesia
India
Ireland
Iran
Iraq
Iceland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Jordan
Japan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kyrgyz Republic
Cambodia
Kiribati
St. Kitts and Nevis
Korea, Rep.
Kuwait
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
St. Lucia
Liechtenstein
Sri Lanka
Lesotho
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Latvia
Morocco
Moldova
Madagascar
Maldives
Mexico
Macedonia, FYR
Mali
Malta
Myanmar
Mongolia
Mozambique
Mauritania
Mauritius
Malawi
Malaysia
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Nicaragua

GHA
GIN
GMB
GNB
GNQ
GRC
GRD
GTM
GUY
HND
HRV
HTI
HUN
IDN
IND
IRL
IRN
IRQ
ISL
ISR
ITA
JAM
JOR
JPN
KAZ
KEN
KGZ
KHM
KIR
KNA
KOR
KWT
LAO
LBN
LBR
LBY
LCA
LIE
LKA
LSO
LTU
LUX
LVA
MAR
MDA
MDG
MDV
MEX
MKD
MLI
MLT
MMR
MNG
MOZ
MRT
MUS
MWI
MYS
NAM
NER
NGA
NIC

Netherlands
NLD
Norway
NOR
Nepal
NPL
New Zealand
NZL
Oman
OMN
Pakistan-post-1972
PAK
Pakistan-pre-1972
PAK_1
Panama
PAN
Peru
PER
Philippines
PHL
Papua New Guinea
PNG
Poland
POL
Korea, Dem. Rep.
PRK
Portugal
PRT
Paraguay
PRY
Qatar
QAT
Romania
ROM
Russia
RUS
Rwanda
RWA
Saudi Arabia
SAU
Sudan
SDN
Senegal
SEN
Singapore
SGP
Solomon Islands
SLB
Sierra Leone
SLE
El Salvador
SLV
Somalia
SOM
Sao Tome and Principe
STP
Suriname
SUR
Slovakia
SVK
Slovenia
SVN
Sweden
SWE
Swaziland
SWZ
Seychelles
SYC
Syrian Arab Republic
SYR
Chad
TCD
Togo
TGO
Thailand
THA
Tajikistan
TJK
Turkmenistan
TKM
Tonga
TON
Trinidad and Tobago
TTO
Tunisia
TUN
Turkey
TUR
Taiwan
TWN
Tanzania
TZA
Uganda
UGA
Ukraine
UKR
Uruguay
URY
United States
USA
Uzbekistan
UZB
St. Vincent and the Grenadines VCT
Venezuela, RB
VEN
Vietnam
VNM
Vanuatu
VUT
Western Samoa
WSM
Yemen
YEM
Yugoslavia - post 1991
YUG
South Africa
ZAF
Congo, Dem. Rep.
ZAR
Zambia
ZMB
Zimbabwe
ZWE

Code

Change in Freedom House Measure of Democracy
-1
-.5
0
.5
1

Figure 1
Change in Democracy and Change in Income, 1970-1995
BEN
MLI
ARG
HND

CAF

ZMB
TGO

GHA
SEN
PER
BDI
TZA

GNQ

VEN

LSO
NPL

COG
BRA

UGA HTIJOR
PHL

AUS
BEL
AUT NOR
CHE
CRI
DZA
DNK
GBR
CAN
FRA
EGY
BRB
GUY
ITA
ISL
IRL
MAR
NZL
SWE
NLD
USA
PRY
TUN
SYR

JAM
SLV CMR
NGA IRN

THA
KOR
TWN

ROM

GAB
MEX
ZAFGIN
ZWE
TTO
URY FIN ISR JPN LUX

CIV
MRTTCD
RWA

NIC

ESP PRT

BOL

NER MDG

ZAR

ECU
GRC
HUN
MWI
PAN

MUS
CYP

BWA
CHN

SGP

CHL
DOM

BFA FJI
COL
GTM
IND
KENTUR
LKA

MYSIDN

SLE

GMB

-1

0
1
Change in Log GDP per Capita (Penn World Tables)

2

See Appendix Table A1 for data definitions and sources. Changes are total difference between 1970 and 1995. Countries are included if they were independent by 1970.
Start and end dates are chosen to maximize the number of countries in the cross-section. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of 0.032
(standard error=0.058), N=102, R 2=0.00.

Figure 2
Change in Polity Measure of Democracy
-1
-.5
0
.5
1

Change in Democracy and Change in Income, 1970-1995
PRT
NIC

LSO
HUNESP
GRC
BRA
PAN
MWI
HTI
PRY
NPL

ARG

NER

MLI
BOL

CAF

COG
MDG

GNQ

TWN
ROM

MEX

ECU
PER
DOM
BEN GIN
THA
JOR
SLVHND
ZMB
TZA
PHL
SEN
DZA
ZAF
TUN
TGO TCD
GUY GAB
IRN
EGY
KOR
CIV
CMRUGA
CYP
MAR
MYS
KEN CHL
GTM URY
MRT
NGA
MUS CHN
TTO FRA
BWA
NZL
NLD
TUR
USA
ITA
ISR
IND
ISL
JPN
NORIRL
IDN
GBR
FIN
SYR
SGP
CHE
CRISWE
DNK
CAN
COL
AUS
BEL
AUT
VEN
RWA JAM
BFA
GHA

FJI

LKA

SLE
ZWE

GMB

-1

0
1
Change in Log GDP per Capita (Penn World Tables)

See notes to Figure 1. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of -0.024 (standard error=0.063), N=98, R2=0.00.

2

Figure 3
MLT
NLD
NOR
GRC
IRLGBR
ITA
ISL
FIN
FRA
ESP
DNK
CYP
DEU
USALUX
PRT
NZL
BRB
CAN
CHE
BEL
AUT
AUS
TTO
SWE
KNA
MUS
JPN
BHS
HUN
ISR
URY

CRI LCA
BLZ
GRD
LTU

DMA
POL
VCT
BWA
EST ARG
LVA
KOR
BGR CHL

CPV

STP

BOL
NAM
PNGJAM
ECU

MNG
BEN
BGD

MDG

HND
IND

NPL

PHL
GUY
DOM
SLV

NIC
LKA
MWI

ZMB CAF

GNB

MOZ

SEN PAK

GHA
LSO
GMB

UGA
BFA
NER
YEM

HTI

TZA
SLE
ETH
ZAR

6

NGA
TGO
TCD
BDI RWA

VEN
BRA
PAN
ZAF
THA
COL

MLI

0

Freedom House Measure of Democracy
.2
.4
.6
.8
1

Democracy and Income, 1990s

KHM
KEN
AGO
MRT

ALB

TWN
RUS

GTM
ROM
TUR
MEX
PRY

ATG
SYC

JOR
FJI

COM

MYS
GAB

PER

SGP

MAR

COG

KWT

ZWE
DJI
EGY
CIV

GIN

TUN
LBN
DZA
IRN
SWZ

IDN

BHR

CMR

LAO
BTN
GNQ
SDN VNM

CHN

SYR

OMN

CUB

SAU

7
8
9
Log GDP per Capita (Penn World Tables)

QAT

10

See Appendix Table A1 for data definitions and sources. Values are averaged by country from 1990 to 1999. GDP per Capita is in PPP terms. The regression represented
by the fitted line yields a coefficient of 0.181 (standard error=0.019), N=147, R 2=0.35.

Figure 4
Change in Democracy and Change in Income, 1870-1995
Change in Polity Measure of Democracy
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

PRT

HUN
URY

BRA

NOR

ITA
AUT SWE

NLD

VEN

DNK

ARG
MEX

JPN

GBR
CAN

BEL

USA
GRC
CHE
CHN

1

1.5
2
2.5
3
Change in Log GDP per Capita (Maddison)

3.5

Log GDP per Capita is from Maddison (2003). See Appendix Table A1 for data definitions and sources. Changes are total difference between 1870 and 1995. Countries
are included if they are in the 200-year sample discussed in Section 6 of the text and were independent by 1870. Start and end dates are chosen to maximize the number
of countries in the cross-section. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of 0.076 (standard error=0.123), N=21, R2=0.02.

Figure 5
1

Change in Democracy and Change in Income, 1500-1995
URY

CRI
LTU
MNG
MDG
NER

NIC

SLV
MDA

BGD ZMB

PRT
SVN
ESP
DEU
AUT
GRC
MUS

PRY

COL SVK ARG

UKR
MKD

BENHND
MOZ

EST

NAM

FIN
CAN USA
NOR
NZL
JPNAUS

BELNLD
ITA TTO
ISR

VEN
TUR
CZE
BWA
BGR
BRA
CHL
POL
HUN
LVA

PAK
PHL
LSO

MWI MLI
HTI

Change in Democracy
.4
.6
.8

ECU ZAF
PAN THA
JAM

BOL

IND

SWE
DNKCHE
GBR
IRL
TWN
FRA
KOR

DOM
GEOALB
COG
LKA ROM

CAF
NPL GNB

RUS

MEX

ARM
GTM

MYS

PER

KHM

BLR
TZA
GIN

SEN
GHA
YEM

TGO
KGZ
TCD

UGA

.2

BFA
RWA
TJK

SGP

JOR
TUN

EGY DZA

CMR

GAB

KAZ
GNQ

KEN
ZWE
CIV
AZE
MRT NGA

HRV
IRN

SLE
SDN
GMB VNMDJI CUBYUG
CHN LBY
MMR
LAO
IDN
MAR

KWT
ARE

PRK

TKM

0

IRQ

UZB
SWZ

BHR

SYR
OMN
QAT

0

1

SAU

2
3
Change in Log GDP per Capita

4

See Appendix Table A1 for data definitions and sources. Changes are total differences between 1500 and 1995. GDP per capita is from Maddison. Democracy is
calculated using the Polity measure of democracy, which comprises in part constraint on the executive; data for 1500 from Acemoglu et al (2004b). The end date is
chosen to maximize the number of countries in the cross-section. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of 0.139 (standard error=0.033), N=143,
R2=0.17, and corresponds to the specification of Table 10, column 1.

Figure 6
Democracy Fixed Effect and Log Settler Mortality
.5

AUS
NZL

USA
CAN

CRI
TTO
VEN

Democracy Fixed Effect
0

URY
ARG
ZAF
MYS
SGP

IND
PAK_1
GUY

PAK

COL
SLV
CHL
BRA
MEX
LKA
PER
ECU
GTM
BOL
HND
PRY
MAR

JAM
PNG
DOM
PAN
NIC
SEN
GAB

BGD
EGY
TUN
DZA

MDG

IDN
GNB
HTI
KEN

GMB

GHA
BEN
CAF
BFA
COG
TZA
CMR
UGA
MRT
AGO
TCD
RWA
BDI
ZAR

NGA
NERSLE
GIN

MLI

CIV
TGO

-.5

VNM

2

4

6
Log Settler Mortality

8

See Appendix Table A1 for data definitions and sources. Country fixed effects are those estimated in the specification of Table 11, column 2 using Freedom House
measure of democracy. PAK_1 refers to Pakistan pre-1972. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of -0.151 (standard error=0.020), N=68,
R2=0.47.

Figure 7
Democracy Fixed Effect and Log Population Density in 1500
.5

CAN
AUS

USA

NZL

CRI
TTO
VEN

Democracy Fixed Effect
0

URY
BWA
ARG

JAM

NAM

ZAF

BRA
SGP

PNG
COL SLV
CHL

MEX
DOM
PHL
PER
MYS
GTMECU
BOL
PAN
HND
NIC

GUY
PRY

IND
PAK_1

SEN

GAB
MDG
ZWE

MOZ

LSO ZMB
CAF

CUB

LKA

MAR
GMB
GHA
IDN DZA TUN
BEN
NGA
BFA
COM
GNB
CIV
SLE

MLI
MWI
NER
HTI
COG
TZAKEN GIN
CMR
MRTTGO
TCD AGO

PAK
BGD
EGY

UGA
KHM

GNQ
ZAR

RWA
BDI

-.5

VNM

-4

-2

0
2
Log Population Density 1500

See notes to Figure 6. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of -0.084 (standard error=0.016), N=80, R2=0.27.

4

Figure 8
Democracy Fixed Effect and Constraint on the Executive at Independence
.5

USA
CAN
AUS
NZL

CRI

TTO

VEN

Democracy Fixed Effect
0

URY
ARG
COL
SLV
MEX
DOM
PER
ECU
BOL
PAN
SGPHND

CHL
BRA
GTM
NIC
PRY

GHA
TUN DZA
CAF
MWI
CIV
HTI
GIN
TCD
KHM
RWA
GNQ
ZAR

NAM
PHL
PAK_1
GUY

MDG
BGD

MOZ
ZMB
BEN

JAM
PNG
ZAF
IND
LKA
MYS

SEN

MAR

GAB

BWA

BFA

GMB

PAK

ZWE
IDN
EGY

LSO
MLI

TGO

NGA

COM
GNB
NER
TZA
CMR COG
MRT
CUB
AGO

SLE
KEN

UGA

BDI

-.5

VNM

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Constraint on the Executive at Independence

See notes to Figure 6. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of 0.370 (standard error=0.079), N=80, R2=0.23.

1

Figure 9
Democracy Fixed Effect and Independence Year
USA

.5

CAN

AUSNZL

CRI

TTO

VEN

Democracy Fixed Effect
0

URY

JAM
BWA

ARG
COL
CHL
MEX

PER
ECU
GTM
BOL
HND
NIC

PNG

ZAF

SLV
BRA

IND
LKA
PHL
MYS
PAK_1

DOM
PAN

PRY

EGY

HTI

-.5

CUB

18

18.5

19
Independence Year/100

NAM

SGP
GUY

SEN
MAR
GAB
MDG
GMB
PAK
BGD
GHA ZWE MOZ
IDN TUNDZA
LSO
ZMB
BEN
CAF
NGA
BFA
COM
MLI
MWI GNB
CIV
SLE
NER
COG
KEN
TZA
CMR
GIN
UGA
TGO
MRT
AGO
TCD
KHM RWA
BDIGNQ
ZAR
VNM

19.5

20

See notes to Figure 6. We divide independence year by 100 in order that the coefficient estimates in Table 11 be visible. The regression represented by the fitted line
yields a coefficient of -0.221 (standard error=0.037), N=80, R 2=0.28.

Figure 10
Change in Democracy
Independent of Historical Factors
-.5
0
.5

Change in Democracy and Change in Income, 1500-1995
Conditional on Historical Factors
NER

BGD

MDG
IND

PAK
MLI JAM
BEN
PAN

CAF GNB

NIC
ZAF
BOL
HTI
TZA

TCD

LAO

MMR

-2

HND

COG
LKA
CRI
ECU NZL
URY
GHACHL
GIN
VEN
SLV
AUS BRA
PRY DOM
TGO
SEN
COL
MYS
CAN
ARG
DZA
MEX
GTM RWA
USA EGY
UGA
CIV
BFA
CMR
NGA
KEN
PER
SDN MRT
MAR
GMB SGP
SLE
VNM

-1

TTO

TUN
GAB

IDN

0
1
Change in Log GDP per Capita
Independent of Historical Factors

2

See Appendix Table A1 for data definitions and sources. Changes are total differences between 1500 and 1995 (see Figure 5 for the construction of these differences) in
the sample of former European colonies which are not predicted in a linear regression by historical determinants of development path: Log Settler Mortality, Log
Population Density in 1500, Constraint on the Executive at Independence, and Independence Year. This corresponds to the residual plot of the regression in Table 10,
column 7 and it yields a coefficient of -0.006 (standard error=0.054), N=65, R 2=0.41.

