                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HEALTH, INFORMATION, AND MIGRATION:
            GEOGRAPHIC MOBILITY OF UNION ARMY VETERANS, 1860-1880

                                               Chulhee Lee

                                          Working Paper 11207
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11207


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




I thank Dora Costa, Joseph Ferrie, Clayne Pope, Richard Steckel, and the participants of the NBER Cohort
Studies-Early Indicators Joint Conference in Salt Lake City (April 2004) for their helpful comments and
suggestions, and Susan Jones for her editorial assistance. I gratefully acknowledge financial support from
the National Institute on Aging, the National Institutes of Health (P01 AG10120). The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2005 by Chulhee Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health, Information, and Migration: Geographic Mobility of Union Army Veterans, 1860-1880
Chulhee Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 11207
March 2005
JEL No. J1, N3, I1

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper explores how injuries, sickness, and geographical mobility of Union Army veterans while
in service affected their post-service migrations. Wartime wounds and illnesses significantly
diminished the geographical mobility of veterans after the war. Geographic moves while carrying
out military missions had strong positive effects on their post-service geographic mobility.
Geographic moves while in service also influenced the choice of destination among the migrants.
The farther into the South a veteran had traveled while in service, the higher the probability that he
would migrate to the South. Furthermore, these migrants to the South were more likely to settle in
a state they had entered while in service. Increased general knowledge about geographical transfer
itself, greater information on distant lands and labor markets, and reduced psychological cost of
moving were probably important mechanisms by which prior mobility affected subsequent
migration. I discuss some implications of the results for the elements of self-selection in migration,
the roles of different types of information in migration decisions, and the overall impact of the Civil
War on geographic mobility.

Chulhee Lee
School of Economics
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
chullee@snu.ac.kr
1. Introduction
        This paper explores how medical events and geographic mobility of Union Army
veterans while in service affected their post-war migration. The main purpose of the present
research is to understand the effects of health and information on migration decisions in
nineteenth-century America. It is widely accepted that information is a key determinant of
geographic mobility and location choice. Health is an important element of a person’s
human capital that can affect both the cost and benefit of migration. Only a few studies
have explicitly investigated the effect of information on migration, and those have relied
mostly on highly indirect measures of information, such as the extent of chain migration.
Even less is known about the link between health and geographic mobility. To my
knowledge, this study is the first to attempt to consider explicit measures of health and
information together with other conventional variables on human capital attributes as
determinants of migration.
        The longitudinal data on Union Army veterans used in this study provide a unique
opportunity to examine the effects of health and prior mobility on migration. Military
service during the Civil War seriously damaged the health of a large number of recruits who
survived the war. Since most battles were fought in either border or southern states, recruits
from the North were deployed to distant regions along with their regiments, and thus gained
opportunities to obtain first-hand knowledge about other locations. Wounds and illnesses
suffered as well as geographic mobility while carrying out military missions were all
unanticipated exogenous events, not related to the choice or characteristics of the recruits.
By exploiting these special features of wartime experiences, I can mitigate potential
problems of endogeneity and self-selection bias commonly confronted by previous studies
on migration. Also, the data allow a rare opportunity to examine the association between
health and mobility at relatively young ages thanks to the wide variations in wartime
medical experiences.
        My study will significantly deepen our understanding of the determinants of
migration in several ways. First, it provides the very first rigorous evidence of how
particular wounds and diseases influenced the probability of migration and the choice of


                                              
destinations among migrants in the nineteenth-century United States, where geographic
mobility was exceptionally high. It also offers fresh evidence regarding how prior mobility
affected general geographic mobility and choice of destination. In addition, this paper gives
new insights into the question of what kinds of information (e.g., information on passage,
broad regions, and particular localities) mattered in making migration decisions, which has
not been thoroughly explored.
        This study is related to several other important issues in various fields, such as
economic effects of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and economic consequences of
the Civil War. A large number of medical and epidemiological studies have investigated the
persistent effect of wartime stress on health and mortality (Archibald and Tuddenham 1965,
Beebe 1975, Berg and Richlin 1977, Dent et al. 1989, Goulston et al. 1985, Hearst,
Newman, and Hulley 1986, Nefzger 1970, Lund et al. 1984, Smith et al. 1987, Spaulding
1977, Sutker et al. 1991, Ursano 1990). Also, there is a voluminous literature on the effect
of veteran status on measures of economic performance (DeTray 1982, Berger and Hirsch
1983, Schwartz 1986 Angrist 1990). However, little is known about how the extent of
wartime stress or particular wartime events affected later economic mobility. Lee (2003b,
2005) recently found that diseases, wounds, and combat exposure experienced by Union
Army recruits while in service significantly diminished their wealth accumulation between
1860 and 1870. This study will add evidence on the impact of war service on geographic
mobility to the literature.
        Finally, this study will shed new light on our understanding of the economic costs of
the Civil War. Whereas previous studies have mainly focused on the damage during the war
itself (Goldin and Lewis 1975), my analysis of the Union Army data takes into account, in
the estimation of human and physical losses, the persistent effects of military service on the
economic mobility of Union Army veterans after the war. In a previous study, I suggested
that the direct economic costs of the Civil War were probably much greater than previously
thought if the persistent adverse effects of wartime experiences on veterans’ health on
wealth accumulation are considered (Lee 2005). The present study provides additional
evidence on how the Civil War had an economic impact on individuals by affecting their
geographic mobility.



                                              
2. Health, Information, and Mobility: Advantages of Using Military Data
        Throughout human history, migration has been a major form of investment by
which people can improve their lifetime material (and sometimes nonmaterial) wellbeing.
In the past, when access to formal education was limited to relatively few people, migration
was perhaps a more important way of investing in human capital than it is today. It is now
well established that geographic mobility in the United States during the nineteenth-century
was exceptionally high by both historical and comparative standards (Ferrie 2004). The
active inter-regional and rural-urban movement of the population seeking better
opportunities is one of the main explanations for the high economic and social mobility
observed in nineteenth-century America that gave it the reputation for being a “land of
opportunity.” It also contributed to the rapid growth of the U.S. economy by reallocating
the labor force from low-wage to high-wage regions.
        Naturally, one of the central issues among social scientists in various fields is why
people migrate and how migrants choose their destinations. Studies viewing migration as a
personal decision assume that migration is a type of investment that entails cost but
produces a stream of return (Sjaastad 1962, Mincer 1978). A migrant contemplating
migration from a given origin to given destinations compares the expected present value of
lifetime income in his place of origin and the potential destinations, and chooses the place
that maximizes his or her expected net benefit. According to this model of migration, the
extent and pattern of geographic mobility are determined by the elements of the expected
costs and benefits of migration. It has been established by previous studies that age, race,
ethnicity, occupation, education, wealth, family structure, previous migration history, and
labor market conditions of both the place of origin and potential destinations are important
determinants of migration decisions (Bogue 1963, Steckel 1989, Galenson and Pope 1989,
Margo 1990, Collins 1997, Hatton and Williamson 1998, Ferrie 1999). These finding are
well matched to the investment approach to geographic mobility.
        Health can affect geographical mobility in several ways. First, poor health
increases the cost of relocation by curtailing one’s physical capacity to move to and settle in
a different location. Second, expectation of early death or early retirement arising from


                                              
health problems will shorten the expected length of remaining work life, and thus diminish
the anticipated net gain from the investment. Third, a decrease in productivity caused by
bad health can reduce the economic gains from migration. Finally, severe disabilities or
sickness may restrict one’s occupational choice, or even labor force participation itself,
consequently eliminating a potential path by which geographic mobility improves a
migrant’s economic status, namely, occupational mobility.
        So far, there is no clear evidence supporting any of the possible mechanisms
through which health can affect geographic mobility. Most studies on the relationship
between health and migration focus on the adverse impacts of migration on health. It is well
documented that geographic transfers usually had adverse effects on the health of migrants.
Compared with natives, immigrants had higher mortality rates and poorer health conditions
in nineteenth-century America (Higgs 1979, Fogel 1986). A study based on a longitudinal
data found that migrants were at a much higher risk of dying of infectious diseases after
they moved (Sánchez 2003). Migrants were often more vulnerable to infectious diseases in
their new homes because they came in contact with a different disease pool against which
they lacked immunities (McNeill 1976, Curtain 1989, Pritchett and Tunalı 1995, Lee 1997,
2003a). The rise in geographic mobility is largely accepted as a major cause of the
deterioration in health, indicated by increased mortality and diminished adult height, in
mid-nineteenth-century America (Steckel 1995). Physical and emotional stress in the course
of long-distance relocation and resettlement, and frequent malnutrition, also damaged the
health of migrants (Higgs 1979). In contrast to the abundant literature on the effect of
migration on health, it is difficult to find evidence regarding how health influences
geographic mobility. The absence of evidence seems to reflect the lack of appropriate data
to be used to identify the previous health condition of the movers and non-movers.
        Information plays a critical role when a migrant forms predictions about the costs
and benefits of migration to a given place. For a risk-averse person, obtaining more
information on regions outside the place of origin and general knowledge about moving
itself (such as routes, transportation, cost, risks, and so on) may increase the probability of
migration. Reliable information on the labor-market condition and living environment of a


                                              
particular place could increase or decrease the probability of choosing it as the destination.
The negative effect of distance on migration has often been suggested as evidence of the
adverse effect of diminishing information on migration (Sjaastad 1962, Schwartz 1973).2
Lack of information about housing markets has been cited as a serious barrier for intra-
urban migration of blacks (Freeman and Sunshine 1976). The positive effect of education
on the probability of migration of blacks out of the South in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries has been explained in part by the advantages more educated persons had
in obtaining information on the labor markets in other regions (Margo 1990).
         The prevalence of chain migration in many different times and places also indicates
the importance of information as a determinant of mobility, especially in international
migration. Numerous studies have found that the size of previous immigrants from a given
country, province or community significantly increased the subsequent rate of immigration
from the place (Murayama 1991, Wegge 1998, Hatton and Williamson 1998). This pattern
of migration is largely explained by the effect of increased information flow as well as
greater provisions of fixed costs of migration (such as remittance, prepaid tickets, and
networked assistance upon arrival) from previous migrants. However, the size of migrant
stock, even that of a narrowly defined community, is a highly indirect measure of
information. It is unknown what fraction of the migrant-stock effect actually represents the
effect of increased information rather than that of greater provision of support before
departure or upon arrival. Nor is it clear what kind of information was particularly valuable
for potential migrants. It might have been general information on a country or region as a
whole that stimulated decisions to move. It is also possible that specific information on a
particular locality or concerning passage to the destination was more helpful for potential
migrants. Since most studies on chain migration do not say where the original and
subsequent chain migrants moved to, it is difficult to identify which is the case.
         Prior geographic mobility provides another measure of information about particular
2
  Increasing psychic cost with distance is another possible explanation for the negative relationship
between distance and probability of migration. Schwartz (1973) found that aging (a proxy of the
magnitude of psychic cost) did not affect the effect of distance on migration whereas increasing
education (a proxy of more information) strongly diminished it, accepting the information
hypothesis over the psychic cost hypothesis.

                                                 
locations a potential migrant possesses. A person who had visited a particular place should
certainly possess more information about the location than someone who had not. Prior
migration can also affect a person’s mobility by changing his preferences (e.g., attitudes
toward risk) or cognitive constructs.3 A series of studies by labor economists reported that
prior migration, especially return migration, affected post-move job-searches and earnings
by providing the movers with more information on the local labor market (Kau and Sirmans
1977, Farber 1978, DaVanzo 1983).4 Groen (2004) found that attending college in a given
state modestly increased the probability of working in the state.
         Prior mobility has some advantages as a more direct measure of information. If the
specific destination of a migrant is known along with his prior mobility, it is possible to
infer what kind of information he obtained from previous migration. For example, if prior
migration only increased the probability of moving to the place previously visited, it is
likely that the information on a specific locality matters for migration decisions. If prior
migration increases general geographic mobility regardless of destination, or the probability
of moving to nearby places, it implies that general information on a broad region or travel
might be important. On the other hand, using prior mobility as a determinant of migration is
subject to self-selection bias because past migration is by no means a random event. That is,
individuals who had moved to a given place could differ from non-movers in terms of
unobservable characteristics that influence mobility.5 Therefore, it is difficult to identify
the pure effect of information on migration by looking at the influence of prior migration on
individuals who could freely choose to move.
3
  According to the literature on behavioral geography, a person stores information on the real world
as cognitive constructs through the filters of the perceptual senses and the value system, and they
form the individual’s cognitive environment. When the individual is choosing from among the
possible locations in his environment for a place to migrate, he uses the information stored in those
cognitive
         constructs rather than the objective information (Lloyd 1976).
  In contrast to claims that prior migration provides informational advantages, Herzog Jr., Hofler,
and Schlottmann (1985) demonstrated that since first-time movers invested more heavily on
information seeking activity, they had better information on wage distribution than that of repeat
migrants.
5
  The evidence of self-selection in migration is abundant. For example, see Wegge (1997) for
nineteenth-century German immigrants and Herscivici (1998) for nineteenth-century internal
migrants in the United States, and Robinson and Tomes (1982) for Canadian interprovincial
migrants.

                                                 
        The wartime experiences of Union Army veterans provide a unique opportunity to
study the impacts of health on migration. Military service during the Civil War seriously
damaged the health of recruits who survived the war. More than a quarter of the soldiers
were injured, and two-thirds became ill at least once while in service. Military service
records of the Civil War veterans linked to later censuses enable us to examine how the
medical experiences of the recruits while in service affected their post-service geographic
mobility. In particular, Union Army data allow a rare opportunity to examine the
association between health and mobility at relatively young ages. Studies on health based
on today’s data are largely concerned with individuals at middle and older ages, in part
because there are relatively small variations in health among the young. But due to the
extremely varied wartime experiences of the recruits, we can observe substantial disparities
in health at younger ages when geographic mobility is relatively high.
        The studies on the impact of health on economic mobility are subject to several
empirical difficulties. First, since current health is in part influenced by past socioeconomic
status, and since socioeconomic conditions at different ages are to an extent correlated,
there is a potential endogeneity problem. Second, in order to measure the pure health effect
on mobility, it is desirable to see how unanticipated changes in health affect migration,
because if people anticipate that their health will deteriorate, they may change their human
capital investment behaviors. 6 The Union Army data used in this study have some
advantages over the modern datasets commonly used for studying the impact of health on
economic status, such as the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) and the Asset and Health
Dynamics of the Oldest Old Survey (AHEAD), in dealing with this problem. First, in the
mid-nineteenth century, there were few effective medical or health care services to be
purchased. The most important link between economic status and health was the quality of
nutrition and housing. There was less residential segregation by social class, and both the

6
  For this reason, some studies on the link between health and economic status use the onset of new
chronic conditions as a predictor of savings. But, while new onsets may provide the best chance of
identifying health shocks, not all new onsets come as a surprise. A number of studies have
attempted to deal with this problem, employing various instruments. Ettner (1996) used the state
unemployment rate, work experience, parental education, and spousal characteristics as instruments
for an individuals’ income. She found that the effect of income on health remains significant and
even increases after instrumenting. Meer, Miller, and Rosen (2003) used the size of inheritance as
an instrument for wealth. They found that the originally small but significant effect of wealth on
health became statistically insignificant if instrumental variable estimation was applied.
rich and the poor were exposed to a similar ecological environment. Furthermore, there was
no medical insurance in the nineteenth century. Thus, we have fewer factors to mask the
true effect of poor health on economic mobility in the past.7 Second, the military medical
records enable us to isolate unanticipated changes in health. All recruits who passed the
medical examination were presumably in relatively good health at the time of enlistment.
Illnesses and injuries while in service were purely unanticipated events at enlistment. These
features of the data provide an ideal setting in which we can analyze the influence of health
on economic mobility.
        In addition, the geographic scope of the military actions that took place during the
Civil War provides an excellent opportunity to examine how prior mobility affects
migration. Since most battles were fought either in border or southern states, many recruits
from northern states were deployed to distant regions along with their regiments. The
distance and pattern of transfers differed greatly from regiment to regiment. For example,
recruits who enlisted in the Illinois 9th Regiment were sent all the way down to the state of
Mississippi via Kentucky and Tennessee. They also entered Georgia, South Carolina, North
Carolina, Virginia, and Washington DC while carrying out their military missions. In
contrast, recruits who served in the Delaware 9th Regiment, organized in August 1864,
never had a chance to move out of their state of origin. The unique nature of geographical
movement while in military service, which is ideal for the purpose of my study, is that it
was exogenously determined, completely unrelated to the recruit’s decision. Since a recruit
was normally enlisted in a regiment organized near where he lived along with other men
from his community, he couldn’t choose his military unit (Kemp 1990, Vinovskis 1990,
Geary 1991). The enlisted men just went where their regiments were ordered to go. Thus,
using wartime geographical mobility as a measure of information is not subject to the

7
  The results of studies on the effects of socioeconomic status on health in the past are mixed.
Steckel (1988) found that socioeconomic class differences in mortality among women and children
in mid-nineteenth-century America were small based on a sample of families matched to the 1850
and 1860 censuses. Preston and Haines (1991) also reported that the influences of economic factors
on child mortality at the end of the nineteenth century were relatively weak. Preston et al. (1981)
suggested that the link between wealth and health became stronger over the twentieth century. In
contrast, Ferrie (2003) found that socioeconomic status, especially wealth, was an important force
shaping the mortality rates experienced by Americans in the middle of the nineteenth century, based
on a sample of the mortality schedules of the 1850 and 1860 censuses. Lee (2003a) found that
wealth had a significant positive effect on the health of Union Army recruits while in service.
potential self-selection bias frequently confronted by studies examining the effect of prior
mobility on migration decisions.


3. Data
          This study is based on a sample of the several primary data sources that were
collected and linked as part of the project titled “Early Indicators of Later Work Levels,
Disease, and Death,” jointly sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research, the
National Institutes of Health, the Center for Population Economics at the University of
Chicago, and Brigham Young University. The original population from which the sample
used in this study was drawn is composed of 35,747 recruits who enlisted in 331 randomly
selected Union Army companies. These recruits have been linked to various data sources,
including military service records, pension records, and records from the 1850, 1860, 1900,
and 1910 censuses.8
          The service records contain very detailed descriptions of the diseases or wounds
that the recruits suffered during their military service. As soon as a recruit was too ill to
report for duty, his condition was noted in morning reports. If his condition required
medical attention, it was recorded in the regimental surgeon’s report. If he was hospitalized,
the diagnosis of the disease was described in the case history together with the ultimate
outcome, such as return to service, discharge for disability, or death (U.S. Surgeon
General’s Office 1870, vol. 1). Information on disease and wounds, which was used in
measuring the health of recruits, was gathered from these sources. Military service records
also provide information on the demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of recruits
prior to enlistment, including age, occupation, place of birth, height, and military career
(rank, military duty, company, regiment, change in military status, dates of enlistment and
discharge, and so on). Variables on occupation prior to military service, nativity, age, year
of enlistment, and company death rates, which were used as either measures or


8
  See Fogel (1993, 2000a, 2000b, 2001) and Wimmer (2003) for more detailed explanations of the
EI Project and data produced from the project. The data sets collected and linked as part of this
project can be obtained from the web site of the Center for Population Economics
(http://www.cpe.uchicago.edu).
determinants of economic mobility or indexes of wartime stress, come from these records.
          I also utilize an auxiliary data set, entitled Regimental History Records, that
provides information on events in the histories of Union Army regiments. This data set was
originally collected from The Compendium of the War of the Rebellion, compiled by
Frederick Dyer (Dyer 1959). The types of military events contained in the source include
“organized,” “mustered in,” “attached,” detached,” “moved to,” “duty at or stationed at,”
“operations,” “combat or combat preparation,” and “discharged.” The states where each
event began and ended are identified, along with starting and ending dates and the number
of men wounded or killed during the action. By matching this source to the Union Army
sample based on the name of the regiment where the recruit served, I inferred which states
each veteran entered while in service.
          For the purpose of examining the patterns of geographical mobility after the Civil
War, the recruits were located in, and linked to, the manuscript schedules of the 1880
population census. The search was restricted to 20,315 men who had not died until the 1880
census was enumerated (including those whose death dates are unknown) and for whom
information on some basic characteristics such as birthplace and age at enlistment are given.
As a result of the linkage process, 7,229 veterans (36% of those who were searched) were
successfully linked to the 1880 census.9 The sample is further restricted to 6,882 men who
were aged 18 to 45 at enlistment and for whom the county of residence prior to military
service is known.
          Of these veterans, 3,144 are also linked to the 1860 census. Census records provide
additional information on socioeconomic structure and on household structure prior to and
shortly after the military service of recruits. They contain information on age, occupation,
place of birth, personal and real estate wealth, place of residence, and literacy for other
household members as well as the recruits. Among the variables required for this study,
wealth and family structure prior to enlistment are found only in the 1860 census. Therefore,
I limit the sample to the 1,097 recruits who were linked to both the 1860 and 1870 censuses
whenever wealth or family structure is concerned.

9
    See Costa and Kahn (2003) for more detailed descriptions of the sample.

                                                  
         Table 1 compares some key characteristics of recruits between the entire and
selected samples. A comparison of the first and second columns of the table shows that the
sample linked to the 1880 census is generally similar to the entire Union Army in terms of
personal characteristics, and medical experiences and geographical movements while in
service. The only notable difference is that in the linked sample, the native born (79%) and
farmers (53%) are overrepresented compared to the recruits at large, of whom 69% were
U.S. born and 49% were farmers. For the smaller sample linked to both the 1860 and 1880
censuses, the percentages of the native born and farmers are even higher, 88% and 61%,
respectively (column 3 of Table 1). Also, a slightly larger fraction of the men found in both
censuses suffered illnesses while in service.10 Even if we cannot preclude the possibility
that the sample is subject to selection bias resulting from linkage failure, it is likely that the
results of this study generally represent the experiences of the entire Union Army and
perhaps the entire Northern male population at military service ages during the Civil War.
         Table 2 provides the pattern of regional migration of the veterans in the sample.
The states included in each region are listed in the Appendix. About two-thirds of the
veterans remained in the same region they resided in at the time of enlistment. The rate of
inter-regional migration was the highest for recruits from the West (72%), followed by
those from the border states (37%). For the migrants from New England, the Mid Atlantic,
East North Central, and West North Central regions were equally important regions of
destination. The majority of migrants from the Mid-Atlantic headed to the Midwest,
especially the West North Central region. A large fraction of the migrants from the East
North Central region moved to the West North Central region. As in the case of the
population at large, the geographical mobility of the veterans was characterized
predominantly by East-West migration. Only 2% of the veterans had migrated to the South

10
   The overrepresentation of the U.S. born and higher disease rates among the recruits who were
linked to the 1860 census can be explained in part by their higher linkage rate to pension records.
Immigrants were less likely to be found in pension records because many foreigners who died
during the early postwar years had no eligible dependents or were used behind the front and so were
less likely to incur war-related disabilities (Fogel 1993). Army veterans with health problems
originating from military service were more likely to apply for and receive pensions because early
pension laws required such conditions. Therefore, it is not surprising that recruits who were linked
to census records show more severe medical experiences while in service.

                                                 
by 1880. Two-thirds of the migrants to the South settled in the West South Central region.


4. Measuring Health and Information
Variables on Health
        Military service during the Civil War seriously damaged the health of recruits who
survived the war. More than a quarter were injured, and two-thirds suffered various
illnesses at least once while in service. Wartime illnesses were mainly caused by infectious
diseases, although some chronic conditions such as rheumatism and hernia were also
prevalent. Diarrhea was the most common disease in the army camp, contracted by a
quarter of the recruits in the sample, followed by malaria (16%), respiratory infections such
as pneumonia and bronchitis (7%), typhoid (6%), and measles (4%). The unusually high
rates of disease contraction were due to the peculiar nature of the army camp, in which a
large number of men from heterogeneous socioeconomic and ecological backgrounds were
confined in an extremely unhealthy environment.
       Many of the recruits who contracted infectious diseases while in service, if they
survived, probably recovered from the illnesses rather quickly, even before they were
discharged from their service. However, the damage caused by those acute diseases may
have had persistent influences on their later health. Studies have found that infectious
diseases affect the odds of suffering chronic conditions such as heart, respiratory, and
musculoskeletal disorders at older ages (Elo and Preston 1992, Costa 2000). I use dummy
variables indicating whether a veteran experienced a particular type of wound or disease as
well as wounds and illnesses in general as a measure of health. The particular wartime
events considered here include five types of wound by location and ten diseases that were
most common among Union Army recruits: typhoid, smallpox, measles, diarrhea,
respiratory infections, malaria, tuberculosis, rheumatism, syphilis, and hernia.
        Illnesses and wounds are not the only kinds of health damage suffered by veterans
who fought in a bloody war. The intense violence involved in war, such as being exposed to
heavy combat, witnessing friends and comrades die, and watching the enemy before or
after killing them, may have inflicted serious war trauma on the survivors. It has been


                                               
reported that Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was widespread and severe among the
veterans who served in Vietnam and the Civil War (Dean, Jr. 1997). There is a large body of
research linking war trauma with various mental and physical health outcomes.11
        Since stress is not directly observable, it is necessary to develop an index to proxy
the severity of wartime experiences. A company-level variable, such as the percentage of
death from wounds in the recruit’s company, is a good index of wartime stress since it
incorporates several different aspects that contribute to stress. Residents of a town were
often recruited to the same company, sent to the same battlegrounds, and fought side by
side. Consequently, all individuals in a particular company were exposed to a similar level
of stress. In particular, the company mortality from wounds provides a measure of common
exposure to combat of recruits who served in the same company.12 The company mortality
of Union Army recruits was closely linked to their post-service health status. Analyzing
surgeons’ physical examination data, Pizarro, Silver, and Prause (2004) recently found that
a high company death rate significantly increased the probability of veterans’ suffering
various chronic cardiac, gastrointestinal, and nervous conditions when they were examined



11
   Epidemiologists studying PTSD in contemporary veterans reported that such wartime events as
being wounded in combat, fired upon in combat, stationed in a combat zone, and being captured by
the enemy had persistent and statistically significant effects on the later mortality and morbidity of
veterans who fought in World War II, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War (Archibald and
Tuddenham 1965, Beebe 1975, Berg and Richlin 1977a-d, Dent et al. 1989, Goulston et al. 1985,
Hearst, Newman, and Hulley 1986, Nefzger 1970, Smith et al. 1987, Spaulding 1977, Sutker et al.
1991, Ursano 1990). Based on a sample of Union Army veterans, Costa (1993) found that
imprisonment by the enemy, being wounded, and being discharged for injury or illness significantly
increased the risk that veterans who survived to 1890 would die between the ages of 55 and 77.
12
   A typical company was composed of about one hundred men. In the entire Union Army sample,
23% of the recruits served in more than one company. For these recruits, the mortality of their first
company was used to construct the wartime stress variables. The degree of wartime stress
undergone by recruits, measured by the company mortality from wounds, greatly varied across
different companies. Twenty-two percent of the recruits in the sample served in companies where
not a single person was killed in action. In contrast, nearly 11% of the recruits fought in a company
in which more than 10% of enlisted men died from wounds. Some recruits in the former category
belonged to militia units formed exclusively from men of their locality and never saw battle. Many
of them were recruited (and released) before the major battles or after Lee’s surrender, and thus
escaped not only the stress of combat but even a substantial threat of exposure to combat (Hamersly
1888).

                                                  
by surgeons to receive Union Army pensions.13 Lee (2003b, 2005) reported that the degree
of combat exposure measured by the company mortality from wounds had a strong
negative effect on the wealth accumulation of Union Army veterans between 1860 and
1870. Accordingly, I use dummy variables indicating four levels of company mortality from
wounds, (1) zero (2) 3% or less (3) 3% to 5%, and (4) more than 5% (denoted as Co wound
mortality 1 through 4) as an index of wartime stress.
        In addition to the variables on wartime experiences, I add variables on height at the
time of enlistment as an indicator of the nutritional status of recruits. Since it is
inappropriate to compare the height of a recruit at a growing age with one who had already
reached his final stature, it is desirable to use an age-standardized measure of height.
Accordingly, I construct five dummy variables on height (Height 1 to Height 5), each of
which represents a quintile of the height distribution for a particular age. For age 18, for
example, recruits with heights from 64.5 inches to 67 inches were classified as the fourth
quintile; for age 19, recruits whose heights were 65 inches to 66.25 inches were included in
the same category. The height distribution by age was obtained from the entire Union Army
sample. A single height distribution was applied to all recruits 23 and older, based on the
assumption that height after age 23 remained unchanged.


Measuring Wartime Geographical Mobility
         I use several different measures of geographical mobility while in service, each of
which represents a particular type of information. First, I consider how far the veteran
moved from his place of origin while in service. The underlying rationale for using the
measure is that distance traveled can influence the mover’s cognition of other places,
general knowledge about the passage, attitudes toward risk, and preference for relocation.


13
   Lee (2005) also reported that the company mortality was positively related to the proportion of
veterans who had received pensions by 1890 and the average amount of pension given to the
recipients in 1890. Given that the very sick got into the pension rolls earlier and received a larger
pension, this indicates that the veterans who served in a company that lost a large fraction of
servicemen during the war were less healthy than those who fought in a low-mortality company. In
addition, the company mortality from wounds had a weak positive relationship to post-service
mortality.

                                                  
The information obtained from prior mobility may differ between latitudinal (East-West)
and longitudinal (North-South) moves. Steckel (1983) noted that an important basis of the
dominant pattern of East-West migrations in nineteenth-century America was the desire of
the migrants to relocate to areas where their agricultural knowledge of the climate and soil
type would still be applicable. It is likely, therefore, that the veterans who moved
longitudinally were exposed to a greater variety of unfamiliar environments than those who
traveled the same distance horizontally. Also, the veterans may have collected different
kinds of information from their military movements depending on the direction. To
consider these potential differences, I use separate variables on both longitudinal and
latitudinal moves in the analysis (denoted “North-South move” and “East-West move” in
the tables reporting the results of regression analyses), representing the distance from the
county of residence at enlistment and the longitudinally (horizontally) most remote state the
veteran had ever entered while in service.14
         The second measure of wartime geographic mobility is the distance (measured in
the unit of longitudinal degrees) a given recruit moved below latitude 40º north (denoted
“latitudes moved below 40 degrees” in the table reporting the regression results). This
measure represents how far a person entered into the South during his service. The most
peculiar feature of the military deployment during the Civil War is that it was
predominantly south-bound. The vast majority of the recruits moved to the border states
such as Virginia and Maryland. More than half of the Union Army entered either the South
Atlantic or the East South Central region, and nearly a quarter of them marched into the
West South Central region. A natural question arising from this pattern of wartime mobility
is how wartime experiences of visiting the South affected northern veterans’ later migration
to the region. I assume that the lowest latitude reached by a given soldier represents the
extent of his exposure to the environments and labor-market conditions in the South.
         Finally, dummy variables indicating whether a veteran had ever entered a particular
14
   This measure represents the difference in the latitude (longitude) between the county of residence
at enlistment and the most distant state horizontally (longitudinally) from the place of origin. The
regimental history records usually do not provide the names of the county or town where the given
military action took place. Accordingly, I use the distance between the county of enlistment and the
capitol of the state the given recruit entered in measuring the mobility while in service.

                                                  
region in the South (such as the South Atlantic, the East South Central, and the West South
Central) are used as measures of the information on broadly-defined regions. These
variables will be employed in analyzing the determinants of the general mobility and the
probability of choosing the South as the destination among the movers. In addition, dummy
variables of entering particular states are used in examining how location-specific
information affected the choice of state among the migrants to the South.


5. Health, Wartime Mobility, and Migration
        Migration may be modeled as a type of investment in human capital to increase the
present value of life-time earnings. A soldier discharged from military service would have
faced a choice between remaining in his previous place of residence and moving to another
place. Moving to a different place can bring a rise in life-time income or social status, but at
the same time, incurs a cost of relocation. The chances that a person will switch location
will depend on the net income gains, discounted by his rate of time preference, over his
remaining work life (Ferrie 1999).
        Some possible paths through which health and information can affect geographical
mobility were suggested above (see Section 2). In addition to health and information,
geographical mobility can be determined by other human capital attributes, such as age,
nativity, and literacy. Older age is associated with a shorter remaining work life and greater
psychological cost of relocation. Therefore, the impact of age on mobility among adults is
likely to be negative. Immigrants may have been more mobile because they had less strong
connections to the community where they resided at the time of enlistment. Illiterate
persons should have been at a disadvantage in obtaining information required for migration
decisions. In addition to these variables pertaining to human capital, dummy variables on
the region of enlistment were included to account for the possibility that geographic
mobility was influenced by the conditions of the local labor market.
        A problem with comparing the places of residence at enlistment and in 1880 is that
the length of the period at risk of migration differs between veterans, depending on their
year of enlistment. For veterans who enlisted in 1861, for example, we observe geographic


                                               
mobility for 19 years; for those who entered the army in 1865, on the other hand, we
observe mobility for only 15 years. To account for the difference in the length of the period
at risk, I add dummy variables on the year of enlistment.
        The measured rates of migration will depend heavily on the size of the geographic
units used. The larger the geographic unit employed, the lower the rate of migration across
the units. Accordingly, I employ four different measures of geographic mobility and
corresponding specifications for regressions: (1) the distance of migration measured in
miles, (2) the probability of moving to a different county, (3) the probability of moving to a
different state, and (4) the probability of moving to a different region.
        Table 3 presents the results of baseline logistic regressions. They suggest that
wounds and illnesses experienced while in service had significant negative effects on the
measures of geographical mobility. The size of the impacts of wartime medical experiences
on the probabilities of migration was large. Suffering any wounds while in service reduced
the probability of moving to a different county by 20%. Any type of wartime illnesses
diminished the probability of inter-county migration by 24%. Wounds and illnesses in
general also had modest but significant effects on the distance of migration, diminishing it
by, respectively, 34 miles and 54 miles, or 8% and 12% of the sample average distance of
migration (448 miles).
        Wartime wounds and illnesses affected different aspects of geographical mobility.
Contracting any disease while in service had a strong negative effect on the distance of
migration among migrants as well as the probability of leaving the place of origin. It
diminished the probability of inter-state migration by 20% and the chances of inter-regional
migration by 17%. The results of regressions conducted exclusively for the movers to a
different county (not reported here) suggest that wartime illnesses decreased the distance of
migration by 43 miles, which is not much different from the result for the entire sample.
This indicates that the observed negative effect of having suffered illness on the distance of
migration largely reflects its impact on the distance conditional on moving, rather than the
probability of migration. In contrast, wartime wounds mostly affected the veteran’s decision
whether or not to move, rather than how far he would move. Wounds incurred while in
service did not significantly decrease the probabilities of inter-state and inter-regional
migrations. Among movers, moreover, it diminished the distance of migration by only 17
miles.
         The company mortality from wounds, a measure of the extent of combat exposure,
did not have any significant effect on geographic mobility. This result is in contrast to the
result that Union Army veterans who fought in high-mortality companies saved much less
than those who served in low-mortality companies (Lee 2005). This may indicate that
geographic mobility is determined mainly by physical health, not mental health, which
could have been more seriously damaged by trauma from bloody battles. It is also possible
that psychological trauma made it difficult for the veteran to remain in his original
community, offsetting the potential impacts of poor health caused by combat exposure.
Height, another measure of health, had no systematic effect on geographic mobility, either.
         Wartime geographical movements had significant effects on some measures of
post-service geographic mobility. The measure of North-South moves significantly
increased the probability of inter-regional migration and the distance of migration. On the
other hand, the measure of East-West moves is positively related to the probabilities of
moving to a different county and moving to a different state. The magnitudes of the effects
were substantial. For instance, entering a state located in the South of the place of
enlistment by seven degrees of latitude (the sample average of the latitudes moved) was
associated with an increase in the probability of inter-regional migration by 27% and an
increase in the distance of migration by 45 miles. Similarly, visiting a state that is
horizontally distant from the place of origin by the sample mean (7.4 degrees) increased the
probabilities of inter-county and inter-state migrations by 26% and 25%, respectively.
         The effect of wartime mobility on subsequent migration depended on whether the
move was horizontal or longitudinal. North-South movements in the army largely affected
the distance of migration among movers. It did not have any significant effect on the
probability of relatively short-range migrations, such as inter-county and inter-state
migrations. If the regression analysis is limited to migrants to a different county, the size of
the effect of the latitudes moved is even bigger (7.8 miles, compared to 6.4 miles for the


                                              
full sample). On the other hand, latitudinal mobility while in service affected the probability
of migration, not the distance. This pattern could be explained by the fact that veterans who
moved longitudinally were probably more likely to be exposed to an environment much
different from their place of origin than those who traveled the same distance horizontally.
Therefore, longitudinal mobility during military service should have provided more useful
information for long-distance migration.
         Among other variables included in the regressions, immigrant status stands out as
the most powerful determinant of geographical mobility. Natives were much less mobile
than immigrants by all four measures of mobility. Age is negatively related to geographical
mobility, as found in other studies on the determinants of migration, but its effect is
statistically insignificant for all four measures of mobility. The veterans whose occupations
at enlistment were unknown were more mobile than those whose occupation was reported.
Managers and proprietors, and unskilled workers moved farther on average than did
farmers and professionals. The effect of the year of enlistment on mobility depended on the
measure of mobility chosen. In general, the veterans who entered the army in either 1862 or
1864 were less mobile than the others. Finally, the veterans from the West were much more
likely to migrate, and move a longer distance than the rest. The enlistees from the North
West Central region were more mobile than those from the Northeast, although they were
less likely to move out of the region.15
         Table 4 reports the results of regressions employing more detailed classifications of
wounds and illnesses. Regression coefficients for all other control variables are excluded
15
   Previous studies have found that wealth, household structure, and literacy are significant
predictors of geographic mobility (Galenson and Pope 1989). To consider the effects of these
variables on migration, I conducted regressions in which these variables were added to the original
set of variables reported in Table 3, based on a sample of 2744 men linked to the 1860 census.
According to the results, presented in Appendix Table, real estate wealth was negatively related to
the measures of geographic mobility, but its effect was statistically insignificant. On the other hand,
personal wealth had a significant positive effect on the probability of migration. Illiterate veterans
were significantly less likely to move to a different region. The effects of the variables on family
structure are not significant in general, but presence of children increased the probability of inter-
regional migration. The effects of wartime experiences, especially illnesses and East-West moves
while in service, on migration are much weaker in these regressions than the regressions based on
the full sample. The differences are mainly due to the selection of the sample, not the inclusion of
variables on wealth, illiteracy, and family structure.

                                                  
from the table but included in the regressions. The results for these variables are similar to
the results reported in Table 3. Among wounds on various body parts, injuries to a leg or
foot had the most powerful negative effect on geographical mobility, although it is
statistically significant only for the probabilities of inter-county and inter-state migrations.
The majority of specific diseases had negative effects on geographic mobility but many of
them miss statistical significance. Measles strongly diminished the distance of migration,
and diarrhea and malaria exerted particularly powerful negative effects on the probability of
inter-county migration. The probability of inter-regional mobility was most strongly
affected by tuberculosis.
         Table 5 presents the results of regressions employing three different sets of
measures of wartime geographical mobility, namely, (1) latitudes and longitudes moved,
excluding the interaction term, (2) dummy variables on entering three southern regions
while in service, and (3) variables on regions entered and the distance of the move
combined. Dropping the term of interaction between horizontal and longitudinal moves
decreased the size of coefficients, but the implications of the results are generally similar to
those reported in Table 3. That is, latitudinal moves largely increased the probability of
migration, whereas longitudinal moves mostly increased the distance of migration. The
results of the regressions that include the regions entered while in service suggest that
having been to the West South Central region during the war greatly stimulated migrations
of the veterans after the war. Even if the latitudes and longitudes moved are controlled for,
the strong effect of entering the West South Central region does not disappear, although its
effect on the distance of migration misses statistical significance by a small margin. When
the regions entered are considered, the effect of latitudes moved on the distance of
migration and the probability of regional migration becomes more powerful.16
         Table 6 presents summary results of the regressions performed separately for



   Another interesting result from the change in specification is that East-West moves now have a
very strong effect on the distance of migration and the probability of regional migration as well as
the probability of inter-state migration. This result may reflect the fact that many recruits who
moved from the Northeast to the East South Central region moved the longest distance to the West
while in service, and they were less likely to move into the West South Central region.

                                                 
several sub-samples of the veterans with different ages, occupations, and nativities. The
relationship between their wartime experiences and the measures of geographic mobility
varied considerably between veterans with different human capital attributes. In general, the
impacts on migration of medical events and geographic moves while in service were
significantly weaker for younger men, white-collar workers, and immigrants than for older
persons, manual workers, and natives, respectively. In particular, it is notable that wartime
geographic moves had no significant effect on the migration decisions of the veterans aged
30 or older. It is also striking that the post-service geographic mobility of white-collar
workers was not significantly influenced by wartime diseases, and was negatively related to
geographic mobility while in service.
           The variations across individuals with different characteristics offer useful clues to
the question of why wartime events affected subsequent geographic mobility. The effect of
wartime illnesses on mobility was stronger for the veterans employed in occupations that
required greater physical strength (artisans and manual laborers) than for those engaged in
jobs for which non-physical human capital was more important (professionals, managers,
and proprietors). If poor health restricted mobility by limiting the person’s ability to move,
its effect should not differ by personal characteristics. Thus, the major link between
wartime illnesses and geographic mobility was probably the decline in the benefits of
migration caused by either the expectation of early retirement or by diminished physical
ability.
           If wartime geographic mobility increased the probability of migration by offering
more general knowledge about moving itself or by mitigating the psychological cost of
relocation, veterans with more prior experience of migration should have been less affected
by the military experiences. The results reported in Table 6 suggest that geographic moves
while in service had much weaker effects on the mobility of older persons and immigrants
than, respectively, younger recruits and natives. Since older men and immigrants
presumably had more prior experience of moving compared to the young and natives, the
results indicate that the increased general information on geographical transfers and
reduced psychological resistance to moving to a new location were indeed important


                                                 
mechanisms by which prior mobility affected subsequent migration.
        Wartime mobility, especially longitudinal moves, had a particularly powerful
positive effect on the geographic mobility of farmers. The mobility of the unskilled was
strongly influenced by latitudinal moves while in service. In contrast, wartime mobility
decreased the post-war mobility of white-collar workers. These results suggest that new
information on climate and lands in other regions collected while serving in the army could
be one of the possible links between the wartime mobility and post-war migration,
especially for farmers. The general information on labor market conditions in other regions
obtained in the course of military deployment might be another connecting factor,
especially for less-skilled workers, as indicated by the strong relationship between
latitudinal moves while in service and the probability of migration among the unskilled. A
white-collar worker’s human capital should be more heterogenous and location-specific
than a manual worker’s. Therefore, the information on distant labor markets collected
during the war should have been too general and incomplete to influence a white-collar
worker’s migration.


6. Location-Specific Information and Choice of the Destination
        The results given above suggest that wartime geographic mobility increased the
probability and distance of migration of the recruits after the service. I will examine below
whether the information on a particular place obtained while carrying out military missions
indeed increased the probability of moving to that place. As noted above, the geographic
moves of Union Army soldiers while in service were predominantly south-bound. Given
this peculiar feature of the military deployment, I focus on the patterns of migration to the
South to examine how location-specific information influenced the choice of the
destination among the migrants. More specifically, I attempt to answer below the following
two questions: (1) How did geographic mobility while in service affect the probability of
choosing the South as the destination among the inter-state migrants? (2) Did prior
experience of entering a particular state while in service increase the probability of moving
to the state among the migrants to the South?


                                              
Region-Specific Information and Migration to the South
        The Union Army recruits who were sent to the South on military missions should
have collected some knowledge about the region as a whole, such as its climate, terrain, soil,
and socioeconomic conditions. Many of them were presumably strangers to the region.
Therefore, veterans’ impressions of the South and the information they acquired about it
should have varied considerably depending on their wartime experiences. A natural
question arising from this unique aspect of the Civil War is how such different region-
specific information affected the veteran’s decision to migrate to the South.
        As a measure of the region-specific information, I consider how far a given veteran
entered into the South while in service, represented by the difference between latitude 40º
north and the lowest latitude he had ever reached. The underlying assumption is that the
lowest latitude reached by the veteran represents the extent of his exposure to the
environments and labor-market conditions in the South. The regression analysis is limited
to the veterans who enlisted in the North, excluding those from the West and the border
states, who migrated to a different region by 1880. The following three types of migration
to the South were separately considered in the regressions: (1) moving to the South
including the border states, (2) moving to the South excluding the border states, and (3)
moving to the border states.
        Table 7 presents the results of logit regressions. They suggest that the deeper a
veteran had moved into the South while in service, the higher the probability that he would
migrate to the South. However, the measure of prior mobility to the South had no
significant effect on the conditional probability of moving to the border states. The
magnitude of the effect of wartime mobility is quite large. A south-bound move by one
degree of latitude was associated with an increase in the probability of choosing the South
(excluding the border states) as the destination by 11.3%. This implies that wartime
movement to the South by the sample mean (6 degrees) would have increased the
conditional probability of migration to the South by 68%. I also performed regressions
including the dummy variables indicating which regions in the South a given veteran had


                                              
entered while in service. The results, not reported here, suggest that having been to the
South Atlantic and the West South Central regions while in service increased the probability
of moving to the South by more than 75% for the entire sample. For the sub-sample of
inter-regional migrants, entering these two regions while in service increased the
probability of choosing the South as the destination by 50% and 80%, respectively.
        It is also notable that suffering illnesses while in service strongly reduced the
conditional probability of moving to the South. It was reported above that illnesses in
general restricted long-distance migration of the veterans (see Table 3). Poor health could
have been an even more serious obstacle to migration to the South than moving to other
regions owing to the relatively severe disease environment in the South. In contrast,
wartime wounds had no significant effect on the conditional probability of moving to the
South. The migrants from the North West Central region were much more likely to choose
the South as their destination, probably due to the fact that the West South Central region
was the most attractive location to the migrants within the South and it is geographically
close to the North West Central region.17


State-Specific Information and Choice of State: Conditional Logit Analysis
        The results given above suggest that region-specific information did matter for the
migrants when choosing the destination. Now, I go one step further to examine whether
possessing information on a particular state affected the probability of choosing that state
among the migrants to the South. A veteran who had decided to migrate to the South had
fourteen choices for his destination (the number of the states and district in the South to
which at least one veteran from the North chose to move). To analyze how prior experience
of visiting a particular state affected the veteran’s choice, I employ the following
conditional logit model. In this model, the probability that veteran i moved to state j is



17
   Of the veterans in the sample, 1.4% moved to the West South Central region, much greater than
the 0.3% who moved to the South Atlantic or the 0.4% who moved to the East South Central region.
Also, 3.3% of the men from the North West Central region migrated to the West South Central,
whereas only 1.1% of men from the other regions in the North moved there.

                                               
                                            exp(αxij + β ′Z ij )
                          Pr[ S ij = 1] =
                                             j
                                               exp(αxij + β ′Z ij )

where xij stands for a dummy variable that has value of one if the veteran i had ever entered

state j while in service, and Z ij denotes a vector of other determining factors of location

choice. The conditional logit model has some advantages: the predicted probabilities are
bounded between 0 and 1, and the probabilities add up to 1 over states for a given
individual. More importantly, the conditional logit recognizes the grouped nature of the
data, with 14 observations for each veteran.
        As other determining factors of the probability of choosing state j (elements of Z ij ),

variables on the longitudinal and latitudinal distances between the veteran i’s state of origin
of and state j, and the increase in the adult population in state j between 1860 and 1880, are
included.18 Other things being equal, a person would be less likely to choose a more distant
state over a neighboring state. It is therefore expected that the coefficients on the distance
variables have negative signs. The increase in the adult population is a proxy for the general
attractiveness of the state for potential migrants. It is anticipated that, other conditions
being equal, the veterans were more likely to choose a state with a larger population growth.
        Table 8 presents the results of conditional logit regressions based on the model
presented above. The second column reports the result of the regression in which variables
on personal characteristics and wartime medical experiences (the same set of variables
included in Table 3) are controlled for. The results strongly suggest that, holding the
longitudinal and latitudinal distances and the population growth constant, the migrants to
the South were more likely to settle in a state they had entered while in service. The
estimated coefficient shows that a prior visit to a particular state increased the conditional
probability of choosing that state as the destination by 38%. As expected, the longitudinal
and latitudinal distances are negatively related to the probability of choosing the state. Also,
the migrants to the South were more likely to choose the state that had experienced a larger


18
  The increase in the population in each state between 1860 and 1880 was calculated from U.S.
Bureau of the Census (1970), A195-209.

                                                  
population growth. Including the variables on personal characteristics and wartime medical
experiences do not change the results significantly.


7. Conclusions and Further Implications
        This paper has explored how injuries, sickness, and geographical mobility of Union
Army veterans while in service affected their post-service migrations. It is the first attempt
to consider explicit measures of health and information together with other conventional
variables on human capital attributes as determinants of migration. The results suggest that
wartime wounds and illnesses significantly diminished veterans’ geographical mobility
after the war. Illnesses while in service had a particularly strong negative effect on the
distance of migration among migrants. On the other hand, wartime wounds mostly
decreased the probability, not the distance, of migration.
        Veterans’ wartime geographic moves had significant positive effects on their post-
service geographic mobility. The effect of wartime mobility on subsequent migration
depended on whether it was a latitudinal or longitudinal move. The distance of longitudinal
(North-South) mobility significantly increased the probability of inter-regional migration
and the distance of migration. On the other hand, the distance of a latitudinal (East-West)
move was positively related to the probabilities of moving to a different county and moving
to a different state. That is, North-South movements in the army largely affected the
distance of migration among movers, whereas latitudinal mobility increased the probability
of migration, not the distance. The relationship between wartime experiences and the
measures of geographic mobility varied considerably across groups with different human
capital attributes. In general, the effects of medical events and geographic moves while in
service on migration were significantly weaker for younger men, white-collar workers, and
immigrants than for older persons, manual workers, and natives, respectively.
        Geographic moves while in service also influenced the choice of the destination
among the migrants. The deeper a veteran had moved into the South while in service, the
higher the probability that he would migrate there. Furthermore, the results of conditional
logit analyses suggest that the migrants to the South were more likely to settle in a state


                                               
they had entered while in service, when other determinants of the choice of state, such as
the distance and population growth, are controlled for.
        The results of this study provide the first direct evidence suggesting that health was
a powerful determinant of geographic mobility in the nineteenth century. Given that the
infectious diseases considered in the present study were widespread among the civilian
population until the end of the nineteenth century, it is likely that the strong negative
relationship between illnesses and geographic mobility found for the army recruits was true
for the population at large, too. There is increasing evidence that economic costs arising
from poor health are substantial (Deolaliker 1998, Behrman and Deolaliker 1989, Strauss
and Thomas 1992, Smith 1999, Lee 2005). The high prevalence of various infectious
diseases in the past should have adversely affected the economic mobility of the infected
people by limiting their geographical mobility. The decline in the influence of infectious
diseases since the late nineteenth century, therefore, should have exerted a favorable effect
on overall geographic mobility.
        The results regarding the link between health and mobility also have a significant
implication for the issue of self selection in migration decisions. Though it is largely
acknowledged that migrants are probably different from non-movers, even from those who
have similar observable characteristics, it is not clear what the unobservable differences
between them truly are. The evidence given here suggests that health differences could be
one of the important elements of self-selection in migrations. That is, migrants are more
productive than non-movers with similar personal characteristics thanks partly to their
superior health. In addition, health could influence other unobservable determinants of
geographical mobility, such as the psychological cost of relocation and attitudes towards
risk.
        This paper offers new evidence on the effect of information on geographic mobility
by examining how exogenously determined prior mobility affected subsequent migration
decisions. In addition, unlike other studies, mine distinguishes between the effects of
different types of information, namely, (1) general knowledge on moving itself obtained
from prior geographic moves, (2) region-specific (or latitude-specific) information gained


                                             
from entering a particular region, and (3) state-specific information collected while visiting
a particular state. The results suggest that all types of information mattered in migration
decisions, but in different ways.19
         This study also provides insights as to how prior mobility affects subsequent
migration. The major link between wartime illnesses and geographic mobility was probably
the decline in the benefits of migration caused by either the expectation of early retirement
or by diminished physical ability. Increased general knowledge about geographical transfer
itself, greater information on distant lands and labor markets, and reduced psychological
cost of moving were probably important mechanisms by which prior mobility affected
subsequent migration.
         The results of this paper imply that a geographic move, regardless of its purpose,
can stimulate subsequent mobility, not only to the place of visit but also to other locations.
Visiting a new place will provide the visitor with some information about the location even
if there is no intention of permanent relocation with the visit. Some examples of such
events include sending of troops to a foreign country, transfers of workers to a distant
branch, and relocations of refuges forced by political or economic disasters. Tourism and
foreign studies, though not completely exogenous events, may encourage permanent
migrants, too.
         Finally, this study suggests that the Civil War had mixed effects on the geographic


         19
             First, the extent of prior geographical mobility (measured by the distance to the most
remote state from the place of origin) strongly increased the probability that a given individual
moved to a different place, regardless of the destination. This is perhaps due to increased general
information on relocation such as the knowledge about passage itself. Prior mobility may have
changed a person’s attitudes toward moving to a new place. It is notable that longitudinal and
latitudinal moves had different effects on migration, presumably because the information offered by
prior mobility differed depending on its direction. Secondly, the region-specific information
(obtained from entering deep into the South while in service) increased the probability that the
migrants chose a particular region (the South in this case) as the destination. Lastly, the state-
specific information (collected by entering a particular state in the South) significantly increased the
conditional probability that the migrants to the South chose a particular state within the region.
These results suggest that information on a particular location plays an important role when
choosing the destination.



                                                  
mobility of Union Army veterans. It reduced the probability of migration by damaging their
health. On the other hand, it stimulated their geographic mobility by sending them to distant
regions. Given that the measures of health and wartime geographic mobility are by no
means complete, and the estimated magnitudes of their effects on geographical mobility are
not fully accurate, it is difficult to determine which impact of the war was stronger.
However, the regression results and the aggregate migration rates of the veterans suggest
that the overall net effect of the war on the recruits’ geographical mobility was probably
positive. First, by multiplying the sample means and the regression coefficients of the
variables on wounds, illnesses, and wartime mobility, I calculated the size of the effect that
each of the wartime experiences had on geographical mobility. 20 The results of the
computations generally suggest that the positive effect of wartime mobility was strong
enough to dominate the negative effect of wartime medical events.21 Second, the migration
rates of the native-born veterans aged 25 to 45 were higher than the migration rates for the
ransom sample of native-born males at the same age between 1860 and 1880 reported in
Ferrie (2004). The inter-county and inter-state migration rates were respectively 77% and
42% for the veterans, whereas they were respectively 58% and 37% for the random sample.


                                          REFERENCES
Angrist, J. 1990. “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence from Social
 Security Administrative Records,” American Economic Review 80, 313-336.
Archibald H. C., and Tuddenham, R. D. 1965. “Persistent Stress: Reaction after Combat,” Archives
 of General Psychiatry 12, 475-81.
Beebe, Gilbert W. 1975. “Follow-up Studies of World War II and Korean War Prisoners, II:
 Morbidity, Disability, and Maladjustments,” American Journal of Epidemiology 101, 400-422.

20
   For instance, the effect of wounds on the aggregate inter-county migration rate can be calculated
by multiplying the proportion of the veterans wounded (0.269) by the size of its effect on the
probability of moving to a different county (-0.202). According to this calculation, wartime wounds
decreased the rate of migration by 5.4%.
21
   For instance, the net effect of wartime experiences was an increase in the probability of inter-
county migration by 11.3% and the probability of inter-regional migration by 34% only if the
statistically significant coefficients were counted. Even if all estimated coefficients are considered,
the general implications remain unchanged, except that the net effect of the military events on the
probability of inter-county migration switches to negative.

                                                  
Behrman J. R., and A. B. Deolaliker. 1989. “Agricultural Wages in India: The Role of Health,
 Nutrition, and Seasonality,” In D. Sahn, ed., Seasonal Variability in Third World Agriculture.
 Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 107-17.
Berg, S. William and Milton Richlin. 1977a. “Injuries and Illnesses of Vietnam War POWs, I. Navy
 POWs,” Military Medicine 143, Jul., 514-517.
Berg, S. William and Milton Richlin. 1977b. “Injuries and Illnesses of Vietnam War POWs, II.
 Army POWs,” Military Medicine 143, Aug., 598-602.
Berg, S. William and Milton Richlin. 1977c. “Injuries and Illnesses of Vietnam War POWs, III.
 Marine Corps POWs,” Military Medicine 143, Sept., 678-679.
Berg, S. William and Milton Richlin. 1977d. “Injuries and Illnesses of Vietnam War POWs, IV.
 Comparison of Captivity Effects in North and South Vietnam,” Military Medicine 143, Oct., 757-
 761.
Bogue, Alan G. 1963. From Prairie to Cornbelt: Farming on the Illinois and Iowa Prairies in the
 Nineteenth Century, University of Chicago Press.
Collins, W. J. 1997. “When the Tide Turned: Immigration and the Delay of the Great Black
 Migration,” Journal of Economic History 57, 607-632.
Costa D. L. 1993. “Health, Weight, Wartime Stress, and Older Age Mortality: Evidence from Union
 Army Records,” Explorations in Economic History 30, 424-49.
________. 1998. Evolution of Retirement, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
________. 2000. “Understanding the Twentieth-Century Decline in Chronic Conditions among
 Older Men,” Demography 37, 53-72.
Costa, D. L., and M. Kahn. 2003. “Cowards and Heroes: Group Loyalty in the American Civil
 War,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 519-548.
Curtin, P. D. 1989. Death by Migration, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
DaVanzo, Julie. 1983. “Repeat Migration in the United States: Who Moves Back and Who Moves
 On?” Review of Economics and Statistics 65, 552-559.
Dent, Owen F., B. Richardson, S. Wilson, K. Goulston and C. Murdoch. 1989. “Postwar Mortality
 among Australian World War II Prisoners of the Japanese,” Medical Journal of Australia 150, 378-
 382.
Dean, E. C., Jr. 1997. Shook over Hell: Post-Traumatic Stress, Vietnam, and the Civil War,
 Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Deolaliker, A. B. 1988. “Do Health and Nutrition Influence Labor Productivity in Agriculture?
 Econometric Estimates for Rural India,” Review of Economics and Statistics 70, 406-413.
Dyer, Frederick H. 1959. A Compendium of the War of the Rebellion, Vol. 1, New York: Thomas


                                                 
 Yoseloff.
Elo, I. T., and S. H. Preston. 1992. “Effects of Early-Life Conditions on Adult Mortality: A Review,”
 Population Index 58, 186-212.
Ettner, S. 1996. “New Evidence on the Relationship between Income and Health,” Journal of
 Health Economics 15, 67-85.
Farber, Stephen C. 1978. “A Directional Flow Migration Model,” Southern Economic Journal 45,
 205-217.
Ferrie, J. P. 1999. Yankeys Now, New York: Oxford University Press.
________. 2003. “The rich and the dead: Socioeconomic status and mortality in the United States,
 1850-1860,” in D. Costa, ed., Health and labor force participation over the life cycle, Chicago:
 University of Chicago Press, 11-50.
________. 2004. The End of American Exceptionalism: Occupational and Geographic Mobility in
 the U.S., 1850-2000, mimeo, Department of Economics, Northwestern University.
Figley C. R. 1977. “Symptoms of Delayed Combat Stress among a College Sample of Vietnam
 Veterans,” Military Medicine 143, 107-10.
Fogel RW. 1986. “Nutrition and the Decline in Mortality since 1700: Some Additional Preliminary
 Findings.” In S. Engerman, and R. Gallman, eds., Long-Term Factors in American Economic
 Growth, Chicago: Chicago Univ. Press.
Fogel R. W. 1993. “New Sources and New Techniques for the Study of Secular Trends in
 Nutritional Status, Health, and Mortality, and the Process of Aging,” Historical Methods 26, 5-44.
_________. 2000a. Public Use Tape on the Aging of the Veterans of the Union Army Data User’s
 Manual: Military, Pension, and Medical Records 1820-1940, Version M-5, Center for Population
 Economics, University of Chicago and Department of Economics, Brigham Young University.
_________. 2000b. Public Use Tape on the Aging of the Veterans of the Union Army Data User’s
 Manual: U.S. Federal Census Records 1850, 1860, 1900, 1910, Version C-3, Center for Population
 Economics, University of Chicago and Department of Economics, Brigham Young University.
_________. 2001. Public Use Tape on the Aging of the Veterans of the Union Army Data User’s
 Manual: Surgeon’s Certificates 1862-1940, Version S-1 Standardized, Center for Population
 Economics, University of Chicago and Department of Economics, Brigham Young University.
Foy D. W., D. B. Rueger, R. C. Sipprelle, and E. H. Carroll. 1984, “Etiology of Post Traumatic
 Stress Disorder in Vietnam Veterans: Analysis of Premilitary, Military, and Constant Exposure
 Influences,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 52, 79-87.
Freeman, Linton C., and Morris H. Sunshine. 1976. “Race and Intra-Urban Migration,”
 Demography 13, 571-575.


                                                  
Frye, J. S., and R. A. Stockton. 1982, “Discriminant Analysis of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
 among a Group of Vietnam Veterans.” American Journal of Psychiatry 139: 52-56.
Galenson, D. W., and C. Pope. 1989. “Economic and Geographic Mobility on the Farming Frontier:
 Evidence from Appanoose County, Iowa, 1850-1870,” Journal of Economic History 49, 635-55.
Geary, J. W. 1991. We Need Men: The Union Draft in the Civil War. Dekalb: Northern Illinois
 University Press.
Goldin, C. D., and F. D. Lewis. 1975. “The Economic Cost of the American Civil War: Estimates
 and Implication,” Journal of Economic History 35, 299-326.
Goulston, Kerry J. et al. 1985. “Gastrointestinal Morbidity among World War II Prisoners of War:
 40 Years On,” Medical Journal of Australia 143, 6-10.
Groen, Jeffrey A. 2004. “The Effect of College Location on Migration of College-Educated Labor,”
 Journal of Econometrics 121, 125-142.
Hamersly, T. H. S. 1888. Complete Army and Navy Register of the United States of America, from
 1776 to 1887. New York: THS Hammersly, pub.
Hatton, T., and J. Williamson. 1998. The Age of Mass Migration, Oxford University Press.
Hearst, N, T. B. Newman, and S. B. Hulley. 1986. “Delayed Effects of the Military Draft on
 Mortality: A Randomized Natural Experiment,” New England Journal of Medicine 314, 620-624.
Herscovici, S. 1998. “Migration and Economic Mobility: Wealth Accumulation and Occupational
 Change among Antebellum Migrants and Persisters,” Journal of Economic History 58, 927-956.
Herzog, Jr., Henry, Richard A. Hofler, and Alan M. Schlottmann. 1985. “Life on the Frontier:
 Migrant Information, Earnings, and Past Mobility,” Review of Economics and Statistics 67, 373-
 382.
Higgs R. 1979. “Cycles and Trends of Mortality in 18 Large American Cities, 1871-1900,”
 Explorations in Economic History 10, 177-95.
Kau, James B., and C. F. Sirmans. 1977. “The Influence of Information Costs and Uncertainty on
 Migration: A Comparison of Migrant Types,” Journal of Regional Science 17, 89-96.
Kemp, T. R. 1990. “Community and War: The Civil War Experience of Two New Hampshire
 Towns.” In Vinovskis, M. A. ed., Toward A Social History of the American Civil War. New York:
 Cambridge Univ. Press, 31-77.
Lloyd, Robert E. 1976. “Cognition, Preference, and Behavior in Space: An Examination of the
 Structural Linkages,” Economic Geography 52, 241-253.
Lee, Chulhee. 1997. “Socioeconomic Background, Disease, and Mortality among Union Army
 Recruits: Implications for Economic and Demographic History,” Explorations in Economic
 History 34, 27-55.


                                                 
______. 1999. “Selective Assignment of Military Positions in the Union Army: Implications for the
 Impact of the Civil War,” Social Science History 23, 67-97.
_____. 2002. “Sectoral Shift and the Labor-Force Participation of Older Males in the United States,
 1880-1940,” Journal of Economic History 62, 512-523.
______. 2003a. “Prior Exposure to Disease, and Later Health and Mortality: Evidence from Civil
War Medical Records,” In D. Costa, ed., Health and Labor Force Participation over the Life Cycle.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
______. 2003b. “Health and Wealth Accumulation: Evidence from Nineteenth-Century America,”
 NBER Working Paper No. 10035.
______. 2005. “Wealth Accumulation and the Health of Union Army Veterans, 1860-1870,” Journal
 of Economic History, Forthcoming.
Lund M., D. Foy, C. Sipprelle, and A. Strachan. 1984. “The Combat Exposure Scale: A Systematic
 Assessment of Trauma in the Vietnam War,” Journal of Clinical Psychology 40, 1323-328.
Margo, R.A. 1990. Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950. Chicago: University of Chicago
 Press.
McNeil, W. H. 1976. Plagues and People, Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.
Meer, J., D. Miller, and H. Rosen. 2003. “Exploring the Health-Wealth Nexus,” NBER Working
 Paper No. 9554.
Murayama, Yuzo. 1991. “Information and Emigrants: Interprefectural Differences of Japanese
 Emigration to the Pacific Northwest, 1880-1915,” Journal of Economic History 51, 125-147.
Mincer, Jacob. 1978. “Family Migration Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy 86, 749-773.
Nefzger, M. Dean. 1970. “Follow-up Studies of World War II and Korean War Prisoners, I. Study
 Plan and Mortality Findings,” American Journal of Epidemiology 91, 123-138.
Pizarro, J., R. C. Silver, and J. Prause. 2004. “Traumatic War Experiences and Post-War Lifetime
 Disease Development among Civil War Veterans,” Mimeo, Department of Psychology and Social
 Behavior, UC Irvine.
Pope, C. L. 1989. “Households on the American Frontier: The Distribution of Income and Wealth in
 Utah, 1850-1900,” In D. W. Galenson, ed., Markets in History. Cambridge: Cambridge University
 Press.
Preston, S. H., and Haines, M. R. 1991. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late Nineteenth Century
 America. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Preston, S. H., Haines, M. R., and Pamuk, E. 1981, “Effects of Industrialization and Urbanization
 on Mortality in Developed Countries,” In International Union for the Scientific Study of
 Population. International Population Conference, Manila, 1981: Solicited Papers, vol. 2. Liege:


                                                 
 IUSSP, 233-54.
Pritchett, J. B., and . Tunalı. 1995. “Strangers’ Disease: Determinants of Yellow Fever Mortality
 during the New Orleans Epidemic of 1853” Explorations in Economic History 32, 517-539.
Robinson, Chris, and Nigel Tomes. 1982. “Self-Selection and Interprovincial Migration in Canada,”
 Canadian Journal of Economics 15, 474-502.
Sánchez, Mario A. 2003. “Internal Migration, Return Migration, and Mortality: Evidence from
 Panel Data on Union Army Veterans,” In D. Costa, ed., Health and Labor Force Participation over
 the Life Cycle, University of Chicago Press, 203-230.
Schwartz, Aba. 1973. Interpreting the Effect of Distance on Migration, Journal of Political
 Economy 81, 1153-1169.
Sjaastad, Larry A. 1962. “The Costs and Returns of Human Migration,” Journal of Political
 Economy, part 2, Supplement 70, 80-93.
Smith, C. I. et al. 1987. “Evidence of Hepatitis Virus Infection among Australian Prisoners of War
 during World War II,” Medial Journal of Austria 147, 229-230.
Smith, J. P. 1999. “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation between Health and
 Economic Status,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13, 145-166.
Spaulding R. C. 1977. “The Pueblo Incident: Medical Problems Reported during Captivity and
 Physical Findings at the Time of the Crew'
                                          s Release,” Military Medicine, 681-684.
Steckel, Richard. 1983. “The Economic Foundation of East-West Migration during the 19th
 century,” Explorations in Economic History 20, 14-36.
Steckel, R. 1988. “The Health and Mortality of Women and Children, 1850-1860,” Journal of
 Economic History 48, 333-45.
__________. 1995. “Stature and Standard of Living,” Journal of Economic Literature 33, 1903-40.
Strauss, J., and D. Thomas. 1992. “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development,” Journal of
 Economic Literature 36, 766-817.
Sutker, P., D. Winstead, Z. Galina and A. Allan. 1991. “Cognitive Deficits and Psychopathology
 among Former Prisoners of War and Combat Veterans of the Korean Conflicts,” American Journal
 of Psychiatry 148, 67-72.
Ursano, Robert J. 1990. “The Prisoner of War,” Military Medicine 155, 176-180.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970.
 Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Surgeon General'
                    s Office. 1870. Medical and Surgical History of the War of the Rebellion.
 Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Vinovskis, M. A. 1990. “Have Social Historians Lost the Civil War? Some Preliminary


                                                 
 Demographic Speculations,” In Vinovskis, M. A. ed., Toward a Social History of the American
 Civil War. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1-30.
Wegge, Simone A. 1997. Migration Decisions in Mid Nineteenth-Century Germany, Ph.D.
 dissertation, Northwestern University.
_______________. 1998. “Chain Migration and Information Networks: Evidence from Nineteenth-
 Century Hesse-Cassel,” Journal of Economic History 58, 957-986.
Wimmer, L. 2003. “Reflections on the ‘Early Indicator’s Project’: A Partial History,” In D. Costa,
 ed., Health and Labor Force Participation over the Life Cycle, University of Chicago Press, 1-10.




                                                 
                                                          Table 1
              Some Characteristics of the Entire and Selected Samples of Union Army Recruits Aged 18 to 45
                                               (1)                           (2)                           (3)
                                    Entire Union Army sample           Sample linked to              Sample linked to
        Variables                                                      the 1880 census          the 1860 and 1880 census
                                            N = 33,370                    N = 6882                      N = 3144
Personal Characteristics
   Age in 1860                                   25.6                          25.3                          25.3
   Height (inch)                                 67.6                          67.7                          68.0
   U.S. born (%)                                 69.0                          79.1                          87.9
Occupational Composition (%)
   Farmers                                       49.1                          53.4                          61.4
   Professionals                                  2.3                           2.4                           2.6
   Managers and proprietors                       5.3                           5.0                           3.9
   Skilled                                       20.1                          20.7                          18.4
   Semiskilled                                    4.7                           4.1                           3.3
   Unskilled                                     16.5                          12.9                           9.0
   Unclassified                                   1.9                           1.4                           1.3
Region of Enlistment (%)
   New England                                    7.5                           9.4                          11.2
   Mid Atlantic                                  34.6                          31.5                          29.5
   East North Central                            42.4                          42.2                          42.5
   West North Central                             8.4                           9.0                          10.0
   South                                          5.1                           5.9                           6.0
   West                                           2.0                           2.1                           0.9
Year of Enlistment (%)
   1861                                          24.1                          23.3                          21.2
   1862                                          34.2                          35.5                          40.3
   1863                                           6.8                           5.5                           4.5
   1864                                          23.4                          23.4                          23.1
   1865                                          11.4                          12.3                          10.9
Wartime Medical Experience (%)
   All types of wounds                           26.8                          27.3                          27.9
    Arm/Hand/Finger                               5.0                           5.7                           6.0
    Leg/Foot/Toe                                  6.4                           6.9                           7.0
    Head/Face                                     2.3                           2.4                           2.4
    Body                                          2.7                           3.0                           3.0
    Unclassified                                 16.8                          16.2                          16.3
   All types of illnesses                        64.0                          66.7                          70.5
    Typhoid                                       5.9                           5.0                           5.9
    Smallpox                                      1.1                           1.1                           1.2
    Measles                                       3.5                           3.9                           4.5
    Diarrhea                                     25.5                          26.8                          29.8
    Respiratory infections                        6.5                           6.3                           5.9
    Malaria                                      16.2                          18.4                          19.4
    Tuberculosis                                  1.7                           1.7                           2.2
    Rheumatism                                    8.6                          10.4                          10.8
    Syphilis                                      1.4                           1.3                           1.0
     Hernia
Regions Entered While in Service
    Border states                                83.1                          79.0                          79.1
    South Atlantic                               53.1                          51.6                          53.2
    East South Central                           53.1                          53.8                          54.6
    West South Central                           23.8                          23.2                          22.6


                                                           
                                               Table 2
                        Regional Migration of Veterans from Enlistment to 1880
  Region of
 Residence at                                    Region of Residence in 1880
  Enlistment
                    New       Mid      East N.   West N.    Border                South     East S.   West S.
Region      N     England   Atlantic   Central   Central     States     West     Atlantic   Central   Central
 New       474       344       36          35       35         3          14        2          0         5
England           (72.6%)    (7.6%)     (7.4%)    (7.4%)    (0.6%)     (3.0%)    (0.4%)      (0%)     (1.1%)
  Mid      2142      124      1435        293       162        42         55        8          5        18
Atlantic            (5.8)   (67.0%)    (13.7%)    (7.7%)     (2.0)     (2.6%)    (0.4%)      (0.2)     (0.8)
East N.    2872       27       158       1944       584        55         47        9          9        39
Central            (0.9%)    (5.5%)    (67.7%)   (20.3%)    (1.9%)     (1.6%)    (0.3%)     (0.3%)    (1.4%)
West N.    605         7       27          65       447        7          22        2          8        20
Central            (1.2%)    (4.5%)    (10.7%)   (73.9%)    (1.2%)     (3.6%)    (0.3%)     (1.3%)    (3.3%)
Border     396        11       41          44       37        248         7         1          4         3
 States            (2.8%)   (10.4%)    (11.1%)    (9.3%)   (62.6%)     (1.8%)    (0.3%)     (1.0%)    (0.8%)
 West      141        10       26          23       31         4          39        0          2         6
                   (7.1%)   (18.4%)    (16.3%)   (22.0%)    (2.8%)    (27.7%)    (0.0%)     (1.4%)    (4.3%)
  All      6630      523      1723       2404      1296       359        184       22         28        91
                   (7.9%)   (18.4%)    (36.3%)   (19.6%)    (5.4%)     (2.8%)    (0.3%)     (0.4%)    (1.4%)




                                                   
                                                                     Table 3
                          Results of OLS and Logistic Regressions: Correlates of the Distance and Probability of Migration
                                                    (1)                         (2)                        (3)                          (4)
                                          Distance of migration in   Probability of moving to   Probability of moving to     Probability of moving to
                                                   miles                a different county          a different state           a different region
                                                  (OLS)               (Logistic Regression)      (Logistic Regression)        (Logistic Regression)
          Variable             Mean           Mean=444.203                 Mean=0.777                Mean=0.452                   Mean=0.328
                                           Parameter     P-value        P / xi        P-value      P / xi        P-value        P / xi       P-value

 Intercept                                   624.360      0.0000
 Company Mortality
   Co wound mortality 1         0.224             NI          NI                 NI       NI             NI         NI               NI          NI
   Co wound mortality 2         0.289        -16.599      0.5229             -0.073   0.4421         -0.019     0.8144           -0.074      0.3814
   Co wound mortality 3         0.191         20.642      0.4862              0.176   0.1542          0.085     0.3821            0.052      0.6063
   Co wound mortality 4         0.297         -3.467      0.8989              0.076   0.4807          0.041     0.6376            0.002      0.9802
 Wounds                         0.269        -34.038      0.0837             -0.202   0.0016         -0.082     0.1694           -0.003      0.9642
 Illnesses                      0.664        -57.621      0.0021             -0.242   0.0001         -0.201     0.0001           -0.170      0.0027
 Mobility while in service
   North-South move            7.144           6.431      0.0714              0.006   0.6732          0.010     0.3782            0.038      0.0025
   East-West move              7.438           3.588      0.3934              0.035   0.0407          0.038     0.0058            0.036      0.0125
   NS*EW                      65.825          -0.196      0.5844             -0.002   0.1753         -0.002     0.0396           -0.003      0.0131
 1860 Age                     25.322          -2.466      0.7927             -0.044   0.2074         -0.014     0.6453           -0.020      0.5167
 1860 Age2  10-2             69.265           0.033      0.9836              0.006   0.3235          0.001     0.8757            0.003      0.5207
 Height
   Height 5th quintile          0.192         -4.928      0.8570             -0.017   0.8646         -0.066     0.4296           -0.008      0.9282
   Height 4th quintile          0.204         24.304      0.3654              0.187   0.0933          0.114     0.2023            0.209      0.0332
   Height 3rd quintile          0.191             NI          NI                 NI       NI             NI         NI               NI          NI
   Height 2nd quintile          0.223          4.949      0.8508              0.138   0.1914         -0.009     0.9149            0.029      0.7475
   Height 1st quintile          0.190         28.203      0.3036              0.095   0.3725          0.068     0.4455            0.065      0.4954
 Occupation at enlistment
   Farmer                       0.536             NI          NI                 NI       NI             NI         NI               NI          NI
   Professional                 0.025         14.459      0.7917             -0.035   0.8589         -0.035     0.8380           -0.142      0.4122
   Managers and proprietor      0.051         95.361      0.0162             -0.019   0.8946          0.212     0.1210            0.133      0.3360
   Skilled                      0.208         36.918      0.1069              0.084   0.3445          0.106     0.1619           -0.060      0.4247
   Semi-skilled                 0.039         69.075      0.1213              0.109   0.5441          0.132     0.3770            0.090      0.5503
   Unskilled                    0.141         90.668      0.0014              0.101   0.3792          0.102     0.2827           -0.009      0.9210
   Unclassified                 0.015        180.902      0.0096              1.011   0.0354          0.998     0.0028            0.763      0.0125
 U.S. born                      0.788       -248.105      0.0000             -0.324   0.0000         -0.565     0.0000           -0.556      0.0000
 Year of Enlistment
   1861                         0.227             NI          NI                 NI       NI             NI         NI               NI          NI
   1862                         0.355        -57.342      0.0136             -0.358   0.0000          0.045     0.5481           -0.001      0.9935
   1863                         0.054         36.901      0.3624              0.290   0.1285          0.408     0.0074            0.170      0.2354
   1864                         0.232        -68.571      0.0111              0.027   0.7996         -0.230     0.0022           -0.181      0.0391
   1865                         0.131        -32.447      0.3317              0.538   0.0019         -0.019     0.8520            0.082      0.4725
 Region of enlistment
   North East Central           0.434                NI          NI               NI          NI            NI          NI           NI          NI
   Mid Atlantic                 0.327           59.105       0.0062           -0.215      0.0026        -0.103      0.1118        0.035      0.6347
   New England                  0.071           70.358       0.0619           -0.350      0.0012        -0.137      0.2152       -0.184      0.1155
   Border states                0.058            -8.767      0.8262            0.181      0.2927         0.016      0.8968        0.346      0.0234
   North West Central           0.081           67.479       0.0328            0.275      0.0551         0.257      0.0199       -0.203      0.0376
   West                         0.020         1896.960       0.0000            6.440      0.0001         4.954      0.0000        5.437      0.0000
                                           R2:        0.173             -2 Log L: 6165.432         -2 Log L: 8101.095       -2 Log L: 7418.190
                                           F-value: 41.11               Chi-square: 218.125        Chi-square: 299.406      Chi-square: 286.244
                                           P-value: 0.0000              P-value:        0.0000     P-value:      0.0000     P-value:       0.0000
Note: The sample is limited to 6124 veterans who were linked to the 1880 censuses and for whom information on all independent variables is given.
NI stands for “Not Included.” The dependent variable for regression (1) is the distance between the places of enlistment and of residence in 1880. The
dependent variables for logistic regressions (2) to (4) have a value of one if a veteran moved, and zero otherwise.



                                                                         
                                                                  Table 4
                                                 Results of OLS and Logistic Regressions:
                     Effects of Particular Types of Wounds and Illnesses on the Distance and Probability of Migration
                                                 (1)                          (2)                         (3)                      (4)
                                       Distance of migration in   Probability of moving to a   Probability of moving    Probability of moving to
                                                miles                 different county           to a different state      a different region
                                               (OLS)                (Logistic Regression)      (Logistic Regression)     (Logistic Regression)
         Variable            Mean          Mean=444.203                 Mean=0.777                  Mean=0.452                Mean=0.328
                                        Parameter     P-value        P / xi        P-value        P / xi      P-value      P / xi        P-value

Intercept                                 593.407      0.0000
Company Mortality
  Co wound mortality 1        0.224            NI          NI                 NI        NI            NI         NI             NI          NI
  Co wound mortality 2        0.289       -20.407      0.4334             -0.078    0.4128        -0.030     0.7143         -0.079      0.3448
  Co wound mortality 3        0.191        16.567      0.5769              0.158    0.1956         0.071     0.4617          0.047      0.6444
  Co wound mortality 4        0.297       -10.545      0.7004              0.049    0.6470         0.016     0.8508         -0.005      0.9539
Illnesses by type
  Typhoid                     0.049       -46.727      0.2331             -0.193    0.1208        -0.104     0.3772         -0.151      0.2215
  Smallpox                    0.011       -28.582      0.7245             -0.048    0.8668        -0.184     0.4320         -0.067      0.8012
  Measles                     0.038       -89.935      0.0437             -0.050    0.7602        -0.183     0.1520         -0.153      0.2826
  Diarrhea                    0.264        -8.653      0.6642             -0.134    0.0510        -0.051     0.4084         -0.092      0.1538
  Respiratory infections      0.064        24.890      0.4754              0.172    0.2295        -0.043     0.6905         -0.021      0.8552
  Malaria                     0.182       -10.017      0.6571             -0.184    0.0134        -0.059     0.3890          0.016      0.8328
  Tuberculosis                0.018       -76.502      0.2262             -0.229    0.2323         0.078     0.7036         -0.330      0.0832
  Rheumatism                  0.102         4.228      0.8814              0.040    0.7082         0.122     0.1967          0.146      0.1442
  Syphilis                    0.012        98.341      0.2188             -0.198    0.4736         0.056     0.8346          0.484      0.1319
  Hernia                      0.021       -16.317      0.7831             -0.099    0.6189         0.124     0.5301          0.184      0.3829
Wounds by location
  Arm/Hand/Finger             0.054        26.942      0.4769             -0.129    0.3082         0.077     0.5330          0.219      0.1092
  Leg/Foot/Toe                0.069       -46.634      0.1705             -0.245    0.0187        -0.169     0.0858         -0.120      0.2682
  Head/Face                   0.024       -18.279      0.7434              0.184    0.4391         0.040     0.8237         -0.002      0.9896
  Body                        0.030       -25.572      0.6037             -0.241    0.1075        -0.110     0.4539         -0.125      0.4274
  Unclassified                0.159        -7.211      0.7708             -0.060    0.4959        -0.006     0.9423         -0.027      0.8382
Mobility in service
  North-South move           7.144          5.725      0.1086              0.004    0.7785         0.007     0.5437          0.036      0.0042
  East-West move             7.438          3.763      0.3722              0.032    0.0593         0.038     0.0065          0.037      0.0118
  NS*EW                     65.825         -0.195      0.5881             -0.002    0.2509        -0.002     0.0501         -0.003      0.0139
                                      R2:      0.173              -2 Log L: 6160.782           -2 Log L: 8441.279       -2 Log L: 7409.314
                                      F-value: 28.89              Chi-square: 223.600          Chi-square: 294.834      Chi-square: 293.245
                                      P-value: 0.0000             P-value:      0.0000         P-value:      0.0000     P-value:     0.0000
Note: The same sample and specification as those used in the regressions reported in Table 3 are used, except the variables on wounds
and illnesses.




                                                                      
                                                            Table 5
                                           Results of OLS and Logistic Regressions:
                        Various Measures of War-Time Geographical Movements and Post-War Migration
                                          (1)                       (2)                    (3)                   (4)
                                 Distance of migration Probability of moving Probability of moving Probability of moving
                                       in miles           to a different county   to a different state to a different region
                                        (OLS)            (Logistic Regression) (Logistic Regression) (Logistic Regression)
       Variable         Mean        Mean=444.203              Mean=0.777             Mean=0.452            Mean=0.328
                                 Parameter P-value           P / xi      P-value    P / xi     P-value   P / xi      P-value
Movements in service
 North-South move        7.144        5.474    0.0781          -0.003    0.7803        -0.002    0.8659        0.022     0.0379
 East-West move          7.438        1.552    0.4271           0.015    0.0647         0.013    0.0440        0.003     0.5952
Regions entered
 South Atlantic          0.512       39.560    0.0550           0.018    0.8208        -0.075    0.2376       -0.003     0.9648
 East South Central      0.544      -18.743    0.4464           0.323    0.0029         0.046    0.5632        0.083     0.3397
 West South Central      0.228       68.906    0.0050           0.173    0.1026         0.303    0.0007        0.349     0.0003
Regions entered
 South Atlantic          0.512       12.061    0.6393           0.098    0.3152        -0.128    0.0705       -0.099     0.1924
 East South Central      0.544      -37.072    0.1547           0.420    0.0004         0.024    0.7747        0.013     0.8835
 West South Central      0.228       44.672    0.1301           0.364    0.0009         0.332    0.0024        0.318     0.0055
Movements in service
 North-South             7.144       10.414    0.0402          -0.035    0.0743          0.019   0.2664        0.054      0.0028
 East-West               7.438       10.008    0.0379           0.023    0.2427          0.064   0.0001        0.067      0.0001
 NS*EW                  65.825       -0.739    0.0702          -0.001    0.3715         -0.005   0.0006       -0.006      0.0001
Note: The same sample and specification as those used in the   regressions reported in Table 3 are used, except the variables on the
measures of war-time geographical movements.




                                                                 
                                                            Table 6
                                            Results of OLS and Logistic Regressions:
                           Wartime Experiences and Post-War Migration by Age, Occupation, and Nativity
                                              (1)                         (2)                        (3)                        (4)
                                    Distance of migration in   Probability of moving to   Probability of moving to   Probability of moving to
                                             miles                a different county          a different state         a different region
                                            (OLS)               (Logistic Regression)      (Logistic Regression)      (Logistic Regression)
        Variable          Mean          Mean=444.203                 Mean=0.777                Mean=0.452                 Mean=0.328
                                    Parameter      P-value        P / xi        P-value      P / xi        P-value      P / xi       P-value

A. Age under 30
    Wounds                 0.284        -36.153     0.1084         -0.219      0.0027         -0.080      0.2392         -0.008      0.9191
    Illnesses              0.670        -63.211     0.0036         -0.237      0.0014         -0.221      0.0003         -0.196      0.0025
    North-South move       7.223          7.798     0.0588          0.021      0.1650          0.016      0.2182          0.046      0.0019
    East-West move         7.499          6.236     0.2057          0.055      0.0057          0.045      0.0056          0.039      0.0233
    NS*EW                 66.476         -0.355     0.3905         -0.004      0.0118         -0.003      0.0300         -0.003      0.0196
B. Age 30 and older
    Wounds                 0.227         -0.185     0.9963         -0.072      0.5525          0.026      0.8379          0.133      0.3418
    Illnesses              0.646        -47.969     0.1818         -0.215      0.0783         -0.128      0.2332         -0.078      0.4996
    North-South move       6.900          3.151     0.6458         -0.017      0.5143          0.003      0.9054          0.018      0.4372
    East-West move         7.296         -7.483     0.3341          0.002      0.9498          0.016      0.5189          0.019      0.4786
    NS*EW                 64.358          0.534     0.4310          0.001      0.7090         -0.001      0.5222         -0.002      0.4557
C. Farmers
    Wounds                 0.256         -7.288     0.7408         -0.212      0.0144          0.055      0.5317          0.123      0.2025
    Illnesses              0.716        -31.233     0.1449         -0.192      0.0378         -0.131      0.0932         -0.098      0.2495
    North-South move       7.640          9.209     0.0216          0.009      0.6042          0.017      0.2945          0.065      0.0005
    East-West move         7.806          2.503     0.6108          0.028      0.2355          0.048      0.0154          0.058      0.0090
    NS*EW                 70.357         -0.309     0.4331         -0.002      0.2347         -0.003      0.0409         -0.005      0.0056
D. Professionals
    Wounds                 0.278        -67.680     0.4203         -0.451      0.0301         -0.258      0.2198         -0.278      0.2007
    Illnesses              0.573        -17.909     0.8125         -0.271      0.2111         -0.109      0.5899         -0.095      0.6587
    North-South move       6.801        -18.078     0.2937         -0.044      0.4874         -0.088      0.0956         -0.040      0.4258
    East-West move         7.269         -8.979     0.6283         -0.108      0.0826         -0.069      0.2043         -0.043      0.4246
    NS*EW                 63.837          2.168     0.2209          0.013      0.0817          0.011      0.0621          0.007      0.2157
E. Skilled
    Wounds                 0.290        -68.831     0.1433         -0.188      0.1802         -0.129      0.3041         -0.010      0.9432
    Illnesses              0.630       -118.985     0.0079         -0.298      0.0231         -0.274      0.0123         -0.213      0.0739
    North-South move       6.510         15.538     0.0724          0.000      0.9884          0.024      0.3424          0.042      0.1240
    East-West move         6.859          6.890     0.5137          0.084      0.0499          0.022      0.4775          0.036      0.2622
    NS*EW                 58.435         -0.776     0.3826         -0.004      0.3194         -0.003      0.2920         -0.003      0.2938
F. Unskilled
    Wounds                 0.285        -30.538     0.6242          0.077      0.6942         -0.275      0.0435         -0.111      0.4744
    Illnesses              0.584        -68.610     0.2313         -0.288      0.0618         -0.298      0.0152         -0.273      0.0332
    North-South move       6.583         -6.989     0.5652         -0.006      0.8762          0.020      0.5338          0.018      0.5925
    East-West move         7.151          9.819     0.4547          0.095      0.0453          0.080      0.0262          0.066      0.0764
    NS*EW                 62.632         -0.106     0.9329         -0.005      0.2002         -0.005      0.1414         -0.005      0.1450
G. Natives
    Wounds                 0.263        -25.926     0.1931         -0.180      0.0127         -0.040      0.5660          0.016      0.8312
    Illnesses              0.685        -58.966     0.0020         -0.277      0.0000         -0.191      0.0016         -0.171      0.0100
    North-South move       7.087          6.461     0.0796          0.016      0.2844          0.013      0.3151          0.054      0.0005
    East-West move         7.395         -3.620     0.4024          0.039      0.0450          0.023      0.1431          0.039      0.0285
    NS*EW                 64.864          0.118     0.7483         -0.003      0.0843         -0.002      0.1921         -0.004      0.0115
H. Foreign-born
    Wounds                 0.287        -54.500     0.3331         -0.280      0.0555         -0.179      0.1572         -0.002      0.9876
    Illnesses              0.585        -50.284     0.3343         -0.060      0.7160         -0.226      0.0506         -0.162      0.1600
    North-South move       7.355          4.709     0.6247         -0.035      0.2885          0.002      0.9374          0.001      0.9781
    East-West move         7.601         17.910     0.1217          0.011      0.7951          0.079      0.0113          0.026      0.3563
    NS*EW                 69.395         -0.774     0.4320          0.005      0.6601         -0.004      0.0798         -0.001      0.5798
Note: The same sample and similar specification as those used in the regressions reported in Table 3 are used, except that the variables
on age (for A and B), occupation (for C to F), or nativity (G and H) are omitted from the regressions.


                                                                     
                                                                 Table 7
             Logistic Regressions: Correlates of the Probability of Moving to the South among the Migrants from the North
                                                           (1)                            (2)                           (3)
                                              Probability of Moving to the   Probability of moving to the    Probability of moving to
                                                South including border         South excluding border             border states
                                                          states                        states
           Variable                Mean              Mean=0.049                     Mean=0.026                     Mean=0.023
                                                 P / xi          P-value        P / xi         P-value         P / xi      P-value

Company Mortality
  Co wound mortality 1               0.247             NI            NI              NI             NI              NI             NI
  Co wound mortality 2               0.262         -0.090        0.6379           0.020         0.9403          -0.218         0.4075
  Co wound mortality 3               0.191         -0.479        0.0117          -0.450         0.0791          -0.487         0.0874
  Co wound mortality 4               0.300         -0.083        0.6828          -0.126         0.6426          -0.029         0.9240
Wounds                               0.256          0.043        0.8042           0.171         0.4874          -0.089         0.7132
Illnesses                            0.646         -0.308        0.0153          -0.315         0.0648          -0.278         0.1377
Latitudes moved below 40 degree      6.007          0.058        0.0220           0.113         0.0017           0.003         0.9261
1860 Age                            25.198         -0.055        0.4546          -0.047         0.6281          -0.055         0.6057
1860 Age2  10-2                    68.640          0.012        0.3577           0.010         0.5471           0.012         0.5218
Height
  Height 5th quintile                0.192         -0.173        0.4516           0.318         0.4065          -0.546         0.0476
  Height 4th quintile                0.209          0.260        0.3073           0.131         0.7129           0.355         0.3141
  Height 3rd quintile                0.196             NI            NI              NI             NI              NI             NI
  Height 2nd quintile                0.226          0.181        0.4616           0.433         0.2498          -0.042         0.8938
  Height 1st quintile                0.183          0.361        0.1873           0.582         0.1517           0.122         0.7349
Occupation at enlistment
  Farmer                             0.543             NI            NI              NI             NI              NI             NI
  Professional                       0.025         -0.146        0.7404           0.223         0.7091          -0.607         0.3605
  Managers and proprietor            0.051          0.660        0.0803           0.629         0.2218           0.630         0.2295
  Skilled                            0.208          0.032        0.8714           0.060         0.8202           0.008         0.9763
  Semi-skilled                       0.040         -0.190        0.6048          -0.591         0.2234           0.324         0.5673
  Unskilled                          0.118         -0.023        0.9241          -0.299         0.3506           0.278         0.4477
  Unclassified                       0.015         -0.386        0.5052          -0.375         0.6459          -0.390         0.6309
U.S. born                            0.770         -0.195        0.2057          -0.136         0.5379          -0.245         0.2446
Year of Enlistment
  1861                               0.213             NI            NI              NI             NI              NI             NI
  1862                               0.335         -0.043        0.8324           0.162         0.6095          -0.195         0.4573
  1863                               0.057          0.173        0.6233           1.082         0.0609          -0.666         0.1413
  1864                               0.239          0.345        0.1849           0.717         0.0864           0.046         0.8843
  1865                               0.154         -0.063        0.8121           0.349         0.4342          -0.346         0.2761
Region of enlistment
  North East Central                 0.483             NI           NI                NI           NI                NI             NI
  Mid Atlantic                       0.343         -0.027       0.8786            -0.145       0.5473             0.088         0.7359
  New England                        0.070         -0.407       0.1837            -0.154       0.7387            -0.607         0.1342
  North West Central                 0.104          0.532       0.0445             1.131       0.0028            -0.299         0.3962
                                              -2 Log L:   1674.958           -2 Log L:   1027.615           -2 Log L:     910.501
                                              Chi-square: 44.772             Chi-square: 50.928             Chi-square:    32.844
                                              P-value:       0.0172          P-value:       0.0035          P-value:        0.2023




                                                                    
                                                            Table 8
            Conditional Logistic Regressions: Correlates of the Probability of Migration to a Particular State among
                                                    Migrants to the South

                                                          (1)                                            (2)
       Variable            Mean          No Control for Personal Characteristics         Control for Personal Characteristics
                                       Parameter        P-value           P / xi     Parameter         P-value           P / xi
Entered in service          0.292         0.323         0.0307             0.381        0.304           0.050             0.356
Latitudinal distance        6.122        -0.078         0.0004            -0.075       -0.088          0.0001            -0.084
Longitudinal distance       8.031        -0.061         0.0000            -0.059       -0.071          0.0000            -0.068
Population growth         187.237         0.005         0.0000             0.005        0.005          0.0000             0.005
                                                  -2 Log L: 1620.867                             -2 Log L: 1612.598
                                                  Chi-square: 106.396                          Chi-square: 114.665
                                                  P-value:         0.0000                       P-value:       0.0000




                                                                
                                         Appendix Table 1
                                      Classification of Regions
       Region                                        States included
New England          ME, NH, VT, MA, RI, CT
Mid Atlantic         NY, NJ, PA, DE
East North Central   MI, OH, IN, WI, IL
West North Central   IA, KS, MO, MN, NE, SD, ND
Border States        VA, KY, MD, WV, DC
West                 AZ, CA, MT, NM, NV, OR, UT, WS, WY
South Atlantic       NC, SC, GA, FL
East South Central   TN, MS, AL,
WestSouth Central    AR, OK, TX, LA




                                                  
                                                                      Appendix Table 2
                              Correlates of the Distance and Probability of Migration for the Sample Linked to the 1860 Census
                                                        (1)                         (2)                        (3)                       (4)
                                             Distance of migration in Probability of moving to Probability of moving to Probability of moving to
                                                       miles                a different county          a different state        a different region
                                                      (OLS)               (Logistic Regression)      (Logistic Regression)     (Logistic Regression)
         Variable                Mean            Mean=348.502                  Mean=0.724                Mean=0.452                Mean=0.266
                                              Parameter      P-value         P/ x         P-value       P/ x         P-value      P/ x        P-value

Intercept                                      532.858      0.0047
Company Mortality
  Co wound mortality 1            0.226             NI          NI             NI                         NI          NI            NI          NI
  Co wound mortality 2            0.271        -49.811      0.1428         -0.259      0.0332         -0.069      0.5786        -0.180      0.1683
  Co wound mortality 3            0.190        -54.875      0.1643         -0.148      0.3245         -0.101      0.4264        -0.209      0.1525
  Co wound mortality 4            0.313        -12.204      0.7335         -0.139      0.3113          0.044      0.7502        -0.068      0.6345
Wounds                            0.270        -55.625      0.0290         -0.291      0.0005         -0.043      0.6402         0.071      0.5106
Illnesses                         0.702        -27.390      0.2731         -0.141      0.1371         -0.050      0.5827        -0.044      0.6677
Movements in service
    Latitudes moved               7.212         11.672      0.0104          0.012      0.5113          0.022      0.1999         0.074      0.0005
    Longitudes moved              7.384          0.047      0.9934          0.028      0.2512          0.004      0.8599         0.039      0.1140
    Latitude*Longitude           66.575         -0.179      0.6813         -0.002      0.2650         -0.001      0.7428        -0.004      0.0419
1860 Age                         25.337          0.698      0.9561         -0.045      0.3693         -0.015      0.7524        -0.057      0.2587
1860 Age2  10-2                 69.574         -0.679      0.7491          0.007      0.4394          0.002      0.7603         0.009      0.3004
Height
  Height 5th quintile             0.162          6.517      0.8571         -0.099      0.4720         -0.082      0.5309        -0.031      0.8359
  Height 4th quintile             0.176          6.449      0.8553          0.087      0.5615          0.217      0.1359         0.186      0.2370
  Height 3rd quintile             0.204             NI          NI             NI          NI             NI          NI            NI          NI
  Height 2nd quintile             0.235         12.690      0.7003          0.009      0.9453          0.020      0.8717        -0.001      0.9957
  Height 1st quintile             0.222         19.114      0.5690          0.116      0.4213          0.005      0.9712        -0.080      0.5545
Occupation at enlistment
  Farmer                          0.619             NI          NI             NI          NI             NI          NI            NI          NI
  Professional                    0.026        -26.482      0.7001          0.226      0.4746         -0.036      0.8852        -0.221      0.3812
  Managers and proprietor         0.040        -26.423      0.6404         -0.301      0.0963         -0.039      0.8529        -0.139      0.5303
    Skilled                       0.183         -4.387      0.8843          0.188      0.1589         -0.072      0.5109        -0.240      0.0309
    Semi-skilled                  0.031        -22.028      0.7267         -0.016      0.9484         -0.303      0.1435        -0.362      0.1012
    Unskilled                     0.087         87.967      0.0349          0.325      0.1023          0.079      0.6315        -0.124      0.4507
    Unclassified                  0.014        406.593      0.0000          0.886      0.1687          1.137      0.0292         2.421      0.0005
U.S. born                         0.883       -198.850      0.0000         -0.153      0.2538         -0.436      0.0000        -0.508      0.0000
Year of Enlistment
    1861                          0.202             NI          NI             NI          NI             NI          NI            NI          NI
    1862                          0.402        -57.294      0.0620         -0.323      0.0017          0.042      0.7117        -0.021      0.8648
    1863                          0.044         39.733      0.4883         -0.133      0.5458          0.059      0.7824        -0.125      0.5711
    1864                          0.231       -104.583      0.0048         -0.167      0.2289         -0.433      0.0000        -0.405      0.0010
    1865                          0.121        -80.854      0.0726          0.312      0.1721         -0.226      0.1282        -0.085      0.6236
Region of enlistment
  North East Central              0.437             NI          NI             NI          NI             NI          NI            NI
  Mid Atlantic                    0.312         39.901      0.1615         -0.255      0.0088         -0.181      0.0626         0.115      0.3473
  New England                     0.078         -7.959      0.8657         -0.447      0.0009         -0.323      0.0280        -0.415      0.0108
  Border states                   0.061        -42.689      0.3978          0.710      0.0216         -0.081      0.6573         0.160      0.4806
  North West Central              0.102         27.656      0.4842          0.186      0.3064          0.198      0.2079        -0.373      0.0064
  West                            0.009       1881.618      0.0000          7.305      0.0415          4.202      0.0010         5.790      0.0000
Census information
  Log of real estate wealth       1.072         -2.797     0.6052          -0.010       0.6469         -0.032     0.1055        -0.011      0.6041
  Log of personal wealth          4.435          1.883     0.6499           0.038       0.0255          0.012     0.4512         0.035      0.0470
  Illiterate                      0.031        -51.304     0.4219           0.337       0.3005         -0.301     0.1501        -0.309      0.0679
  Married, no children            0.311        -17.628     0.7371          -0.066       0.7411          0.014     0.9422         0.025      0.9110
  Married with children           0.257         52.191     0.1685           0.054       0.7333          0.134     0.3736         0.481      0.0122
                                         R2:          0.127           -2 Log L: 3102.347          -2 Log L: 3511.403        -2 Log L: 3016.756
                                         F-value: 10.96               Chi-square: 117.244         Chi-square: 102.742       Chi-square: 123.854
                                         P-value: 0.0000              P-value:       0.0000       P-value:      0.0000      P-value:      0.0000
Note: The sample is limited to 2744 veterans who were linked to the 1880 censuses and for whom information on all independent variables is given.
NI stands for “Not Included.” The dependent variable for regression (1) is the distance between the places of enlistment and of residence in 1880.
The dependent variables for logistic regressions (2) to (4) have a val value of one if a veteran moved, and zero otherwise.




                                                                             
