                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES AND THE FISCAL THEORY

                                               Troy Davig
                                              Eric M. Leeper

                                          Working Paper 11212
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11212


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




We thank Hess Chung, Jon Faust, Dave Gordon, Ross Levine, Jim Nason, Jürgen von Hagen, Tack Yun, Tao
Zha, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board for comments. Leeper acknowledges support
from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Troy Davig and Eric M. Leeper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Fluctuating Macro Policies and the Fiscal Theory
Troy Davig and Eric M. Leeper
NBER Working Paper No. 11212
March 2005
JEL No. E1, E5, E6

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper estimates regime-switching rules for monetary policy and tax policy over the post-war
period in the United States and imposes the estimated policy process on a calibrated dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium model with nominal rigidities. Decision rules are locally unique and
produce a stationary long-run rational expectations equilibrium in which (lump-sum) tax shocks
always affect output and inflation. Tax non-neutralities in the model arise solely through the
mechanism articulated by the fiscal theory of the price level. The paper quantifies that mechanism
and finds it to be important in U.S. data, reconciling a popular class of monetary models with the
evidence that tax shocks have substantial impacts. Because long-run policy behavior determines
existence and uniqueness of equilibrium, in a regime-switching environment more accurate
qualitative inferences can be gleaned from full-sample information than by conditioning on policy
regime.

Troy Davig
Department of Economics
The College of William and Mary
tadav3@wm.edu

Eric M. Leeper
Department of Economics
304 Wylie Hall
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER
eleeper@indiana.edu
 FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES AND THE FISCAL THEORY

                            TROY DAVIG AND ERIC M. LEEPER




                                     1. Introduction
   A popular approach to analyzing macroeconomic policy posits simple policy rules
and characterizes how alternative policy specifications perform in dynamic stochas-
tic general equilibrium models. This line of work has shown that simple rules seem
to explain observed policy choices quite well and that those rules produce desirable
outcomes in popular classes of dynamic monetary models. Most of the work makes
convenient assumptions that allow monetary and fiscal rules to be studied separately.
Because these assumptions are questionable, it has long been known that the result-
ing conclusions could be misleading. Recent work, particularly the fiscal theory of
the price level, emphasizes that assumptions about how monetary and fiscal policies
interaction can be important.
   Research on policy interactions has spawned a number of results that have become
part of the standard reasoning about macroeconomic policy: (1) an active monetary
policy that raises the nominal interest rate more than one-for-one with inflation–the
“Taylor principle”–is necessary for stability of the economy [Taylor (1993)]; (2) the
Taylor principle delivers good economic performance in widely used models [Rotem-
berg and Woodford (1997), Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004)]; (3) high and variable
inflation rates may be due to failure of central banks to obey the Taylor principle,
leaving the price level undetermined and subject to self-fulfilling expectations [Clar-
ida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), Lubik and Schorfheide (2004)]; (4) the combination of
active monetary policy and passive tax policy insulates the economy from aggregate
demand disturbances, such as those arising from tax-debt policies [Leeper (1991)].
   As with earlier work that focused on monetary or fiscal rules separately, the deriva-
tion of these results rests on a number of assumptions of convenience that simplify
the nature of monetary and fiscal policy interactions. The authors usually note that

   Date: March 5, 2005. Department of Economics, The College of William and Mary, ta-
dav3@wm.edu; Department of Economics, Indiana University and NBER, eleeper@indiana.edu. We
thank Hess Chung, Jon Faust, Dave Gordon, Ross Levine, Jim Nason, Jürgen von Hagen, Tack Yun,
Tao Zha, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board for comments. Leeper acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation.
                               FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                       2

diﬀerent sets of equally plausible assumptions may lead to qualitatively diﬀerent out-
comes. For example, there is now a growing literature providing counter-examples
to the desirability of the Taylor principle [Benhabib and Farmer (2000), Benhabib,
Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2001a,b, 2002), Zanna (2003)].
   Perhaps the least plausible assumption in this work is that policy regime is fixed.
This implies that agents always expect the current policy regime to last forever–
regime change, if it occurs, comes as a complete surprise. Of course, a major branch
of the applied side of the literature consists of identifying periods of diﬀerent policy
regimes [Taylor (1999a, 2000), Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), Auerbach (2002),
Lubik and Schorfheide (2004), Sala (2004), Favero and Monacelli (2005)]. But, as
Cooley, LeRoy, and Raymon (1984) argue, it makes little sense to assume policy
makers are contemplating regime change when agents put zero probability on this
event. Despite the empirical evidence and Cooley, LeRoy, and Raymon’s compelling
logic, there is little modeling of environments where recurring regime change is sto-
chastic and the objects that change are the rules governing how policy authorities
respond to the economy.1
   This paper aims to bring the applied and theoretical lines of this literature closer
together by studying a model with a simple, but empirically plausible, specification of
regime changes. We estimate Markov-switching rules for monetary and fiscal policy.
Monetary policy obeys a Taylor rule that makes the nominal interest rate depend on
inflation and the output gap; fiscal policy adjusts taxes as a function of government
debt and other variables. All the parameters of the rules, including the error vari-
ances, evolve according to a Markov process. The estimated policy process leads to a
locally unique and stationary equilibrium in a calibrated dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium model with nominal rigidities.
   There are five main findings.
   First, the estimates uncover periods of active monetary/passive fiscal behavior, the
policy mix typically assumed to prevail in monetary studies; there are also episodes
of passive monetary/active fiscal behavior, the mix associated with the fiscal theory
of the price level.2 Remaining periods combine passive monetary with passive fiscal

  1
     Some work considers recurring regime switching in exogenous processes, including exogenously
evolving policy variables [Andolfatto and Gomme (2003), Davig (2003, 2004b), Leeper and Zha
(2003), Schorfheide (2003)]. There have also been eﬀorts to incorporate one-time regime changes
into general equilibrium models of the fiscal theory [Sims (1997), Woodford (1998b), Loyo (1999),
Mackowiak (2002), Daniel (2003), Weil (2003)].
   2
     We apply the terminology in Leeper (1991). Active monetary policy arises when the response of
the nominal interest rate is more than one-for-one to inflation and passive monetary policy occurs
when that response is less than one-for-one. Analogously, passive fiscal policy occurs when the
                                FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                          3

policy or active monetary with active fiscal behavior. We argue that these results
connect well to fixed-regime estimates of policy rules and narrative accounts of policy.
   Second, post-war U.S. data can be modeled as a single, locally unique equilibrium.
While our empirical results are largely consistent with existing estimates from fixed-
regime models, we avoid the necessary implication of those models that the econ-
omy lurched unexpectedly among periods of indeterminacy (passive/passive), non-
existence of equilibrium (active/active), or unique equilibria with completely diﬀerent
characteristics (active monetary/passive fiscal or passive monetary/active fiscal) [see,
for example, Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), Lubik and Schorfheide (2004), or Sala
(2004) for such interpretations]. Instead, in a regime-switching setup those periods
are merely alternative realizations of the state vector over which agents’ decision rules
are defined. Consequently, in a switching model the policy episodes have strikingly
diﬀerent implications. For example, an empirical finding that over some sub-period
monetary policy has been active and fiscal policy has been passive is perfectly consis-
tent with there being important impacts from (lump-sum) tax shocks. A finding that
both monetary and fiscal behavior have been passive need not imply the equilibrium
is indeterminate. And the economy can temporarily experience active/active policies
without dire economic consequences.
   Third, the fiscal theory of the price level is always operative. Shocks to (lump-sum)
taxes always aﬀect aggregate demand, even when the rules in place at a given moment
would suggest that Ricardian equivalence should hold if regime were fixed. The fiscal
theory is operating whenever it is possible for fiscal policy to become active. Then a
cut in current taxes, financed by sales of nominal government debt, does not generate
an expectation that future taxes will rise by at least enough to service the new debt.
The tax reduction leaves households feeling wealthier, at initial prices and interest
rates, and they perceive they can raise their consumption paths.3 When nominal
rigidities are present, the expansion in demand for goods raises output and inflation.
Davig, Leeper, and Chung (2004) show that in a regime-switching environment, the
fiscal theory is always at work, as long as agents believe there is a positive probability
of moving to a regime with active fiscal policy. In this paper, that belief is governed
by the long-run properties of the estimated policy process.
   Fourth, the fiscal theory mechanism is quantitatively significant in U.S. data, ac-
cording to the model.4 Through that mechanism alone, a surprise transitory tax cut
of $1 raises the discounted present value of output in the long run by between 76
response of taxes to debt exceeds the real interest rate and active fiscal policy occurs when taxes do
not respond suﬃciently to debt to cover real interest payments. In many models, a unique stationary
equilibrium requires one active and one passive policy.
   3
     See Leeper (1991), Woodford (1994, 1995), Sims (1994), and Cochrane (1999, 2001).
                                FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                           4

cents and $1.02, depending on which policy regime the simulation conditions. A tem-
porary tax cut of 2 percent of output increases the long-run price level by between 1.2
percent and 6.7 percent, conditional on remaining in a given monetary-fiscal regime.
Similar impacts arise from an anticipated cut in taxes. Stochastic simulations that
draw from the estimated distribution for policy regime imply that with 80 percent
probability the output multiplier lies between 43 cents and $1.36 after 6 years, while a
tax cut of 2 percent of output raises the price level between 0.53 to 2.27 percent after
6 years. These numbers suggest the fiscal theory mechanism may be quite potent in
U.S. data, helping to reconcile a popular class of DSGE models for monetary policy
with the empirical evidence that tax disturbances have important impacts [Blanchard
and Perotti (2002), Mountford and Uhlig (2002), Perotti (2004)].
   Fifth, viewing time series as generated by recurring regime change alters how those
time series should be interpreted. Many estimates of policy rules use a priori informa-
tion about policy behavior in order to condition on sub-samples in which a particular
regime prevailed. This procedure can obtain accurate estimates of policy parameters
and the impacts of policy disturbances. But embedding the estimated rules in fixed-
regime DSGE models can lead to seriously misleading qualitative inferences when a
regime-switching environment generates the data. Because long-run policy behavior
determines the qualitative features of data, more accurate inferences can be gleaned
from full-sample information than by conditioning on regime.
   Taken together, the paper’s findings lead to a fundamental reassessment of results
(1)-(4) that guide macro policy research. The findings also lead us to argue that to
understand macroeconomic policy eﬀects, it is essential to model policy regimes (or
rules) as governed by a stochastic process over which agents form expectations. This
argument puts on the table a new interpretation of macro policies and their impacts.5




  4
     Cochrane (1999) interprets U.S. inflation in light of the fiscal theory and Woodford (2001) points
to particular historical episodes when the fiscal theory might have been relevant. But neither author
claims to have found joint monetary-fiscal behavior consistent with the fiscal theory and neither
author tries to quantify the fiscal theory mechanism.
   5
     The table is pretty full. Included among purely monetary interpretations are narratives [DeLong
(1997), Mayer (1998), Romer and Romer (2004)], fixed regime [Orphanides (2003a)], permanent
regime change [Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), Lubik and Schorfheide (2004)], adaptive learning
[Cogley and Sargent (2002a,b), Primiceri (2004), Sargent, Williams, and Zha (2004)], model uncer-
tainty [Cogley and Sargent (2004)], and regime-switching identified VARs [Sims and Zha (2004)].
Work that integrates monetary and fiscal policy includes Leeper and Sims (1994), Romer and Romer
(1994), and Sala (2004).
                               FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                        5

                               2. Estimated Policy Rules
  We seek empirical characterizations of policy behavior that use simple rules of the
kind appearing in the policy literature, but allow for recurring changes in regime.
Monetary and tax regimes can switch independently of each other. This section re-
ports maximum likelihood estimates of policy rules whose parameters evolve according
to a hidden Markov chain, as in Hamilton (1989) and Kim and Nelson (1999).
2.1. Specifications. For monetary policy, we estimate a standard Taylor (1993)
specification, which Rotemberg and Woodford (1999) have shown is nearly optimal
in the class of models we consider in section 3. The rule makes the nominal interest
rate, rt , depend only on inflation, π t , and the output gap, xt :

                 rt = α0 (StM ) + απ (StM )π t + αx (StM )xt + σR (StM )εrt ,       (1)
where StM is the monetary policy regime. Regime evolves according to a Markov
chain with transition matrix P M . r and π are net rates. We allow for four states,
with the parameters restricted to take only two sets of values, while the variance may
take four diﬀerent values. P M is a 4 × 4 matrix.6
  Unlike monetary policy, there is no widely accepted specification for fiscal policy.7
We model some of the complexity of tax policy with a rule that allows for the rev-
enue impacts of automatic stabilizers, some degree of pay-as-you-go spending, and
a response to the state of government indebtedness. The rule links revenues net of
transfer payments, τ t , to current government purchases, gt , the output gap, and debt
held by the public, bt−1 . The specification is:

           τ t = γ 0 (StF ) + γ b (StF )bt−1 + γ x (StF )xt + γ g (StF )gt + στ (StF )ετt ,   (2)
        F
where St is the fiscal policy regime, which obeys a Markov chain with transition
matrix P F for the two fiscal states. Both (1) and (2) allow for heteroskedastic errors,
which Sims and Zha (2004) emphasize are essential for fitting U.S. time series.
  Let St = (StM , StF ) denote the joint monetary/fiscal policy state. The joint distri-
bution of policy regimes evolves according to a Markov chain with transition matrix
                                                                                            P
P = P M ⊗ P F , whose typical element is pij = Pr[St = j |St−1 = i ], where j pij = 1.
With independent switching, the joint policy process has eight states.
  6Ireland  (2004), Leeper and Roush (2003), and Sims and Zha (2004) argue that allowing money
growth to enter the monetary policy rule is important for identifying policy behavior. To keep to a
specification that is comparable to the Taylor rule literature, we exclude money growth.
   7Examples of estimated fiscal rules include Bohn (1998), Taylor (2000), Fatas and Mihov (2001),

Auerbach (2003), Cohen and Follette (2003), Ballabriga and Martinez-Mongay (2004), and Claeys
(2004).
                                FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                          6

2.2. Estimation Results. We use quarterly U.S. data from 1948:2 to 2004:1. To
obtain estimates of (1) that resemble those from the Taylor rule literature, we define
πt to be the inflation rate over the past four quarters. Similarly, estimates of (2) use
the average debt-output ratio over the previous four quarters as a measure of bt−1 .
   The nominal interest rate is the three-month Treasury bill rate in the secondary
market. Inflation is the log diﬀerence in the GDP deflator. The output gap is the log
deviation of real GDP from the Congressional Budget Oﬃce’s measure of potential
real GDP. All fiscal variables are for the federal government only. τ is federal tax
receipts net of total federal transfer payments as a share of GDP, b is the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas’ market value of gross marketable federal debt held by the
public as a share of GDP, and g is federal government consumption plus investment
expenditures as a share of GDP. All variables are converted to quarterly values.
   Parameter estimates are reported in tables 1 and 2 (standard errors in parentheses)
and estimated transition matrices are in table 3.8
   For monetary policy, associated with each set of feedback parameters is a high-
and a low-variance state.9 Monetary policy behavior breaks into periods when it
responds strongly to inflation (active policy) and periods when it does not (passive
policy). In the active, volatile periods, the standard deviation is 3.7 times higher than
in the active, docile periods; in passive periods, the standard deviations diﬀer by a
factor of seven. Passive regimes respond twice as strongly to the output gap, which
is consistent with the Fed paying relatively less attention to inflation stabilization.
There are also important diﬀerences in duration of regime. Active regimes last about
15 quarters each, on average, while the duration of the docile passive regime is over
22 quarters; the volatile passive regime is most transient, with a duration of 11.6
quarters.
   Tax policies fluctuate between responding by more than the quarterly real interest
rate to debt (passive) and responding negatively to debt (active). The active policy
is what one would expect from automatic stabilizers, which reduce revenues and raise
debt as national income falls. Active policy reacts strongly to government spending,
though by less than one-to-one, while passive policy reacts more weakly. In both

  8
    To follow existing empirical work on simple policy rules, the paper does not estimate the rules
as parts of a fully specified model. We are reassured in doing this by the model-based estimates of
Ireland (2004) and Lubik and Schorfheide (2004), which are very close to single-equation estimates
of Taylor rules. It is noteworthy, though, that in an identified switching VAR, Sims and Zha (2004)
conclude that monetary policy was consistently active since 1960; they do not consider fiscal behavior
and their switching specification is more restricted than ours along some dimensions.
   9We include a dummy variable to absorb the variability in interest rates induced by credit controls

in the second and third quarters of 1980. See Schreft (1990) for a detailed account of those controls.
                                FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                         7

regimes taxes rise systematically and strongly with the output gap, as one would
expect from built-in stabilizers in the tax system. A stronger response to output under
passive policy is consistent with active policy pursuing countercyclical objectives more
vigorously.

2.3. Plausibility of Estimates. We consider four checks on the plausibility of the
estimated rules. First, are the estimates reasonable on a priori grounds? We think
they are, as the rules fluctuate between theoretically interpretable regimes. Monetary
policy fluctuates between periods when it is active, satisfying the Taylor principle
(απ > 1), and periods when it is passive (απ < 1). Passive tax policy responds to
debt by a coeﬃcient that exceeds most estimates of the quarterly real interest rate,
while active tax policy lowers taxes when debt is high.
   Second, how well do the estimated equations track the actual paths of the inter-
est rate and taxes? We use the estimates of equations (1) and (2), weighted by the
estimated regime probabilities, to predict the time paths of the short-term nominal
interest rate, r, and the ratio of tax revenues to output, τ , treating all explana-
tory variables as evolving exogenously. The predicted–using smoothed and filtered
probabilities–and actual paths of r and τ appear in figures 1 and 2. These fits are
easily comparable to those reported by, for example, Taylor (1999a) for monetary
policy.10 The interest-rate equation goes oﬀ track in the 1950s, suggesting that that
period might constitute a third distinct regime, but in three-regime specifications the
response of policy to output was negative. The tax rule tracks the revenue-output
ratio extremely well, except in the last year or so when revenues dropped precipitously.
   Third, do the periods estimated to be active and passive jibe with narrative ac-
counts of policy history?11 The estimated marginal probabilities of the monetary and
fiscal states are plotted in figures 3 and 4. All probabilities reported are at time t,
conditional on information available at t − 1.
   Figure 3 reports that, except for a brief active period in 1959-60, monetary policy
was passive from 1948 until the Fed changed operating procedures October 1979 and
policy became active. Monetary policy was consistently active except immediately
  10 Orphanides    (2003b) argues that the poor U.S. inflation performance from 1965-1979 was due
to a strong policy response to poor estimates of the output gap available at the time, rather than
a weak response to inflation. Using real-time data on the gap and inflation, he claims the fit of a
conventional Taylor rule specification is much improved when real-time data are used rather recent
vintage data. Orphanides (2003a) extends this argument to the 1950s. The fit of our switching
regression for monetary policy is far superior to Orphanides’s over the 1960:2-1966:4 period, yet our
results label this as a period of passive monetary policy.
   11 This draws on Pechman (1987), Poterba (1994), Stein (1996), Steuerle (2002), Romer and

Romer (2004), and Yang (2004a).
                           FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                 8

after the two recessions in 1991 and 2001. For extended periods during the so-called
“jobless recoveries” monetary policy continued to be less responsive to inflation for
two or more years after the oﬃcial troughs of the downturns. The passive episode in
1991 became active when the Fed launched its preemptive strike against inflation in
1994.
   These results are broadly consistent with previous findings. From the beginning
of the sample until the Treasury Accord of March 1951, Federal Reserve policy sup-
ported high bond prices to the exclusion of targeting inflation, an extreme form of
passive monetary policy. Through the Korean War, monetary policy largely accom-
modated the financing needs of fiscal policy [Ohanian (1997) and Woodford (2001)].
Romer and Romer (2002) oﬀer narrative evidence that Fed objectives and views
about the economy in the 1950s were very much like those in the 1990s, particularly
in its overarching concern about inflation. But Romer and Romer (2002, p. 123)
quote Chairman William McChesney Martin’s congressional testimony, in which he
explained that “the 1957-58 recession was a direct result of letting inflation get sub-
stantially ahead of us.” The Romers also mention that FOMC “members felt they
had not reacted soon enough in 1955 [to oﬀset the burst of inflation]” (p. 122). To
buttress their narrative case, the Romers estimate a forward-looking Taylor rule from
1952:1-1958:4. They conclude that policy was active: the response of the interest rate
to inflation was 1.178 with a standard error of 0.876. Our estimate of this response
coeﬃcient in passive regimes is 0.522, which is less than one standard error below
the Romers’ point estimate. The Fed might well have intended to be vigilant against
inflation, but it appears not to have acted to prevent the 1955 inflation. The brief
burst of active monetary policy late in 1959 and early in 1960 is consistent with the
Romers’ (2002) finding that the Fed raised the real interest rate in this period to
combat inflation. From 1960-1979, monetary policy responded weakly to inflation,
while since the mid-1980s the Fed has reacted strongly to inflation, a pattern found in
many studies [Taylor (1999a), Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), Romer and Romer
(2002) and Lubik and Schorfheide (2004)].
   The estimates of passive monetary policy behavior following the 1991 and 2001
recessions are likely to conflict with some readers’ priors. Other evidence, however,
corroborates the estimates. As early as March 1993, after the federal funds rate had
been at 3 percent for several months, during policy deliberations Governors Angell,
LaWare, and Mullins expressed concern that the Fed was keeping the rate low for
too long. Angell warned that “our progress to get inflation down low enough so it
[isn’t a factor aﬀecting] any business decision is now in jeopardy” (p. 30) [Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1993b)]. At that March FOMC meeting,
                                FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                          9

Governors Angell and Lindsey dissented on the vote to maintain the funds rate at 3
percent. Six months later, Mullins analogized 1993 to the 1970s as another “period in
which perhaps short rates weren’t appropriately set to track inflation” (p. 11) [Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1993a)].
   More recently, close observers of the Fed have expressed similar concerns, citing
the rapid growth in liquidity in 2003 and 2004 and the exceptionally low real inter-
est rates since 2001 [Unsigned (2005a,b)]. Financial economists list unusually low
interest rates as an important factor behind the spectacular growth in household and
corporate debt in recent years [Unsigned (2002) and Roach (2004)]. These sentiments
about monetary policy behavior in the early 1990s and 2000s are consistent with our
estimates that the Fed responded only weakly to inflation in those periods.
   Estimates of the tax rule in (2) reveal substantially more regime instability than
for monetary policy. Over the post-war period, there were 12 fiscal regime changes,
with tax policy spending 55 percent of the time in the active regime. Figure 4 shows
that the model associates tax policy with regimes that accord well with narrative his-
tories. Fiscal policy was active in the beginning of the sample. Despite an extremely
high level of debt from World War Two expenditures, Congress overrode President
Truman’s veto in early 1948 and cut taxes. Although, as Stein (1996) recounts the
history, legislators argued that cutting taxes would reduce the debt, the debt-GDP
ratio rose while revenues as a share of GDP fell. In 1950 and 1951 policy became
passive, as taxes were increased and excess profits taxes were extended into 1953 to
finance the Korean War, consistent with the budget-balancing goals of both the Tru-
man and the Eisenhower Administrations. From the mid-50s, through the Kennedy
tax cut of 1964, and into the second half of the 1960s, fiscal policy was active, paying
little attention to debt. There followed a period of about 15 years when fiscal policy
fluctuated in its degree of concern about debt relative to economic conditions.
   President Carter cut taxes to stimulate the economy in early 1979, initiating a pe-
riod of active fiscal policy that extended through the Reagan Administration’s Eco-
nomic Recovery Plan of 1981. By the mid-1980s, the probability of passive tax policy
increased as legislation was passed in 1982 and 1984 to raise revenues in response
to the rapidly increasing debt-output ratio. Following President Clinton’s tax hike
in 1993, fiscal policy switched to being passive through the 2001 tax cut. President
Bush’s tax reductions in 2002 and 2003 made fiscal policy active again.12
  12 The negative response of taxes to debt in the active fiscal regime might be regarded as perverse.
A negative correlation arises naturally over the business cycle, as recessions automatically lower
revenues and raise debt. Two active fiscal regimes, the late 1940s and 1973:4-1975:1, almost exactly
coincide with the cycle. But there are extended periods of active behavior, which include but do
not coincide with recessions [1955:4-1965:2 and 1978:4-1984:3]. There are also instances in which
                               FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                       10

  Favero and Monacelli (2005) estimate switching regressions similar to (1) and (2)
and also find that monetary policy was passive from 1961 to 1979. In contrast to our
results, they do not detect any tendency to return to passive policy following the 1991
and 2001 recessions, though they estimate one regime, which emerges from 1985:2-
2000:4 and 2002:2-2002:4, in the monetary policy response to inflation is exactly unity.
Their estimates of fiscal policy are not directly comparable to ours because Favero
and Monacelli use the net-of-interest deficit as the policy variable, which confounds
spending and tax policies. Like us, they find that fiscal policy is more unstable than
monetary policy.13 Our findings are also consistent with the time-varying monetary
policy rule estimates of Kim and Nelson (2004). They find that the response of
monetary policy to inflation is not diﬀerent from unity in the 1970s and the 1990s.

2.4. Joint Policy Process. It is convenient, and does no violence to the qualita-
tive predictions of the theory, to aggregate the four monetary states to two states.
We aggregate the high- and low-variance states for both the active and the passive
regimes, weighted by the regimes’ ergodic probabilities. An analogous transformation
is applied to the estimated variances. The resulting transition matrix is
                                               ·                 ¸
                                       M           .9505 .0495
                                   P       =                                                   (3)
                                                   .0175 .9825
and variances are σ 2R (St = Active) = 4.0576e−6 and σ2R (St = P assive) = 1.8002e−5.
Combining this transition matrix with the one estimated for fiscal policy yields the
joint transition matrix
                                                                            
                                          .8908        .0597   .0464   .0031
                                         .0494        .9011   .0026   .0469 
                   P = PM ⊗ PF         =
                                         .0164
                                                                             .                (4)
                                                       .0011   .9208   .0617 
                                          .0009        .0166   .0511   .9314
Probabilities on the main diagonal are P [AM/P F |AM/P F ], P [AM/AF |AM/AF ],
P [P M/P F |P M/P F ], and P [P M/AF |P M/AF ]. The transition matrix implies that
all states communicate and each state is recurring, so the economy visits each one
infinitely often.

recessions occur during periods of passive fiscal policy [1990:3-1991:1 and 2001:1-2001:4]. Taken
together these results suggest that the tax rule does more than simply identify active regimes with
economic downturns.
   13 Favero and Monacelli (2005) estimate that through 2002, fiscal policy was active in 1961:1-

1974:3, 1975:3-1995:1, and 2001:3-2002:4 and passive otherwise. Our estimates find more periods of
passive behavior.
                                FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                  11

   Figure 5 shows that the joint probabilities computed using (4) also correspond to
periods that have been noted in the literature. Both policies were passive in the early
1950s, when the Fed supported bond prices (and gradually phased out that support)
and fiscal policy was financing the Korean War. From the late 1960s through most
of the 1970s, both policies were again passive. Arguing this, Clarida, Gali, and
Gertler (2000) claim the policy mix left the equilibrium undetermined, allowing for
bursts of inflation and output from self-fulfilling expectations. Using data only from
1960-1979, it is easy to see how one might reach this conclusion. The early-to-mid-
1980s, when monetary policy was aggressively fighting inflation and fiscal policy was
financing interest payments with new debt issuances, gets labeled as doubly active
policies. Finally, the mid-1980s on is largely a period of active monetary and passive
fiscal policies, as most models of monetary policy assume [for example, the papers in
Bryant, Hooper, and Mann (1993) and Taylor (1999b)].
   Taken together, the marginal and joint probabilities paint a picture of post-war
monetary and fiscal policies that is broadly consistent with both narrative accounts
and fixed-regime policy rule estimates.
   A final check on the plausibility of the estimates asks if the policies make economic
sense when they are embedded in a conventional DSGE model. Sections 6 and 7
answer this question in detail.

                         3. A Model with Nominal Rigidities
  We employ a conventional model with monopolistic competition and sticky prices in
goods markets, extended to include lump-sum taxes and nominal government debt.14

3.1. Households. The representative household chooses {Ct , Nt , Mt , Bt} to maxi-
mize
                          "                                      #
                   X∞
                            C 1−σ
                             t+i     N 1+η
                                      t+i     (Mt+i /P t+i ) 1−κ
                Et     βi         −χ       +δ                                  (5)
                   i=0
                            1−σ      1+η          1−κ
with 0 < β < 1, σ > 0, η > 0, κ > 0, χ > 0 and δ > 0. Ct is a composite consumption
good that combines the demand for the diﬀerentiated goods, cjt , using a Dixit and
Stiglitz (1977) aggregator:
                                        ·Z       1            ¸ θ−1
                                                                 θ
                                                      θ−1
                                                       θ
                                 Ct =                cjt dj           , θ > 1.            (6)
                                             0

  14 Detailed   expositions appear in Yun (1996, 2004), Woodford (2003), and Schmitt-Grohe and
Uribe (2004).
                                 FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                           12

  The household chooses cjt to minimize expenditure on the continuum of goods
indexed by the unit interval, leading to the demand functions for each good j
                                               µ         ¶−θ
                                                   pjt
                                       cjt =                   Ct ,                 (7)
                                                   Pt
            hR           i 1−θ
                            1
               1
where Pt ≡     p1−θ dj
              0 jt
                          is the aggregate price level at t.
  The household’s budget constraint is
                        µ          ¶         µ ¶
               Mt               Bt            Wt          Mt−1 Bt−1
          Ct +     + Et Qt,t+1       + τt ≤         Nt +       +        + Πt ,       (8)
                Pt              Pt             Pt           Pt     Pt
where τ t is lump-sum taxes/transfers from the government to the household, Bt is
one-period nominal bonds, Qt,t+1 is the stochastic discount factor for the price at t of
one dollar at t + 1, and Πt is profits from the firm, which the household owns. The
household maximizes (5) subject to (8) to yield the first-order conditions

                                         Ntη    Wt
                                          χ−σ =                                     (9)
                                        Ct      Pt
                                           µ      ¶
                                              Ct σ Pt
                                Qt,t+1 = β                .                        (10)
                                             Ct+1    Pt+1
If Rt denotes the risk-free gross nominal interest rate between t and t+1, then absence
of arbitrage implies the equilibrium condition

                                    [Et (Qt,t+1 )]−1 = 1 + rt ,                    (11)
so the first-order conditions imply that real money balances may be written as
                                        µ        ¶−1/κ
                             Mt           1 + rt
                                  =δ  κ
                                                       Ctσ/κ .                    (12)
                              Pt            rt
  The government demands goods in the same proportion that households do, so the
                               ³ ´−θ                       hR θ−1 i θ−1
                                                                     θ
                                  pjt                          1
government’s demand is gjt = Pt          Gt , where Gt = 0 gjt djθ
                                                                        .
  Necessary and suﬃcient conditions for household optimization are that (9)-(12)
hold at all dates and that households exhaust their intertemporal budget constraints.
The latter condition is equivalent to requiring that the present value of households’
planned expenditure is finite and that wealth accumulation satisfies the transversality
condition [Woodford (2001)]:
                                          ·       ¸
                                               AT
                                  lim Et qt,T       = 0,                          (13)
                                 T →∞          PT
                                  FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                              13

where At = Bt + Mt and qt,t+1 = Qt,t+1 Pt+1 /Pt .
3.2. Firms. A continuum of monopolistically competitive firms produce goods using
labor. Production of good j is

                                            yjt = ZtNjt ,                               (14)
where Zt is aggregate technology, common across firms and taken to be constant.
  Aggregating consumers’ and government’s demand, firm j faces the demand curve
                                                 µ         ¶−θ
                                                     pjt
                                         yjt =                   Yt ,                   (15)
                                                     Pt
where Yt is defined by

                                           Ct + Gt = Yt .                               (16)
Equating supply and demand for individual goods,
                                                 µ   ¶
                                                 pjt −θ
                                     Zt Njt =           Yt .                             (17)
                                                  Pt
  Following Calvo (1983), a fraction 1 − ϕ firms are permitted to adjust their prices
each period, while the fraction ϕ are not permitted to adjust. If firms are permitted to
adjust at t, they choose a new optimal price, p∗t , to maximize the expected discounted
sum of profits given by
                                    "µ        ¶1−θ        µ ∗ ¶−θ #
                      X∞
                                         p ∗
                                                              pt
                                           t
                   Et     ϕi qt,t+i                − Ψt+i            Yt+i ,              (18)
                      i=0
                                        P t+i                P t+i
                                                               ³ ´1−θ
where the real profit flow of firm j at period t, Πjt = pPjtt         Yt − W t
                                                                            Pt
                                                                               Njt , has been
rewritten using (17). Ψt is real marginal cost, defined as

                                            Wt
                                            Ψt =.                                       (19)
                                          Zt Pt
The first-order condition that determines p∗t can be written as

                                                             ³       ´
                       µ       ¶ E P∞ (ϕβ)i (Y − G )−σ Pt+i θ Ψ Y
             p∗t            θ     t  i=0       t+i   t+i        Pt       t+i t+i
                   =                P∞                         ³      ´θ−1
                                                                                 ,      (20)
            Pt             θ−1               i              −σ   Pt+i
                                  Et i=0(ϕβ) (Yt+i − Gt+i )       Pt
                                                                           Yt+i
which we denote by
                           FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                   14

                                    µ      ¶
                              p∗t       θ    K1t
                                  =              ,                                    (21)
                              Pt      θ − 1 K2t
where the numerator and the denominator have recursive representations:
                                                                      µ          ¶θ
                                   −σ                                     Pt+1
                   K1t = (Yt − Gt )     Ψt Yt + ϕβEt K1t+1                            (22)
                                                                           Pt
and
                                                          ¶       µ
                                   −σ                 Pt+1 θ−1
                    K2t = (Yt − Gt ) Yt + ϕβEt K2t+1           .               (23)
                                                       Pt
   Solving (21) for p∗t and using the result in the aggregate price index, Pt1−θ =
                      1−θ
(1 − ϕ)(p∗t )1−θ + ϕPt−1  , yields
                                             µ       ¶1−θ
                                  1 1−ϕ          K1t
                          π θ−1
                            t  = −             µ          ,                     (24)
                                  ϕ      ϕ       K2t
where µ ≡ θ/(θ − 1) is the markup.
  We assume that individual
                         R1   labor services may be aggregated linearly to produce
aggregate labor, Nt = 0 Njtdj. Linear aggregation of individual market clearing
conditions implies Zt Nt = ∆t Yt, where ∆t is a measure of relative price dispersion
defined by
                                        Z    ¶  µ
                                          pjt −θ
                                            1
                              ∆t =               dj.                                  (25)
                                     0    Pt
Now the aggregate production function is given by

                                          Zt
                                      Yt =   Nt .                             (26)
                                          ∆t
  It isR natural to define aggregate profits as the sum of individual firm profits,
         1
Πt = 0 Πjt dj. Integrating over firms’ profits and combining the household’s and
the government’s budget constraints yields the aggregate resource constraint

                                   Zt
                                      Nt = Ct + Gt .                              (27)
                                  ∆t
From the definitions of price dispersion and the aggregate price index, relative price
dispersion evolves according to
                                            µ         ¶−θ
                                                p∗t
                         ∆t = (1 − ϕ)                       + ϕπθt ∆t−1 ,             (28)
                                                Pt
                             FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                  15

where πt = Pt /Pt−1 .

3.3. Policy Specification. Monetary and tax policies follow (1) and (2), with error
terms that are standard normal and i.i.d. The processes for {Gt , τ t , rt , Mt , Bt} must
satisfy the government budget identity
                                          µ          ¶
                            Mt − Mt−1             Bt     Bt−1
                 Gt = τ t +           + Et Qt,t+1      −      .         (29)
                               Pt                 Pt      Pt
given M−1 > 0 and (1 + r−1)B−1 . Government spending as a share of output is
assumed to be constant.

3.4. Information Assumptions. Although in the empirical estimates in section
2 regime is a state variable hidden from the econometrician, we do not confront
agents in the model with an inference problem. Instead, we assume agents observe
at least current and past policy shocks and regimes. Under conventional information
assumptions, the model is solved assuming that private agents base their decisions
at date t on the information set Ωt = {εrt−j , ετt−j , St−j
                                                        M      F
                                                            , St−j , j ≥ 0} plus the initial
conditions (M−1, (1 + r−1 )B−1 ). This conventional information structure enables us
to quantify the impacts of unanticipated changes in taxes. We also seek to quantify the
eﬀects of anticipated changes in taxes. Those eﬀects are computed by endowing agents
with foreknowledge of tax disturbances, so the model is solved using the expanded
information set Ω∗t = Ωt ∪ {ετt+1 }.

3.5. Stationary Equilibria. The algorithm used to solve this model finds decision
rules that produce stationary equilibria, if they exist, given the estimated exogenous
processes. Our focus on stationary equilibria is driven by empirical and theoretical
considerations. On the empirical side, our aim is to understand post-war U.S. time
series and those time series display no tendency for the debt-GDP ratio to explode.
We take seriously Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba’s (2001) demonstration that if over
time the response of government surplus to total government liabilities is bounded
away from zero infinitely often, then there exist equilibria that exhibit Ricardian
equivalence. But we question the relevance of this proposition for interpreting U.S.
data because it depends on having debt grow without bound.
   Turning to theoretical considerations, Davig, Leeper, and Chung (2004) show that
in a flexible-price variant of this regime-switching DSGE model, policies that satisfy
the assumptions of Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba’s proposition deliver a non-Ricardian
equilibrium that is unique within the set of equilibria with bounded debt-output
ratios. In addition, Chung (2005) argues that the feasibility of equilibria with un-
bounded debt-output relies on unrealistic assumptions such as lump-sum taxation. In
                               FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                       16

a model with only proportional income taxes, it is impossible to service an exploding
debt process. If instead taxes are levied against consumption or bond holdings, tax
eﬀects feed directly into the real interest rate, once again eliminating the possibility
of an equilibrium with unbounded debt.

                          4. The Fiscal Theory Mechanism
   The economics underlying the fiscal theory mechanism potentially present in the
model of section 3 relies on the existence of nominal government debt and particular
combinations of monetary and fiscal policies. An equilibrium condition that is useful
for heuristic purposes is derived by imposing the transversality condition, (13), on
the present value form of the government’s budget constraint to obtain:
                                  ·    µ                      ¶¸
                     At−1 X
                            ∞
                                                     rT MT
                         =      Et qt,T τ T − GT +               .                            (30)
                      Pt   T =t
                                                   1 + r T PT

The expression states that in equilibrium the real value of nominal government lia-
bilities must equal the expected present value of primary surpluses plus seigniorage.
When this expression imposes restrictions on the stochastic process for the price level,
it does so through the fiscal theory mechanism. In that case, Cochrane (1999, 2001)
refers to (30) as a “debt valuation” equation because fluctuations in surpluses or
seigniorage can induce jumps in Pt , which alter the real value of debt to keep it con-
sistent with expected policies.15 Conventional monetary analysis, in contrast, assumes
that monetary policy is active and fiscal policy is passive, so (30) holds via adjust-
ments in future surpluses, without imposing any restrictions on the {Pt } process [for
example, Woodford (2003)].
   Consider the simple case of an exogenous process for the net-of-interest surplus
(active fiscal policy) and a pegged nominal interest rate (passive monetary policy).16
A debt-financed cut in taxes does not raise the present value of future taxes, so
it is perceived by households as raising their wealth. Unlike when productivity or
government purchases change, wealth eﬀects from the fiscal theory do not necessarily
stem from a change in the resources available to the economy. Instead, a tax cut
raises the present value of consumption the households believe they can aﬀord at
initial prices and interest rates. This wealth-induced increase in demand for goods
  15 In the model all debt matures in one period. Cochrane (2001) emphasizes that with long-
maturity debt, the inflation consequences of a fiscal expansion can be pushed into the future.
   16 This policy mix does not impose a boundary condition on the inflation process, but it does

impose a boundary condition in the real debt process. With nominal liabilities predetermined, the
price level is uniquely determined. This is the canonical fiscal theory specification [see Woodford
(2001) or Gordon and Leeper (2002)].
                            FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                   17

raises output relative to potential, when nominal rigidities are present. But it must
also cause inflation and/or real interest rates to adjust in order to satisfy (30). With a
pegged nominal interest rate, the increase in inflation lowers the ex-ante real interest
rate, ensuring that the demand for goods expands. Condition (30) emphasizes that it
is changes in the present value of primary surpluses and seigniorage that can trigger
fluctuations in aggregate demand, suggesting that anticipated and unanticipated taxes
have symmetric eﬀects.
   Equality between the value of government liabilities and the present value of sur-
pluses plus seigniorage is achieved through three channels, as Woodford (1998a) ex-
plains. First, passive monetary policy endogenously expands the money stock to
clear the money market at the targeted nominal interest rate, creating seigniorage
revenue. Second, unexpectedly higher inflation revalues outstanding nominal debt.
Third, lower real interest rates make it possible to service a higher level of debt with
a given stream of primary surpluses.
   If condition (30) imposes restrictions on the equilibrium price level, as it does in the
fiscal theory, then higher expected seigniorage tends to lower the current price level, an
association that seems perverse relative to conventional monetary theory. Of course,
(30) is one of several conditions for equilibrium. But this informal analysis oﬀers
a preview of the possibility that monetary disturbances may have unconventional
impacts in a fiscal theory equilibrium.
   The logic of the fiscal theory mechanism carries over directly to a regime-switching
environment. Davig, Leeper, and Chung (2004) show that in that environment the
fiscal theory is always at work, regardless of the prevailing regime. As long as there is
a positive probability of moving to a regime with active fiscal policy, agents’ decision
rules will reflect that probability and disturbances to current or expected future taxes
will generate wealth eﬀects that aﬀect aggregate demand. This occurs even if in
the current regime fiscal policy is passive and monetary policy is active. Whether
this logic is practically relevant depends on whether the fiscal theory mechanism is
quantitatively important. The paper now addresses this issue.


                     5. Calibration and Solution Method
   Parameters describing preferences, technology and price adjustment for the model
in section 3 are specified to be consistent with Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) and
Woodford (2003). The model’s frequency is quarterly. The markup of price over
marginal cost is set to 15 percent, implying µ = θ(1 − θ)−1 = 1.15, and 66 percent
of firms are unable to reset their price each period (ϕ = .66). The quarterly real
interest rate is set to 1 percent (β = .99). Preferences over consumption and leisure
                                  FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                   18

are logarithmic (σ = η = 1) and χ is chosen to make steady state employment 0.2.
Each intermediate goods producing firm has access to a production function with
constant returns to labor. The technology parameter, A, is chosen to normalize the
deterministic steady state level of output to be 1.
   The preference parameter on real balances, δ, is set to ensure that velocity in the
deterministic steady state, defined as cP/M, matches average U.S. monetary base
velocity at 2.4. This value comes from the period 1959-2004 and uses the average
real expenditure on non-durable consumption plus services. The parameter governing
the interest elasticity of real money balances, κ, is set to 2.6 [Mankiw and Summers
(1986), Lucas (1988), Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2000)].
   Reaction coeﬃcients in the policy rules are taken from the estimates in tables 1
and 2 and the four-state joint transition matrix (4). The intercepts in the policy
rules govern the deterministic steady state values of inflation and debt-output in the
computational model. Intercepts are set so the deterministic steady state is common
across regimes and match their sample means from 1948:2-2004:1. Those values,
annualized, are π = 3.43 percent and b = .3525. Government purchases as a share of
output are fixed in the model at their mean value of .115.
   We compute the solution using the monotone map method, based on Coleman
(1991). The algorithm uses a discretized state space and requires a set of initial
decision rules that reduce the system to a set of non-linear expectational first-order
diﬀerence equations. The complete model consists of the first-order necessary con-
ditions from the households’ and firms’ optimization problems, constraints, speci-
fications of policy, the price adjustment process, and the transversality conditions
for real balances and bonds. The solution is a set of functions that map the state,
Θt = {bt−1 , wt−1 , ∆t−1 , θt , ψt , St }, into values for the endogenous variables.17

                     6. General Characteristics of Equilibrium
   This section discusses the qualitative features of the computed equilibrium. In par-
ticular, we argue that the equilibrium is locally unique and stationary. An analytical
demonstration of these features is not available, so we rely on numerical arguments.

6.1. Uniqueness and Stationarity. Because monetary and fiscal regimes are free
to change independently of one another, the model temporarily permits policy combi-
nations with passive monetary and passive fiscal policies, as well as active monetary
and active fiscal policies. A passive-passive policy combination leaves the equilib-
rium undetermined in fixed-regime versions of the model, admitting the possibility
  17 Details   appear in appendix A. w is a wealth measure, defined as wt ≡ Rt bt + Mt /Pt .
                              FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                    19

that sunspot shocks aﬀect equilibrium allocations. An active-active policy combi-
nation implies either no equilibrium exists or, if it does exist, the equilibrium is
non-stationary. But when regimes obey a Markov process, an active-active mix does
not necessarily violate the transversality condition because agents correctly impute
positive probability to returning to a regime that prevents debt from growing too
rapidly. Similarly, temporarily passive-passive policies do not necessary leave the
equilibrium indeterminate. It is long-run policy behavior, not current behavior, that
determines the qualitative properties of existence and uniqueness.
  To establish local uniqueness of the equilibrium, we perturb the converged decision
rules by a truncated normal random variable at every point in the state space and
check that the algorithm converges back to the initial set of rules. We repeated this
many times and the algorithm always converged to the initial converged decision
rules, leading us to infer the decision rules are locally unique.
  We also checked how the monotone map algorithm behaves when it is known there
are multiple equilibria or no equilibrium exists. Using the fixed-regime model with
PM/PF policies, the algorithm diverges; under AM/AF policies, the algorithm con-
verges, but implies a non-stationary path for debt. The regime-switching DSGE
model converges and produces a stationary path for debt, providing further evidence
that the equilibrium is locally unique and stationary.
  Zero expected present value of debt, which the transversality condition implies, is
equivalent to the intertemporal equilibrium condition
                                        bt = xt + zt ,                                    (31)
where x and z are the expected discounted present values of future primary surpluses
and seigniorage. We check whether (31) holds following an exogenous shock, con-
ditioning on remaining in each of the three stationary regimes–AM/PF, PM/PF,
PM/AF. We repeat this calculation with random realizations of regimes. The con-
dition is always satisfied, confirming that the numerical solution is an equilibrium of
the model.
   To assess the long-run properties of the model, figure 6 plots histograms from a
simulation of 250,000 periods. The top four panels are unconditional distributions
and the bottom four panels sort the sample by regime. The simulation randomly
draws policy shocks and policy regimes from their estimated distributions.
   All regimes are stationary, as is apparent by inspection of the bottom 4 panels:
all distributions have finite means and variances.18 The estimated policy rules imply
that debt diverges very slowly under AM/AF policies. Although debt temporarily
  18 Francq and Zakoian (2001) show that Markov-switching processes can have explosive regimes,
yet the entire stochastic process can be stable. Davig (2004a) shows that a properly restricted
                                    FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                          20

follows a non-stationary path, the duration of the AM/AF regime is not suﬃciently
long nor is the growth rate of debt high enough to preclude stationary distributions
for debt and other variables.

                    7. Quantifying the Fiscal Theory Mechanism
  To quantify the eﬀects of policy shocks, we report results based on two kinds
of impulse response functions. The first conditions on regime to mimic responses
functions usually reported from identified VARs. The second reflects the “typical”
eﬀect of a policy shock by computing the distribution of equilibrium time paths after
a policy disturbance.

7.1. Non-Linear Impulse Response Analysis. When conditioning on regime, we
assume the initial state of the economy equals the regime-dependent mean. After
perturbing the error term in a policy rule, we solve for equilibrium time paths, holding
the prevailing regime fixed, and report paths of variables relative to the baseline of
their regime-dependent means. For a policy shock at time t, the initial response of
variable k is
                                                  J                                  J
                 φkt (εrt , ετt ) = hk (bJ , w J , ∆ , εrt , ετt , J) − hk (bJ , wJ , ∆ , 0, 0, J),   (32)

where hk is the decision rule for variable k as a function of the state variables for
regime J and the realizations of i.i.d. policy disturbances, εrt and ετt . x̄J denotes the
mean of x in regime J. Following initial impact, policy shocks equal their means of
zero and the value of variable k in period n > t is
                                                                                         J
            φkn (εrt , ετt ) = hk (bn−1 , wn−1, ∆n−1, 0, 0, J) − hk (bJ , wJ , ∆ , 0, 0, J),          (33)

φkn is a function of the initial shocks because the impulse responses are history depen-
dent.
   Also of interest is the average (“typical”) response of a variable, where the mean is
computed over future regimes. In this case, the impact period is computed as above,
but the generalized impulse response of variable k in period n > t is given by
             k                                                                           J
           φ̂n (εrt , ετt ) = hk (bn−1 , wn−1, ∆n−1, 0, 0, Sn ) − hk (bJ , wJ , ∆ , 0, 0, J),         (34)

where the realization of the decision rule depends on the current realization of regime,
                                                                      k
Sn . We report various summary measures of the random variable φ̂n .

Markov-switching process for discounted debt can have an explosive regime, yet satisfy the transver-
sality condition for debt.
                            FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                  21

7.2. A Fiscal Expansion. In every regime, a cut in taxes is financed by new sales
of nominal government debt and generates wealth eﬀects that increase aggregate
demand, inflation, and output.
   Figure 7 reports paths following a surprise tax reduction of two percent of output
in period 5, conditional on starting out and staying in each of the three stationary
regimes–AM/PF, PM/AF, and PM/PF. Regardless of the prevailing regime, the fis-
cal theory mechanism is evident. A surprise tax cut raises inflation. Monetary policy
prevents the nominal interest rate from rising as much as expected inflation, reducing
the ex-ante real interest rate and raising output above potential. In all regimes, the
one-period tax cut has persistent eﬀects, lasting over 5 years when monetary policy is
passive (thin solid and dashed lines) and for many more years when monetary policy
is active (thick solid lines). Figure 7 illustrates the three sources of fiscal financing:
inflation jumps unexpectedly on impact, revaluing debt; the real interest rate falls,
raising the expected discounted present values of surpluses and seigniorage; future
inflation and, therefore, seigniorage increases.
   Active monetary policy appears to dramatically dampen the tax eﬀects on output
and inflation. In fact, a strong response of the nominal interest rate to inflation
spreads the responses to taxes over many periods and actually results in larger long-
run eﬀects from fiscal disturbances. In a linear model, the Taylor principle creates
explosive inflation dynamics following an i.i.d. shock, so it may seem anomalous that
the inflation process is stationary in the AM/PF regime. Davig, Leeper, and Chung
(2004) show, in an endowment version of this model, that an AM/PF regime creates
wealth eﬀects that make the forecast error in inflation serially correlated, depending
negatively on past inflation and positively on past real debt. These surprises in
inflation are a key feature of the fiscal theory mechanism, as they serve to revalue
debt. Through the Taylor principle, higher πt raises Rt , which increases future debt
service. Because regimes can switch, agents expect some debt service to be met with
future seigniorage. But figure 7 conditions on remaining in the AM/PF regime, so
taxes are unexpectedly high, which reduces aggregate demand and stabilizes inflation.
   Generalized impulse response functions bring out the role that the evolution of
regime plays in aﬀecting economic agents’ expectations and choices. Dynamic impacts
of policy disturbances display important diﬀerences from their counterparts in figure
7. For the three stationary regimes, figure 8 plots the mean and one standard deviation
bands of the generalized impulse responses following a fiscal expansion. The first four
periods condition on the stationary mean in a given regime, period 5 imposes the
shock and holds regime fixed, and draws of regimes are taken from period 6 on.
                                 FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                          22

   Factoring in future regime changes alters the predictions one makes about the
dynamic path of the economy following a tax cut. A one-period fiscal expansion gen-
erates a hump-shaped response of inflation and output; the hump is more pronounced
when the initial regime is AM/PF policies. The responses resemble those arising from
identified VARs focusing on the eﬀects of fiscal policy. When monetary policy is pas-
sive, the inflation and output responses are stronger in the short run, but die out
more quickly. Generalized response functions also imply that when the initial regime
entails passive fiscal policy, there is a substantial probability that a few years after
the fiscal expansion both output and inflation will fall below their pre-shock levels.
7.3. Tax Multipliers. We compute several summary measures of tax eﬀects, both
conditional on the economy remaining in the current regime and unconditional, av-
eraging across future realizations of regime. The measures quantify the impacts of a
one-time exogenous change in taxes, either unanticipated or anticipated.
    Table 4 reports tax multipliers, computed as the discounted present value of addi-
tional output generated by a tax cut. The multiplier is defined as P Vn (∆y)/∆τ 0 =
  1
     Pn
∆τ 0   s=0 q0,s (ys − y), where q0,s is the stochastic discount factor, computed for the
horizons n = 5, 10, 25, and for the long run (∞).
    A one-time $1 surprise tax cut raises the discounted present value of future output
in the long run by $1.02 in the AM/PF regime, by 76 cents in the PM/PF regime, and
by 98 cents in the PM/AF regime. The table highlights the stronger persistence of
output under active monetary policy, where after 25 quarters the discounted present
value of additional output is only 42 cents. Under passive monetary policy, the
additional eﬀects of the tax cut have largely dissipated after 25 quarters.
    The fiscal theory does not sharply delineate between the impacts of unanticipated
and anticipated changes in taxes. As expression (30) emphasizes, the fiscal theory
focuses on how fluctuations in the expected discounted present value of taxes impact
current aggregate demand. The lower panel of table 4 reports output multipliers when
households anticipate a tax cut next period.19 The multipliers under foreknowledge
of taxes are similar to the multipliers from a tax surprise, confirming that it is the
change in the expected discounted present value of primary surpluses that is central
to the fiscal theory mechanism.
    Table 4 shows the proportion of the marginal addition to debt arising from a tax
cut that is backed by an increase in discounted primary surpluses. Under an AM/PF
policy, two-thirds of new debt is backed by discounted primary surpluses, in contrast
to fixed-regime models, where the proportion is 100 percent. The proportions under
  19 The decision rules are functions of the expanded information set Ω∗t , defined in section 3.4. Yang
(2004b) explores the implications of foreknowledge of tax rates in a neo-classical growth model.
                                FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                        23

PM/PF and PM/AF are 59 percent and 49 percent. Consequently, the PM/AF
regime experiences the strongest wealth eﬀect on impact from a tax cut, as figure 7
makes apparent. Much of this adjustment arises from the lower real interest rates
that are used to discount future surpluses and seigniorage.
   In the model, it is highly unusual for policy regime to remain unchanged, as the
calculations in table 4 assume. Typically, after a policy disturbance, regimes evolve
according to their estimated transition matrices. Table 5 reports 80th percentile
ranges for the tax multipliers, computed from 10,000 draws of regimes, using the
generalized impulse response function defined in (34). At the 80th percentile, a $1
tax cut raises the discounted present value of output from 76 cents to $1.36 after 6
years, depending on the initial regime.
   Table 6 reports the price level eﬀects of a one-period tax shock, conditional on
regime. In the long run, a transitory tax cut of 2 percent of output raises the price
level by 6.7 percent under AM/PF policies. At a little over 1 percent, the long-run
price eﬀects are substantially smaller when monetary policy is passive. At shorter
horizons, taxes have larger price eﬀects when monetary policy is passive than when
it is active. Table 7 records typical price level impacts, accounting for possible future
regimes. These impacts can be substantial, with the price level more than 2 percent
higher 6 years after the tax cut. Uncertainty about realizations of future regimes
creates a wide range of possible output and price level impacts from tax changes, as
tables 5 and 7 attest.20

7.4. A Monetary Expansion. In the model’s fiscal theory equilibrium, an expan-
sionary monetary policy disturbance generates conventional short-run responses–
lower real interest rate and higher output and inflation–but unconventional longer
run impacts–higher real interest rate and lower output and inflation [figure 9]. Un-
derlying the transitory monetary expansion is an open-market purchase of debt that
leaves households holding less government debt. This negative wealth eﬀect is not
neutralized in the model, as it is with a fixed AM/PF regime, because the estimated
policy process implies that future taxes do not fall in the long run by enough to
counteract the decline in wealth from lower debt.
   Although the longer run impacts of a monetary disturbance are unconventional by
most criteria, the positive correlation between the nominal interest rate and future
inflation that appears in figure 9 is a feature of many monetary VARs [Sims (1992)].
  20
     Appendix B considers an alternative specification of the policy process that increases the du-
ration of the active monetary policy regime by labeling as active the periods after the recessions in
1991 and 2001, which section 2 estimated as passive monetary policy. This reduces the quantitative
impacts of tax shocks, though the fiscal theory mechanism remains important.
                                 FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                         24

This “price puzzle,” which is discussed in more detail in the next section, is a feature
of the equilibrium generated by the fiscal theory mechanism.

                             8. Some Empirical Implications
   Many studies of monetary policy condition on policy regime and then estimate
policy rules. To interpret the estimates, the estimated rules are embedded in a fixed-
regime variant of the model in section 3. This section illustrates some pitfalls of
this approach when data are generated by an environment with recurring changes in
policy regimes.
   We imagine that the calibrated model with the estimated switching process gen-
erated observed time series. Three sources of stochastic variation and the model’s
non-linearity are suﬃcient to ensure that a five-variable VAR fit to taxes, the nomi-
nal interest rate, the output gap, inflation, and the real value of debt is stochastically
non-singular. In the identified VAR, only the policy rules are restricted. Output,
inflation, and debt are treated as a triangular block which, as in the DSGE model,
is permitted to respond contemporaneously to monetary and tax disturbances. The
policy rules are specified as

                                   rt = α0 + απ π t + αx xt + εrt                              (35)

                               τ t = γ 0 + γ x xt + γ b bt−1 + ετt .                 (36)
Following Blanchard and Perotti (2002), we impose the response of taxes to output,
but freely estimate the response to debt. Counting only contemporaneous restrictions,
the model is just identified if we estimate the response of monetary policy to inflation,
but impose its response to output.
   The econometrician estimates fixed-regime identified VARs with data generated by
the DSGE model under two diﬀerent assumptions about the econometrician’s a priori
information. In one case, the econometrician believes the full sample comes from a
single policy regime; in other cases, the econometrician believes regime changes have
occurred and has extra-sample information that identifies which regimes prevailed
over various sub-samples. Simulated data in the first case draws both policy shocks
and regime, while in the other cases the simulation conditions on regime and draws
only policy shocks.21 After estimating the VARs, the econometrician seeks to interpret
the findings in the context of a fixed-regime DSGE model.
   The identified VARs obtain accurate quantitative estimates of policy parameters
and the impacts of policy shocks. Table 8 reports four sets of estimates of the feedback
  21 But   the data are generated by decision rules based on the “true” regime-switching process.
                            FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                25

parameters απ and γ b . The “All Regimes” estimates come from the full sample and
the other columns condition on the indicated regime. All the estimates that condition
on regime recover the correct policy parameters and the associated regimes. The “All
Regimes” estimates suggest that a researcher using a long sample of data would infer
that, on average, monetary policy is passive and fiscal policy is active.
   Figure 10 shows estimates of the dynamic impacts of policy shocks from the iden-
tified VARs. Tax disturbances have important impacts on output and inflation, both
conditional on regime and in the full sample. Active monetary policy diminishes the
size of the period-by-period impacts, but induces such extreme serial correlation that
the total impacts are substantial. Monetary contractions have conventional short-
run eﬀects (lower output and inflation), but unconventional longer run eﬀects (higher
output and inflation), owing to the resulting wealth eﬀects engendered by the fiscal
theory mechanism. The rise in future inflation resembles the price puzzle Sims (1992)
discovered in monetary VARs. That puzzle is more pronounced when monetary pol-
icy is passive, consistent with Hanson’s (2004) findings that in U.S. data the puzzle is
more severe in samples that include data before 1979, a period that section 2 labels
passive monetary policy. Both the parameter estimates and the impulse response
functions the econometrician obtains are quantitatively consistent with those in the
switching model underlying the simulated data (given that the econometrician knows
αx and γ x a priori).
   Connecting these quantitative results to fixed-regime theories can lead to qual-
itatively misleading inferences. Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000) and Lubik and
Schorfheide (2004) use diﬀerent econometric methods, but both condition on mone-
tary policy regime and both conclude that since the early 1980s, U.S. monetary policy
has been active, while from 1960-1979, monetary policy was passive. Both sets of au-
thors maintain the assumption that fiscal policy was passive throughout, leading in
their fixed-regime DSGE models to Ricardian equivalence in the recent sub-sample
and indeterminacy in the earlier sub-sample. The results for AM/PF (thick solid
lines) in figure 10 are diﬃcult to reconcile with Ricardian equivalence. Similarly, in
the sub-sample where the estimated rules imply PM/PF (thin solid lines), the econo-
metrician would infer the equilibrium is indeterminate and be compelled to interpret
the policy impacts as arising from correlations between sunspot shocks and policy
shocks. But the simulated data were generated by locally unique decision rules.
   Employing the full sample, the econometrician estimates the policy impacts shown
by dashed lines in figure 10. Moreover, using the “All Regimes” parameter estimates
in a fixed-regime version of the model in section 3, produces the policy impacts rep-
resented by lines in the figure punctuated with x’s. In contrast to the estimates that
                                 FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                          26

condition on regime, the full sample estimates deliver qualitatively correct inferences
about policy eﬀects. Correct qualitative inferences require nailing down the correct
long-run behavior of policy. That long-run behavior is better gleaned from a long
sample that includes the possible realizations of regimes than from sub-samples that
condition on regime.22


                                   9. Concluding Remarks
   Existing work on policy rules is based on a logical inconsistency: it assumes regime
cannot change and then proceeds to analyze the implications of alternative regimes.
This paper takes a step toward resolving this inconsistency. A simple and plausible
empirical specification of regime change finds that U.S. monetary and fiscal policies
have fluctuated among active and passive rules. Treating that evidence of regime
change in an internally consistent manner can significantly alter interpretations of
the historical period and of monetary and fiscal policies more generally. Both the
empirical specification and the economic model are very simple, leaving much room
for improving fit to data. This is an important area for continued research.
   This paper has not addressed why policy regimes change. This is a hard question,
but it is the same hard question that can be asked of any model with a stochastic
component to policy behavior. Although Sims (1987) oﬀers a rationale for why op-
timal policy might include a component that is random to private agents, there is
certainly no consensus on this issue. Lack of consensus, however, does not undermine
the utility of simply postulating the existence of policy shocks and then tracing out
their influence in data and in models. In this paper, we have followed the convention
of assuming some part of policy behavior is random.
   Under the working hypothesis of recurring regime change, this paper shows that
when estimated Markov-switching rules for monetary and tax policies are embedded in
a DSGE model calibrated to U.S. data, lump-sum taxes have quantitatively important
eﬀects on aggregate demand, output, and inflation. In the model, tax non-neutralities
arise because the estimates imply that agents always place positive probability mass
on an active fiscal regime in the future, a belief that makes the fiscal theory of the
price level operative.
   Of course, the fiscal theory is not the only source of tax non-neutralities in actual
data. A full accounting of tax eﬀects requires introducing some of the panoply of
reasons oﬀered for why taxes might be non-neutral–distortions, life-cycle considera-
tions, and so forth. In any case, the quantitative predictions of this paper strongly

  22 Unless   there is compelling evidence that agents believe the prevailing regime is permanent.
                           FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                               27

suggest that the fiscal theory mechanism should be added to the list of usual suspects
for the breakdown of Ricardian equivalence.
                            FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                  28

                         Appendix A. Solution Method
   Implementation of the algorithm begins by conjecturing an initial set of rules, which
we take to be the solution from the model’s fixed-regime counterpart. Specifically,
we take the solutions from the fixed-regime model with AM/PF and PM/AF policies
as the initial rules for the corresponding regimes in the non-synchronous switching
model. For the AM/AF and PM/PF regimes there are no stationary, unique fixed-
regime counterparts, so we use the solution from the PM/AF fixed-regime model
to initialize the algorithm. To ensure the solution is not sensitive to initial condi-
tions, we also use the solution from the AM/PF regime and weighted averages of the
two. Further perturbations of the initial rules have no eﬀect on the final solution,
suggesting the solution is locally unique. This appendix more fully draws out con-
nections between determinacy and uniqueness in linear models with convergence of
the monotone map algorithm.
   Taking the initial rules for labor, b
                                       hN (Θt ) = Nt , and the functions determining the
firm’s optimal pricing decision, b hK1 (Θt) = K1,t and b hK2 (Θt ) = K2,t , we find values
using a non-linear equation solver for Nt, K1,t , K2,t such that
                                           h     ¡          ¢−σ i
                         Ct−σ = βRt Et πt+1 hC (Θt+1 )            ,                   (37)

                        K1,t = Ct1−σ Ψt + ϕβEtb
                                              hK1 (Θt+1 ),                           (38)
                        K2,t = Ct1−σ + ϕβEtbhK2 (Θt+1),                              (39)
where hC (Θt ) = (A/∆t)b  hN (Θt )− g. Given Nt , K1,t , K2,t , we compute the endogenous
variables. Note that ∆t , bt and wt = Rt bt + Mt /Pt are states at t + 1. Gauss-Hermite
integration
   £         is¤ used over possible values for εrt+1, ετt+1 and St+1, yielding values for
          −σ
Et πt+1Ct+1 , Et K1,t+1 , Et K2,t+1 , which reduces the above system to three equations
in three unknowns. The (net) nominal interest rate is restricted to always be positive.
   When solving the above system, the state vector and the decision rules are taken
as given. The system is solved for every set of state variables defined over a discrete
partition of the state space. This procedure is repeated until the iteration improves
the current decision rules at any given state vector by less than some = 1e − 12.

                Appendix B. An Alternative Policy Process
   Many authors have argued that monetary policy has been active since around 1979.
Since our empirical estimates indicate two brief episodes of passive monetary policy
after 1979, this section conducts a sensitivity analysis that adjusts the transition
matrix to be consistent with an active monetary regime for the entire post 1979
sample. This exercise highlights that the general message of the paper, namely that
                           FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                29

fiscal shocks have important real eﬀects even under AM/PF policy, carries into an
environment with a more persistent active monetary policy.
   Our empirical estimates indicate that there are a total of 28 quarters of passive
monetary policy after 1979. Relabeling these periods as active monetary policy re-
sults in 44.2 percent of all periods having active monetary policy. There is no unique
way of adjusting the transition matrix so that 44.2 percent of periods are active. How-
ever, increasing the persistence of the active monetary regime, instead of decreasing
the persistence of the passive regime, is more consistent with the priors of many re-
searchers that the U.S. has had active monetary policy since 1979. So, we adjust
the transition matrix by increasing the transition probability of staying in the active
regime, conditioning on being in the active regime, from .9505 to .9779.
   To summarize the eﬀects of a more persistent active monetary regime, tables anal-
ogous to those reported in the paper are computed [tables 9-12].. The proportion of
new debt backed by discounted surpluses increase in all regimes as the persistence
of the active monetary regime increases. However, the primary diﬀerences that arise
relative to the baseline specification occur under AM/PF policy. Across all time hori-
zons, a more persistent active monetary regime diminishes the impacts fiscal shocks
have on output and inflation. For example, the increase in all additional discounted
output under AM/PF policy arising from a $1 tax reduction is 61 cents, compared
to $1.02 under the baseline specification.
                                                    P V (∆y)
             Fraction of new debt                      ∆τ
                                                             after
   Regime backed by PV of taxes 5 quarter 10 quarters 25 quarters           ∞
   AM/PF              .801             −.053     −.099           −.213    −.607
   PM/PF              .588             −.512     −.683           −.758    −.760
   PM/AF              .490             −.619     −.853           −.976    −.981
      Table 9. Output multipliers for taxes conditional on regime. Uses the
      alternative policy process that makes monetary policy active after the
      1991 and 2001 recessions.
                          FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                             30

                                            P V (∆y)
                                                after
                                               ∆τ
         Initial Regime   5 quarters    10 quarters     25 quarters
         AM/PF          [−.062, −.066] [−.107, −.667] [−.218, −.959]
         PM/PF          [−.172, −.174] [−.192, −.512] [−.249, −.655]
         PM/AF          [−.314, −.317] [−.447, −.799] [−.802, −1.252]

      Table 10. Output multipliers for taxes, unconditional: 80th percentile
      bands based on 10,000 draws. Uses the alternative policy process that
      makes monetary policy active after the 1991 and 2001 recessions.


                                    %∆P after
              Regime 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters ∞
              AM/PF     .166       .331         .798    5.128
              PM/PF     .765       1.073       1.231    1.236
              PM/AF     .942       1.364       1.620    1.633

      Table 11. Cumulative eﬀect on price level of an i.i.d. unanticipated
      tax cut of 2 percent of output. Uses the alternative policy process that
      makes monetary policy active after the 1991 and 2001 recessions.


                                            %∆P after
             Initial Regime 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters
             AM/PF           [.166, .180] [.331, 1.206] [.798, 1.906]
             PM/PF           [.673, .765] [.837, 1.073] [.542, 1.231]
             PM/AF          [.943, 1.001] [1.292, 1.546] [1.621, 2.233]

      Table 12. Cumulative eﬀect on the price level of an i.i.d. tax cut of
      2 percent of output, unconditional: 80th percentile bands based on
      10,000 draws. Uses the alternative policy process that makes monetary
      policy active after the 1991 and 2001 recessions.


                                   References
Andolfatto, D., and P. Gomme (2003): “Monetary Policy Regimes and Beliefs,”
 International Economic Review, 44(1), 1—30.
Auerbach, A. J. (2002): “Is There a Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy?,” in Re-
 thinking Stabilization Policy: Proceedings of a Symposium Sponsored by the Federal
                           FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                               31

 Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 109—150.
          (2003): “Fiscal Policy, Past and Present,” Brookings Papers on Economic
 Activity, (1), 75—122.
Ballabriga, F. C., and C. Martinez-Mongay (2004): “Sustainability of EU
 Public Finances,” Manuscript, ESADE Business School.
Benhabib, J., and R. E. A. Farmer (2000): “The Monetary Transmission Mech-
 anism,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 3(2), 523—550.
Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2001a): “Monetary Policy and
 Multiple Equilibria,” American Economic Review, 91(1), 167—186.
         (2001b): “The Perils of Taylor Rules,” Journal of Economic Theory, 96(1-2),
 40—69.
          (2002): “Avoiding Liquidity Traps,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(3),
 535—563.
Blanchard, O. J., and R. Perotti (2002): “An Empirical Characterization of
 the Dynamic Eﬀects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1329—1368.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1993a): “Transcript
 of Federal Open Market Committee,” September 23.
         (1993b): “Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting,” March
 23.
Bohn, H. (1998): “The Behavior of U.S. Public Debt and Deficits,” Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics, 113(3), 949—963.
Bryant, R. C., P. Hooper, and C. L. Mann (eds.) (1993): Evaluating Policy
 Regimes: New Research in Empirical Macroeconomics. The Brookings Institution,
 Washington, D.C.
Calvo, G. A. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maxmimizing Model,” Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 12(November), 383—398.
Canzoneri, M. B., R. E. Cumby, and B. T. Diba (2001): “Is the Price Level
 Determined by the Needs of Fiscal Solvency?,” American Economic Review, 91(5),
 1221—1238.
Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2000): “Sticky Price Models
 of the Business Cycle: Can the Contract Multiplier Solve the Persistence Prob-
 lem?,” Econometrica, 68(5), 1151—1179.
Chung, H. (2005): “A Note Concerning Debt Dynamics When Taxes are Distorting,”
 Manuscript, Indiana University.
Claeys, P. (2004): “Monetary and Budget Policy Interaction: An Empirical Analy-
 sis of Fiscal Policy Rules, Stabilisation Policies and Policy Interaction in Monetary
                          FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                            32

 Union,” Manuscript, European University Institute.
Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules and
 Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 115(1), 147—180.
Cochrane, J. H. (1999): “A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation,” in NBER Macro-
 economics Annual 1998, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg, pp. 323—384.
 MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
         (2001): “Long Term Debt and Optimal Policy in the Fiscal Theory of the
 Price Level,” Econometrica, 69(January), 69—116.
Cogley, T., and T. J. Sargent (2002a): “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Poli-
 cies and Outcomes in the Post WWII U.S.,” Manuscript, Arizona State University.
         (2002b): “Evolving Post-World War II U.S. Inflation Dynamics,” in NBER
 Macroeconomics Annual 2001, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg. MIT
 Press, Cambridge.
        (2004): “The Conquest of U.S. Inflation: Learning and Robustness to Model
 Uncertainty,” Manuscript, New York University.
Cohen, D., and G. Follette (2003): “Forecasting Exogenous Fiscal Variables
 in the United States,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2003-59, Federal
 Reserve Board.
Coleman, II, W. J. (1991): “Equilibrium in a Production Economy with an Income
 Tax,” Econometrica, 59(4), 1091—1104.
Cooley, T. F., S. F. LeRoy, and N. Raymon (1984): “Econometric Policy
 Evaluation: Note,” American Economic Review, 74(3), 467—470.
Daniel, B. C. (2003): “Fiscal Policy, Price Surprises, and Inflation,” Manuscript,
 SUNY Albany.
Davig, T. (2003): “Regime-Switching Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,” Manu-
 script, The College of William and Mary.
          (2004a): “Periodically Expanding Discounted Debt: A Threat to Fiscal
 Policy Sustainability?,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, forthcoming.
        (2004b): “Regime-Switching Debt and Taxation,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 51(4), 837—859.
Davig, T., E. M. Leeper, and H. Chung (2004): “Monetary and Fiscal Policy
 Switching,” NBER Working Paper No. 10362.
DeLong, B. J. (1997): “America’s Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s,” in Reducing
 Inflation: Motivation and Strategy, ed. by C. D. Romer, and D. H. Romer, pp.
 247—276. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
                          FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                             33

Dixit, A. K., and J. E. Stiglitz (1977): “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
  Product Diversity,” American Economic Review, 67(3), 297—308.
Fatas, A., and I. Mihov (2001): “Politica Fiscal y Ciclos Economicos: Una Investi-
  gacion Empirica. (Fiscal Policy and the Business Cycle: An Empirical Analysis.),”
  Moneda y Credito, (212), 167—205.
Favero, C. A., and T. Monacelli (2005): “Fiscal Policy Rules and Regime
  (In)Stability: Evidence from the U.S.,” Manuscript, IGIER.
Francq, C., and J.-M. Zakoian (2001): “Stationarity of Multivariate Markov-
  Switching ARMA Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 102, 339—364.
Gordon, D. B., and E. M. Leeper (2002): “The Price Level, The Quantity Theory
  of Money, and the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” NBER Working Paper No.
  9084.
Hamilton, J. D. (1989): “A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonsta-
  tionary Time Series and the Business Cycle,” Econometrica, 57(2), 357—384.
Hanson, M. S. (2004): “The ‘Price Puzzle’ Reconsidered,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 51(7), 1385—1413.
Ireland, P. N. (2004): “Money’s Role in the Monetary Business Cycle,” Journal
  of Money, Credit and Banking, 36(6), 969—983.
Kim, C.-J., and C. R. Nelson (1999): State-Space Models with Regime Switching.
  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
          (2004): “Estimation of a Forward-Looking Monetary Policy Rule: A Time-
  Varying Parameter Model using Ex-Post Data,” Manuscript, University of Wash-
  ington.
Leeper, E. M. (1991): “Equilibria Under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal
  Policies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 27(1), 129—147.
Leeper, E. M., and J. E. Roush (2003): “Putting ’M’ Back in Monetary Policy,”
  Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 35(6, Part 2), 1217—1256.
Leeper, E. M., and C. A. Sims (1994): “Toward a Modern Macroeconomic Model
  Usable for Policy Analysis,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1994, ed. by S. Fis-
  cher, and J. J. Rotemberg, pp. 81—118. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Leeper, E. M., and T. Zha (2003): “Modest Policy Interventions,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 50(8), 1673—1700.
Loyo, E. (1999): “Tight Money Paradox on the Loose: A Fiscalist Hyperinflation,”
  Manuscript, Harvard University.
Lubik, T. A., and F. Schorfheide (2004): “Testing for Indeterminacy: An Ap-
  plication to U.S. Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 94(1), 190—217.
                          FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                              34

Lucas, Jr., R. E. (1988): “Money Demand in the United States: A Quantita-
  tive Review,” in Money, Cycles, and Exchange Rates: Essays in Honor of Allan
  H. Meltzer, vol. North-Holland of Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
  Policy, pp. 137—168. Amsterdam.
Mackowiak, B. (2002): “Macroeconomic Regime Switching and Speculative At-
  tacks,” Manuscript, Humbolt University.
Mankiw, N. G., and L. H. Summers (1986): “Money Demand and the Eﬀects of
  Fiscal Policies,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 18(4), 415—429.
Mayer, T. (1998): Monetary Policy and the Great Inflation in the United States.
  Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, U.K.
Mountford, A., and H. Uhlig (2002): “What Are the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy
  Shocks?,” Manuscript, Humbolt University.
Ohanian, L. E. (1997): “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of War Finance in the United
  States: World War II and the Korean War,” American Economic Review, 87(1),
  23—40.
Orphanides, A. (2003a): “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor
  Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(5), 983—1022.
         (2003b): “The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 50(3), 633—663.
Pechman, J. A. (1987): Federal Tax Policy. The Brookings Institution, Washington,
  D.C., fifth edn.
Perotti, R. (2004): “Estimating the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy in OECD Countries,”
  Manuscript, IGIER-Universita’ Bocconi.
Poterba, J. M. (1994): “Federal Budget Policy in the 1980s,” in American Eco-
  nomic Policy in the 1980s, ed. by M. Feldstein, pp. 235—270. University of Chicago
  Press, Chicago.
Primiceri, G. (2004): “Why Inflation Rose and Fell: Policymakers’ Beliefs and US
  Postwar Stabilization Policy,” Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Roach, S. (2004): “The Asset Economy,” Morgan Stanley Online.
Romer, C. D., and D. H. Romer (1994): “What Ends Recessions?,” in NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 1994, ed. by S. Fischer, and J. J. Rotemberg, pp. 13—57.
  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
          (2002): “A Rehabilitation of Monetary Policy in the 1950s,” American
  Economic Review, 92(2), 121—127.
         (2004): “Choosing the Federal Reserve Chair: Lessons from History,” Jour-
  nal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1), 129—62.
                          FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                              35

Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford (1997): “An Optimization-Based Econo-
  metric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” in NBER Macroeco-
  nomics Annual 1997, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg, pp. 297—346.
  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
          (1999): “Interest Rate Rules in an Estimated Sticky Price Model,” in Mon-
  etary Policy Rules, ed. by J. B. Taylor, pp. 57—119. University of Chicago Press,
  Chicago.
Sala, L. (2004): “Testing the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” IGIER Working
  Paper No. 257.
Sargent, T. J., N. Williams, and T. Zha (2004): “Shocks and Government
  Beliefs: The Rise and Fall of American Inflation,” NBER Working Paper No. 10764.
Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2004): “Optimal Simple and Implementable
  Monetary and Fiscal Rules,” Manuscript, Duke University.
Schorfheide, F. (2003): “Learning and Monetary Policy Shifts,” Manuscript, Uni-
  versity of Pennsylvania.
Schreft, S. L. (1990): “Credit Controls: 1990,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
  Economic Review, 76(6), 25—55.
Sims, C. A. (1987): “A Rational Expectations Framework for Short-Run Policy
  Analysis,” in New Approaches to Monetary Economics, ed. by W. A. Barnett, and
  K. J. Singleton, pp. 293—308. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
          (1992): “Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The Eﬀects of
  Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review, 36, 975—1000.
          (1994): “A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price Level
  and the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Economic Theory, 4(3), 381—
  399.
          (1997): “Fiscal Foundations of Price Stability in Open Economies,” Manu-
  script, Yale University.
Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (2004): “Were There Regime Switches in US Monetary
  Policy?,” Manuscript, Princeton University.
Stein, H. (1996): The Fiscal Revolution in America. AEI Press, Washington, D.C.,
  second revised edn.
Steuerle, E. (2002): “Tax Policy from 1990 to 2001,” in American Economic Policy
  in the 1990s, ed. by J. Frankel, and P. Orszag, pp. 139—169. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Taylor, J. B. (1993): “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” vol. 39 of
  Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, pp. 195—214. North Hol-
  land.
                           FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                36

          (1999a): “An Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in Monetary
  Policy Rules, ed. by J. B. Taylor, pp. 319—341. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
         (1999b): Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
           (2000): “Reassessing Discretionary Fiscal Policy,” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 14(3), 21—36.
Unsigned (2002): “Dicing with Debt,” The Economist, (January 24).
         (2005a): “Saturated,” The Economist, (February 26).
         (2005b): “Still Gushing Forth,” The Economist, (February 3).
Weil, P. (2003): “Reflections on the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” Manuscript,
  ECARES.
Woodford, M. (1994): “Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-
  in-Advance Economy,” Economic Theory, 4, 345—380.
          (1995): “Price-Level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary Aggre-
  gate,” vol. 43 of Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, pp. 1—46.
  North-Holland.
         (1998a): “Control of the Public Debt: A Requirement for Price Stability?,”
  in The Debt Burden and Its Consequences for Monetary Policy, ed. by G. Calvo,
  and M. King, pp. 117—154. St. Martin’s Press, New York.
         (1998b): “Public Debt and the Price Level,” Manuscript, Princeton Univer-
  sity.
         (2001): “Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability,” Journal of Money, Credit,
  and Banking, 33(3), 669—728.
          (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Yang, S.-C. S. (2004a): “Evidence of Tax Foresight,” Manuscript, John Carroll
  University.
         (2004b): “Quantifying Tax Eﬀects Under Policy Foresight,” Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics, forthcoming.
Yun, T. (1996): “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business
  Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 37(April), 345—370.
         (2004): “Optimal Monetary Policy with Relative Price Distortions,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, forthcoming.
Zanna, L.-F. (2003): “Interest Rate Rules and Multiple Equilibria in the Small
  Open Economy,” Federal Reserve Board IFDP No. 785.
                     FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                          37

                         Active                     Passive
         State    StM =1      StM = 2        StM  =3      StM = 4
          α0       .0069        .0069          .0064       .0064
                 (.00039)     (.00039)       (.00017)    (.00017)

          απ      1.3079         1.3079       .5220       .5220
                  (.0527)        (.0527)     (.0175)     (.0175)

          αx       .0232          .0232       .0462       .0462
                  (.0116)        (.0116)     (.0043)     (.0043)

          σ 2R    1.266e-5   9.184e-7   2.713e-5   5.434e-7
                 (8.670e-6) (1.960e-6) (5.423e-6) (1.512e-6)

Table 1. Monetary policy estimates. Log likelihood value = −1014.737.

                        State    StF = 1    StF = 2
                         γ0        .0497      .0385
                                  (.0021)    (.0032)
                         γb        .0136      -.0094
                                  (.0012)    (.0013)
                         γx        .4596      .2754
                                  (.0326)    (.0330)
                         γg        .2671      .6563
                                  (.0174)    (.0230)
                         σ2τ     4.049e-5   5.752e-5
                                (6.909e-6) (8.472e-6)

   Table 2. Tax policy estimates. Log likelihood value = −765.279.

                                             
            .9349       .0651   .0000   .0000          ·             ¸
           .0000       .9324   .0444   .0232 
    PM   =                                    , P F = .9372 .0628
           .0093       .0000   .9552   .0355           .0520 .9480
            .0000       .0332   .0529   .9139

       Table 3. Monetary and fiscal policy transition matrices
                         FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                38

                                                      P V (∆y)
          Fraction of new debt                            after
                                                         ∆τ
Regime backed by PV of taxes        5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters         ∞
Conventional information set Ωt
AM/PF              .673               −.108          −.199       −.417    −1.019
PM/PF              .586               −.515          −.686       −.759    −.761
PM/AF              .488               −.623          −.855       −.976    −.981

Foreknowledge information set Ω∗t
AM/PF               -                 −.106          −.195       −.410    −.997
PM/PF               -                 −.460          −.612       −679     −.681
PM/AF               -                 −.556          −.762       −.873    −.877

          Table 4. Output multipliers for taxes conditional on regime

                                          P V (∆y)
                                             ∆τ
                                               after
        Initial Regime   5 quarters    10 quarters     25 quarters
        AM/PF          [−.126, −.400] [−.213, −.754] [−.430, −.922]
        PM/PF          [−.215, −.401] [−.271, −.623] [−.414, −.764]
        PM/AF          [−.365, −.568] [−.537, −.928] [−.993, −1.363]

     Table 5. Output multipliers for taxes, unconditional: 80th percentile
     bands based on 10,000 draws

                                      %∆P after
              Regime 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters ∞
             AM/P F        0.324    0.641          1.513       6.704
             P M/P F       0.770    1.077          1.232       1.237
             P M/AF        0.949    1.369          1.620       1.633
     Table 6. Cumulative eﬀect on price level of an i.i.d. unanticipated tax
     cut of 2 percent of output
                     FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                 39

                                     %∆P after
      Initial Regime 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters
      AM/PF           [.324, .687] [.641, 1.306] [1.158, 2.160]
      PM/PF           [.678, .770] [.840, 1.077] [.533, 1.232]
      PM/AF          [.949, 1.008] [1.325, 1.551] [1.610, 2.269]

Table 7. Cumulative eﬀect on the price level of an i.i.d. tax cut of 2
percent of output, unconditional: 80th percentile bands based on 10,000
draws

                   All Regimes AM/PF PM/PF PM/AF
             απ        0.723          1.308    0.595      0.528
             γb        0.002          0.016    0.018     −0.003
Table 8. Policy parameters from identified VAR estimated on simu-
lated data. “All Regimes” from stochastic simulation drawing from
regime; others are conditional on regime. Estimated equations are
τ t = γ 0 + γ x xt + γ b bt−1 + ετt , rt = α0 + απ π t + αxxt + εR
                                                                 t , with γ x
and αx restricted to values used to simulate model. Samples of length
10,000.
                    FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                            40


                             r: Actual vs. Predicted
 16
                                                               r
                                                               Smoothed
 14
                                                               Filtered

 12


 10


   8


   6


   4


   2


   0
        1950        1960       1970         1980       1990        2000



Figure 1. Actual and predicted paths of the nominal interest rate
from estimates of the monetary policy rule, equation (1) using smoothed
and filtered probabilities.
                  FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                           41


                           τ: Actual vs. Predicted
0.16
                                                            τ
                                                            Smoothed
0.14                                                        Filtered


0.12


 0.1


0.08


0.06


0.04


0.02
       1950       1960        1970        1980       1990      2000



Figure 2. Actual and predicted paths of the tax-output ratio from
estimates of the tax policy rule, equation ( 2), using smoothed and
filtered probabilities.
                     FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                             42



                   Monetary Regime Probabilities
                                  Active, High σ
    1

  0.5

    0
         1950        1960       1970        1980        1990        2000
                                  Active, Low σ
    1
  0.5
    0
         1950        1960       1970        1980        1990        2000
                                 Passive, High σ
    1
  0.5
    0
         1950        1960       1970        1980        1990        2000
                                 Passive, Low σ
    1
  0.5
    0
         1950        1960       1970        1980        1990        2000



Figure 3. Smoothed (solid line) and filtered (dashed line) probabilities.
                     FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                             43



                     Fiscal Regime Probabilities
                                     Passive
    1



  0.5



    0
         1950        1960       1970            1980    1990        2000

                                       Active
    1
                                                                filtered
                                                                smoothed

  0.5



    0
         1950        1960       1970            1980    1990        2000



Figure 4. Smoothed (solid line) and filtered (dashed line) probabilities.
                     FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                             44



                 Joint Policy Regime Probabilities
                            Active Monetary/Passive Fiscal
    1

  0.5

    0
         1950        1960         1970       1980         1990      2000
                            Active Monetary/Active Fiscal
    1
  0.5
    0
         1950        1960       1970       1980        1990         2000
                         Passive Monetary/Passive Fiscal
    1
  0.5
    0
         1950        1960         1970       1980          1990     2000
                            Passive Monetary/Active Fiscal
    1
  0.5
    0
         1950        1960         1970        1980           1990   2000



Figure 5. Smoothed (solid line) and filtered (dashed line) probabilities.
                        FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                     45



15000
10000                                     5000
 5000
    0                                       0
        2   2.5     3     3.5   4   4.5     0.32     0.33     0.34 0.35     0.36
             Inflation (annual %)                           Debt−Output
                                          3000
 5000
                                          2000
                                          1000
    0                                        0
    −1    −0.5         0     0.5    1            0    2       4        6           8
    Output (% Deviation from Potential)               (ex ante) real rate
  1.5
    1                                      50
  0.5
    0                                       0
      2   2.5      3     3.5    4 4.5       0.32     0.33     0.34 0.35     0.36
            Inflation (annual %)                            Debt−Output
    3
   2                                       0.5
   1
   0                                        0
   −1    −0.5      0      0.5      1             0    2       4        6           8
   Output (% Deviation from Potential)                (ex ante) real rate


 Figure 6. Distributions: unconditional and conditional. Top four
 panels are unconditional distributions, taking draws from policy shocks
 and regimes; bottom four panels are conditional on regime, sorting
 observations by designated regime. AM/PF (thick solid), AM/AF
 (dashed), PM/PF (dotted-dashed), PM/AF (thin solid).
                               FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                                 46




                  π (Change basis pts)                                      b/y (% Change)
                                                             2
 100                                          AM/PF
                                                            1.5
                                              PM/PF
                                                             1
  50                                          PM/AF
                                                            0.5
                                                             0
   0
                                                           −0.5
        0   10            20             30           40          0   10          20            30   40
                    Output Gap (%)                                    Nominal R (Change basis pts)
  0.4                                                       60

                                                            40
  0.2
                                                            20
   0                                                         0

        0   10            20             30           40          0   10          20            30   40
                 PV surplus (% Change)                                 PV seigniorage (% Change)
   2                                                         4


   1                                                         2


   0                                                         0

        0   10            20             30           40          0   10          20            30   40




Figure 7. Responses to an i.i.d. tax cut of 2 percent of output, con-
ditional on remaining in the prevailing regime.
                            FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                            47




           AM/PF : π (Change basis pts)                        AM/PF : Output gap (%)
  60                                            0.2
  40
                                                0.1
  20
   0                                             0

 −20                                           −0.1
       0   10          20            30   40          0   10            20              30   40
           PM/PF : π (Change basis pts)                        PM/PF : Output gap (%)
 100
                                                0.2
  50
                                                0.1

   0                                             0

                                               −0.1
       0   10          20            30   40          0   10            20              30   40
           PM/AF : π (Change basis pts)                        PM/AF : Output gap (%)
 100                                            0.4


  50                                            0.2


   0                                             0

       0   10          20            30   40          0   10            20              30   40




Figure 8. Responses to an i.i.d. tax cut, given the regime at the date
of the shock and drawing from regime over the forecast horizon.
                               FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                                 48




                  π (Change basis pts)                              b/y (% Change)

  20                                                  0

   0                                                −1

 −20                                                −2

 −40                                                −3
        0   10            20             30   40          0   10          20            30           40
                    Output Gap (%)                            Nominal R (Change basis pts)
                                                      0
  0.2

  0.1                                              −50

   0
                                                   −100
 −0.1
                                                   −150
        0   10            20             30   40          0   10          20            30           40
                 PV surplus (% Change)                         PV seigniorage (% Change)
                                                      0
   0

 −0.2                                               −5
                                                                                             AM/PF
 −0.4                                                                                        PM/PF
                                                   −10
                                                                                             PM/AF
        0   10            20             30   40          0   10          20            30           40




Figure 9. Responses to an i.i.d. monetary expansion, conditional on
remaining in the prevailing regime.
                             FLUCTUATING MACRO POLICIES                                  49


                   Fiscal Policy                               Monetary Policy
      1                                          0.2

     0.5                                          0
τ


      0
                                                −0.2
           0   5        10         15     20           0       5     10       15    20
      0                                          0.5
R




    −0.2
                                                  0
           0   5        10         15     20           0       5     10       15    20
      0                                          0.2
                                                  0
x




    −0.1                                        −0.2
                                                −0.4
           0   5        10         15     20           0       5     10       15    20
      0
                                                 0.1
    −0.2
π




                                                  0
    −0.4
                                                −0.1
           0   5        10         15     20           0       5     10        15   20
                         All            AM/PF              PM/PF          Fixed


    Figure 10. Impacts of policy shocks. Estimated from simulated data
    and produced by fixed-regime DSGE model.
