                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ATTENTION, DEMOGRAPHICS, AND THE STOCK MARKET

                                           Stefano DellaVigna
                                            Joshua M. Pollet

                                          Working Paper 11211
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11211


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




We thank George Akerlof, Colin Camerer, John Campbell, David Card, Zhiwu Chen, Liran Einav, Ed
Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, Amit Goyal, Caroline Hoxby, Gur Huberman, Michael Jansson, Lawrence Katz,
David Laibson, Ronald Lee, Ulrike Malmendier, Ignacio Palacios-Huerta, Ashley Pollet, Jack Porter, James
Poterba, Matthew Rabin, Joshua Rauh, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Geoffrey Tate, Tuomo Vuolteenaho,
Jeff Wurgler, seminar participants at Bocconi, Columbia GSB, Emory, Haas, Kellogg, Harvard, Ohio State
University, Stanford (Economics Department and GSB), Trento, UC Berkeley, UI Urbana-Champaign, and
the participants at the NBER Behavioral Finance Program Meeting, at the NBER Summer Insitute on Aging,
at the WFA 2004, and at the ASSA Meetings 2004 for their comments. Jessica Chan, Fang He, Lisa Leung,
Shawn Li, Fanzi Mao, Rebbecca Reed, and Terry Yee helped collect the dataset of industries. Dan Acland,
Saurabh Bhargava and Christine Yee provided excellent research assistance. We thank Ray Fair and John
Wilmoth for making demographic data available to us. For financial support, DellaVigna thanks the CEDA
and the Academic Senate in Berkeley. Both authors thank the NSF for support through grant SES-0418206.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Stefano DellaVigna and Joshua M. Pollet. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Attention, Demographics, and the Stock Market
Stefano DellaVigna and Joshua M. Pollet
NBER Working Paper No. 11211
March 2005
JEL No. G1, J1, D0

                                           ABSTRACT

Do investors pay enough attention to long-term fundamentals? We consider the case of demographic
information. Cohort size fluctuations produce forecastable demand changes for age-sensitive sectors,
such as toys, bicycles, beer, life insurance, and nursing homes. These demand changes are
predictable once a specific cohort is born. We use lagged consumption and demographic data to
forecast future consumption demand growth induced by changes in age structure. We find that
demand forecasts predict profitability by industry. Moreover, forecasted demand changes 5 to 10
years in the future predict annual industry returns. One additional percentage point of annualized
demand growth due to demographics predicts a 5 to 10 percentage point increase in annual abnormal
industry stock returns. However, forecasted demand changes over shorter horizons do not predict
stock returns. The predictability results are more substantial for industries with higher barriers to
entry and with more pronounced age patterns in consumption. A trading strategy exploiting
demographic information earns an annualized risk-adjusted return of 5 to 7 percent. We present a
model of underreaction to information about the distant future that is consistent with the findings.

Stefano DellaVigna
UC, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu

Joshua M. Pollet
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth St.
Champaign, IL 61820
pollet@uiuc.edu
1    Introduction
According to the theory of eﬃcient financial markets, stock prices should reflect all avail-
able information. However, evidence on post-earnings announcement drift and short-horizon
momentum eﬀects suggests that stock prices do not fully adjust to new information.
    We implement a novel test of underreaction to information based on demographic variables.
We examine whether investors respond appropriately to changes in the demographic structure
of the United States.
    One unusual feature characterizes demographic changes–they are forecastable years in
advance. Current cohort sizes, in combination with mortality and fertility tables, generate
accurate forecasts of future cohort sizes even at long horizons. Diﬀerent goods have distinctive
age profiles of consumption, and therefore forecastable changes in the age distribution produce
forecastable shifts in demand for various goods. These shifts in demand induce predictable
changes in profitability for industries that are not perfectly competitive. Consequently, the
timing of the stock market reaction to these predictable demand shifts is a test of investor
attention to determinants of profitability.
    We illustrate the idea of this paper with an example. Assume that a large cohort is born
in 2004. This large cohort will increase the demand for school buses as of 2010. If the school
bus industry is not perfectly competitive, the companies in the industry will enjoy an increase
in abnormal profits in 2010. When should stock returns be abnormally high in anticipation of
greater future profitability?
    The timing of abnormally high returns depends on the attention horizon of the marginal
investor. According to the standard analysis with perfect attention, the marginal investor
foresees the positive demand shift induced by demographic changes and purchases school bus
stocks in 2004. The price of school bus shares increases in 2004 until the opportunity to receive
abnormal returns in the future dissipates. In this case, forecastable changes in profitability do
not predict stock returns after 2004.
    Alternatively, under a particular form of inattention, agents neglect information about
future profitability until it is embedded in realized profits. In this case, stock returns in the
school bus industry are abnormally high in 2010, six years after the release of information.
A second, more realistic form of inattention has investors that incorporate information about
future profitability only up to a fixed horizon. For instance, investors may have a four-year
horizon, since analyst forecasts for profitability are typically available for the next four years. In
this case, stock returns are abnormally high in 2006, two years after the release of information.
For both forms of inattention, formalized in Section 2, demographic information available in
2004 predicts industry abnormal returns between 2005 and 2010.
   This example motivates a simple test of attention with respect to future outcomes. In
a model with attentive investors, forecastable fluctuations in cohort size do not generate


                                                  1
predictability for stock returns, because stock prices react immediately to the demographic
information. If investors, instead, are inattentive to information about future profitability,
demographic variables predict industry asset returns.
    This test can provide an estimate of the attention horizon. Since cohort size is predictable
both in the short-term and in the long-term, we can estimate separately the impact of short-
term and long-term profitability changes on stock returns. This examination of investor atten-
tion is diﬀerent from other tests of predictability based on announcements of quarterly earn-
ings or performance information measured by previous returns (DeBondt and Thaler, 1985)
or accounting ratios (Fama and French, 1992). These variables convey information about
profitability that is not easily decomposable into short-term and long-term components.
    In Section 3 we perform the attention test. We analyze stock return predictability in a set
of 48 US industries over the period 1935-2003. We define industries in an eﬀort to separate
goods with diﬀerent age profiles in consumption and yet cover all final consumption goods.
Several goods have an obvious association with a demographic cohort. In the life cycle of
consumption, books for children are followed by toys and bicycles. Later in life, individuals
consume housing, life insurance, and pharmaceuticals. The life cycle ends with nursing homes
and funeral homes. Other expenditure categories, like clothing, food, and property insurance,
have a less obvious association with a specific age group.
   The empirical strategy follows six steps. In the first step, we use current cohort sizes,
mortality tables, and fertility rates to forecast future cohort sizes. The forecasted cohort growth
rates over the next ten years are close to the actual growth rates over the same horizon, as
well as to the corresponding Census projections.
   In the second step, we estimate age-consumption profiles for the 48 goods in the sample.
We use historical surveys on consumer expenditure from 1935-36, 1960-61, and 1972-73 to
complement the more standard Consumer Expenditure Survey for the years 1983-84. We find
that: (i) consumption of most goods depends significantly on the demographic composition of
the household; (ii) across goods, the age profile of consumption varies substantially; (iii) for a
given good, the age profile is quite stable across the diﬀerent surveys. These findings support
the use of cohort size as a predictor of consumer demand.
    In the third step we combine the demographic forecasts with the age profiles of consump-
tion for each good. The output is the good-by-good forecasted demand growth caused by
demographic changes. In each year, we identify the 20 industries with the highest forecasted
standard deviation of consumption growth. This subsample, labeled Demographic Industries,
is most likely to be aﬀected by demographic changes.
   In the next three steps, we match the consumption forecasts with accounting information
from Compustat and stock returns data from CRSP. In order to perform this match, we disag-
gregate the industry classification beyond the 4-digit SIC code level. For example, we separate
the SIC codes for book producers 2730-2739 into 4 industries depending on the targeted age


                                                2
group. In the fourth step we examine whether the forecasted consumption growth predicts
contemporaneous profitability for companies in an industry. For the Demographic Industries,
the accounting return on equity increases by 1.5 to 2.5 percentage points for each additional
percentage point of contemporaneous demand growth induced by demographics. The results
are comparable for the whole sample of industries. The point estimates are larger in industries
with a more concentrated industrial structure, but the estimates are not statistically diﬀerent
from zero. Finally, when we separate industries by target demographic groups, we find that
much of the identification comes from industries selling products to the young, although the
point estimates are similar for industries producing goods for adults and the elderly.
   In the fifth step, we test for underreaction to demographic information using stock returns.
We regress beta-adjusted annual industry stock returns on measures of short-term and long-
term forecasted demand growth. The short-term measure is the forecasted annualized growth
rate of consumption due to demographics over the next 5 years. The long-term measure is
the forecasted annualized growth rate of consumption during years 5 to 10. We find that
long-term demand growth forecasts annual stock returns. A one percentage point increase in
the annualized demand growth rate due to demographics predicts a 5 to 10 percentage point
increase in abnormal industry return. The eﬀect of short-term demand growth on returns is
negative but not statistically significant. The eﬀects are comparable for the whole sample of
industries.
   The predictability of returns depends on industry concentration, a proxy for barriers to en-
try or market power. Industries with above-median concentration ratios exhibit predictability
that is approximately twice as large as in the whole sample, while industries with below-median
concentration ratios exhibit no predictability. We also analyze the relationship between stock
returns and forecasted demand growth at diﬀerent horizons. We find that demand growth 5
to 8 years ahead is the strongest predictor of returns.
    Finally, in the sixth step we present an alternative measure of the stock return predictability
due to demographics. We construct a zero-investment portfolio that is long in industries with
high absolute and relative long-term forecasted growth and short in industries with low ab-
solute and relative long-term forecasted growth. For the Demographic Industries, this portfolio
outperforms various factor models by more than 7 percent per year. For the sample including
all industries, the portfolio (marginally) outperforms the benchmark portfolios by approxi-
mately 3 percentage points per year. A portfolio constructed using only high-concentration
industries earns annualized abnormal returns of over 8 percentage points.
   In Section 4 we interpret these results within the framework of a model with inattentive
investors, described in Section 2. We assume that investors only consider information about
future profitability within a horizon of h years. For the periods further into the future, investors
use a combination of a parametric estimate for the long-term growth and an extrapolation
from the near-term forecasts. This model embeds the standard framework as a limiting case


                                                 3
as h approaches infinity. Evidence from I/B/E/S, one of the most comprehensive data sets for
analyst forecasts, suggests that the horizon h for analysts may be between 3 and 5 years. While
forecasts of earnings 1, 2, or even 3 years into the future are available for most companies,
earnings forecasts beyond 4 years exist for less than 10 percent of the sample.
    For a horizon h of approximately 5 years, the model of short-sighted investors matches the
stylized facts in this paper. Forecasted demand growth 5 to 10 years ahead should predict
industry stock returns. Forecastable demographic shifts occurring 5 years in the future are
neglected by investors at the beginning of the year. As the year unfolds, investors notice the
upcoming shifts and react accordingly. Predictability should be more substantial for industries
with higher concentration. In the presence of higher barriers to entry, demand changes have
a stronger impact on profitability and, consequently, on stock returns. Moreover, a calibrated
version of the model is consistent with the magnitudes of our findings.
   We also consider alternative interpretations of the results. In particular, we discuss rational
predictability, poor estimation of systematic risk, persistent regressors, generated regressors,
asset manager horizon, and neglect of slowly-moving variables as possible explanations.
    This paper contributes to the literature on the role of attention allocation in economics and
finance (Barber and Odean, 2002; Gabaix, Laibson, Moloche, and Weinberg, 2004; Hirshleifer,
Lim, and Teoh, 2004; Huberman and Regev, 2001; Peng and Xiong, 2004). The evidence in
this paper suggests that individuals may simplify complex decisions by neglecting long-term
information.
    A related literature in financial economics analyzes the positive autocorrelation of stock
returns at short horizons (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993; Moskowitz and Grinblatt 1999; Hong,
Touros, and Valkanov, 2003) and the post-earnings announcement drift (Watts 1978, Bernard
and Thomas 1989). Three behavioral explanations of these phenomena rely on underreaction
due to slow diﬀusion of information (Hong and Stein, 1999), fluctuations in overconfidence
(Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam, 1998), and investor sentiment (Barberis, Shleifer,
and Vishny 1998). Since our forecasts use information that has been in the public domain for
at least one year and possibly decades, our findings suggests that underreaction may persist
for years.
    This paper also extends the literature on the eﬀect of demographic variables on corporate
decisions and stock market behavior. Pharmaceutical companies introduce new drugs in re-
sponse to predictable demand increases induced by demographics (Acemoglu and Linn, 2004).
The evidence on the relationship between cohort size and the equity premium is mixed (Bakshi
and Chen, 1994; Poterba, 2001; Geneakoplos, Magill, and Quinzii, 2002). Compared to the
literature on the equity premium, our paper focuses on changes in demand across consumption
goods rather than on aggregate shifts in demand for financial assets.
   Finally, Mankiw and Weil (1989) find that contemporaneous cohort size partially explains
the time-series behavior of housing prices. We generalize their approach by analyzing 48


                                                4
industries and examining stock market returns where, unlike for housing prices, arbitrage
should eliminate predictability. While we also find evidence of predictability, stock returns are
predicted by forecasted demand growth in the distant future, rather than by contemporaneous
demand growth.
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a model of the impact
of demand changes on stock returns in the presence of short-sighted investors. Section 3
describes the six steps of the empirical analysis, from the forecast of cohort size to the portfolio
performance. Section 4 interprets the empirical results in light of the model from Section 2
and discusses alternative interpretations. Section 5 concludes.


2    A model of inattention
While this Section is focused on the implications of inattention for stock returns, we first
examine the eﬀects of demand changes on firm profitability. The model of the industrial
organization serves to illustrate some simple comparative statics results, which follow also
under more general models.

    Industrial structure. We model the industrial structure as a two-stage game (Mankiw
and Whinston, 1986). In the first period, a set of potential entrants decides whether to pay
a fixed cost K and enter an industry. In the second period, the N firms that paid K in the
first period choose production levels {qn } in a Cournot game. Each firm has convex costs of
production c satisfying c (0) = 0, c0 (.) > 0, and c00 (.) ≥ 0. We consider symmetric equilibria in
the second stage where all firms choose the same quantity q. The aggregate demand function for
the market is αD(P ) where α is a proportional demand shift capturing demographic changes.
Aggregate supply Q is equal to N q; we can write the equilibrium inverse demand function
P = P [N q/α]. We assume P 0 (Q) < 0 and P 00 (Q) < 0 for all Q. The first assumption is
simply a requirement that demand curves be downward-sloping. The second assumption is a
technical requirement that guarantees strict concavity of the profit function and the uniqueness
of the solution to the profit-maximization problem in the second stage. Let q̄ be the average
production choice of the competitors, then the second stage maximization problem is
                                                 ∙                ¸
                                                     (N − 1)q̄ + q
                           max π(q|N, α) = P                       q − c (q) .
                             q                            α
 Consider first the eﬀect of a short-run increase in demand from α0 to α1 > α0 . The demand
change occurs after the entry decision has been made, that is, for fixed number of firms N.
The firms observe the level of demand α before they choose the production q ∗ . Given non-
decreasing marginal costs, the firms increase production at most proportionally to the demand
shift, that is, q ∗ (α0 ) < q ∗ (α1 ) ≤ α1 q ∗ (α0 ) /α0 .To see this, consider the first order conditions


                                                      5
for the firms in equilibrium:
                                      ∙       ¸        ∙          ¸
                                  0       N q∗ q∗    N q∗
                              P                   +P      − c0 (q ∗ ) = 0.                          (1)
                                           α   α      α
If these conditions are satisfied for q ∗ (α0 ) at α = α0 , it is easy to check that the left-hand
side of (1) is (weakly) negative for q = α1 q ∗ (α0 ) /α0 at α = α1 . Since the objective function is
strictly concave, q ∗ (α1 ) ≤ α1 q ∗ (α0 ) /α0 follows. Similarly, the left-hand side of (1) is positive
for q = q ∗ (α0 ) at α1 , because, for constant q, an increase in α increases the left-hand side of (1).
Using again the concavity of the profit function, we can conclude q ∗ (α0 ) < q ∗ (α1 ) . This proves
the desired inequality for q ∗ as a function of α. In turn, this implies 0 < ∂q ∗ (α) /∂α ≤ q ∗ (α) /α.
   Second, consider the impact of a demand shift on firm profitability. The derivative of firm
profits π with respect to a demand change α is
                                      µ           ¶µ          ¶
                     ∂π        q ∗ ∂q ∗                N q∗           ¡         ¢ ∂q ∗
                        = −P 0    −                               + P − c0 (q ∗ )        >0         (2)
                     ∂α        α    ∂α                  α                           ∂α
where the last inequality makes use of 0 ≤ ∂q ∗ (α) /∂α ≤ q ∗ (α) /α, of the assumption P 0 <
0, and of the fact that the price P is higher than marginal cost c0 (q ∗ ) by (1). Therefore,
profitability is increasing in the demand shift α in the second stage, that is, in the short-run.
   While in the short-run the number of firms N is constant, in the long-run firms enter until
profits are zero. Ignoring the integer constraint, the sub-game perfect equilibrium in the first
stage of the game implies that π(q ∗ , N ∗ , α) − K = 0. Gross profits π equal the entry cost K.
A change in demand α that is known before the entry decision, therefore, does not aﬀect the
profits.

   In the special case with constant marginal costs c (q) = cq, expression (1) implies that in
the short-run ∂q ∗ (α) /∂α = q ∗ (α) /α. As a consequence, expression (2) simplifies to
                                             ∂π           q∗  π
                                                = (P − c)    = .
                                             ∂α           α   α
If the industry is in long-run equilibrium before the change in α, the zero-profit condition
implies π = K. It follows that the short-run derivative of profits with respect to small demand
shifts is increasing in the entry costs K.

    To summarize, long-run profits are independent of demand changes, while short-run profits
are increasing in demand changes. Moreover, in the case of constant marginal costs, the eﬀect
of a demand shift is increasing in the size of the entry cost.
   This model has two main implications. First, a demand change is more likely to aﬀect
profits if the entry decision takes longer and therefore the short-run equilibrium is more likely
to apply. For example, with strong brand loyalty market entry may require a multi-year ad-
vertising campaign. Second, the higher the entry costs, the higher the response of profitability

                                                        6
to a demand change. Both implications suggests that the responsiveness of profits to demand
changes are likely to be higher in industries with higher concentration. In Section 3 concen-
tration measures serve as proxies for barriers to entry and entry costs.1

   Stock Returns. Assume that demand shifts aﬀect profitability to some extent. How
should returns of firms in an industry respond if investors are short-sighted? We use log-linear
approximations for stock returns (Campbell and Shiller, 1988; and Campbell, 1991) and for
accounting return on equity (Vuolteenaho, 2002). Consider a generic expectation operator
                             b
(not necessarily rational), E[·], with the properties Ebt [cat+j + bt+k ] = cE
                                                                             bt at+j + E
                                                                                       bt bt+k and
at = E bt at ..The unexpected log return can be expressed as a change in expectations about
profitability and returns (see derivation in Appendix A):
                                               ∞
                                               X                          ∞
                                                                          X
                          bt rt+1 = ∆E
                   rt+1 − E          bt+1                          bt+1
                                                    ρj roet+1+j − ∆E            ρj rt+1+j .              (3)
                                              j=0                         j=1

Equation (3) relates the unexpected log return to the change in expectations about the prof-
itability (measured by roe) and returns. In this expression, rt+1 is the log return between t
and t + 1, roet+1 is the log of the accounting return on equity between t and t + 1, ρ < 1 is a
constant (interpreted as a discount factor) associated with the log-linear approximation, and
∆E bt+1 [·] = E
              bt+1 [·] − E
                         bt [·] is the change in expectations between periods.
    Short-sighted investors have correct short-term expectations but incorrect long-term expec-
tations about profitability. Let Et∗ [·] be the expectation operator for short-sighted investors at
time t. Similarly, let Et [·] be the fully rational expectation operator for period t. Short-sighted
investors have rational expectations regarding dividend growth for the first h periods after t,
Et∗ roet+1+j = Et roet+1+j ∀ j < h. For periods beyond t+h, they form incorrect expectations of
profitability based on a constant term, roe, and an extrapolation from the expected (rational)
average log return on equity for periods t + 1 + h − n to t + h:
                                                          n
                                                          X Et roet+1+h−i
                     Et∗ roet+1+j = w ∗ roe + (1 − w)                           ∀j ≥ h.                  (4)
                                                          i=1
                                                                     n

Finally, we assume that short-sighted investors believe that expected returns are constant:
Et∗ rt+1+j = r̄ ∀t, ∀ j ≥ 0.
    We consider three leading cases of the model. In the limiting case as h → ∞, investors
possess rational expectations about future profitability. If h is finite and w = 1, then investors
exhibit unconditional inattention. In this situation, investors expect that the return to equity
after period t + h will equal a constant, roe. If h is finite and w < 1, then investors exhibit
inattention with partial extrapolation. Investors form expectations for the return on equity
   1
    In addition, if the potential entrants ignore forecastable demographic changes, then the impact of demand
changes on profits is larger.


                                                      7
after period t + h with a combination of a fixed forecast, roe, and an extrapolation based on
the average expected return on equity for the n periods before t + 1 + h.
    This model of inattention assumes that investors carefully form expectations about prof-
itability in the immediate future, but adopt rules of thumb to evaluate profitability in the
more distant future. In a world with costly information processing, these rules of thumb could
be approximately optimal. The short-term forecasts embed most of the available information
about profitability in the distant future. However, investors disregard useful information when
they neglect long-term demographic variables. They do not realize that these demographic
variables provide relatively precise forecasts of profitability even at long horizons.
   Let E ∗ [.] characterize the expectations of a representative agent. We can substitute the
                                                              b in (3) to get
short-sighted expectations, E ∗ [.], for the generic operator E[.]
                                              ∞
                                              X                            ∞
                                                                           X
rt+1 − r̄ = rt+1 − E ∗ rt+1 = ∆Et+1
                                ∗
                                                    ρj roet+1+j − ∆Et+1
                                                                    ∗
                                                                                 ρj rt+1+j =
                                              j=0                          j=1
                      h−1
                                                Ã                                         n
                                                                                                            !
                      X                                                                   X Et roet+1+h−i
          = ∆Et+1           ρj ∆dt+1+j + ρh Et+1 roet+1+h − wroe − (1 − w)
                      j=0                                                                 i=1
                                                                                                  n
                            ∞
                                       Ã n                         n
                                                                                        !
                            X           X Et+1 roet+2+h−i          X Et roet+1+h−i
              +(1 − w)            ρj                           −                            .
                          j=h+1         i=1
                                                      n            i=1
                                                                                 n

The last equation presents the ‘unexpected’ return for short-sighted investors when E ∗ [.] gov-
erns the behavior of the representative agent. Notice that the unexpected return, rt+1 − r̄,
depends on the value of the return on equity only up to period t + 1 + h; as of period t + 1 the
later periods are not incorporated.
    Taking conditional rational expectations at time t (using Et [.]) and applying the law of
iterated expectations, we obtain an expression for return predictability from the perspective
of the fully rational investor.
                                                                     n
                                                                     X Et [roet+1+h − roet+1+h−i ]
     Et rt+1 − r̄ = ρh w (Et roet+1+h − roe) + ρh (1 − w)
                                                                     i=1
                                                                                          n
                          ρh+1(1 − w)
                      +               Et [roet+1+h − roet+1+h−n ]                                       (5)
                          1−ρ    n
The expected return between time t and time t + 1 depends on the sum of three terms.
For rational investors (h → ∞), all terms converge to zero (given ρ < 1) and we obtain the
standard result of unforecastable returns. For investors with unconditional inattention (h finite
and w = 1), only the first term applies: Et rt+1 − r̄ = ρh (Et roet+1+h − roe) . Returns between
year t and year t + 1 are predictable using the diﬀerence between the expected return on equity
h + 1 years ahead and the constant roe. For inattentive investors with extrapolation (h finite
and w = 0), only the last two terms apply. Returns depend positively on the expected return
on equity h + 1 years ahead and negatively on the expected return on equity in the previous

                                                          8
n years. In general, for inattentive investors (h finite), stock returns between time t and t + 1
are forecasted positively by the expected return on equity h + 1 years ahead and negatively by
the expected return on equity for the n years before t + 1 + h.
    Between years t and t+1, investors update their expectations by incorporating the expected
profitability in period t + 1 + h, which was previously ignored. This information replaces the
earlier forecast that was created using roe and the expected return on equity between years
t + 1 + h − n and t + h. Expected returns are an increasing function of the update about future
profitability. This update depends positively on expected profitability in period t + 1 + h and
negatively on roe and on expected profitability between t + 1 + h − n and t + 1 + h.
    Building on the discussion of the industrial structure, we assume that the return on equity,
our profitability measure, responds to contemporaneous demand changes due to demographics.
In particular, we model the log return on equity as a linear function of two components, demand
growth due to demographics and all other factors:

                                roet+1+j = φ + θ∆ct+1+j + vt+1+j                             (6)

where ∆ct+1+j is the growth rate of demand due to demographics, θ is the sensitivity of
accounting return on equity to demand growth induced by demographics, and vt+1+j captures
all other factors. For simplicity, we also assume that Et+1 vt+1+j = 0. The sensitivity of roe
to demand shifts, θ, depends on the industrial organization of the industry. For instance, in a
perfectly competitive industry with no barriers to entry, we expect that θ ≈ 0. In the presence
of barriers to entry, we expect θ > 0. Substituting expression (6) into equation (5) we obtain
                                                           n
                                                           X Et [∆ct+1+h − ∆ct+1+h−i ]
       Et rt+1 − r̄ = A + ρh wθEt ∆ct+1+h + ρh (1 − w)θ
                                                           i=1
                                                                           n
                            ρh+1 (1 − w)
                        +                θEt [∆ct+1+h − ∆ct+1+h−n ]                          (7)
                            1−ρ     n

where A is a constant equal to ρh w (φ − roe) . Equation (7) allows us to make the following
predictions.

   Prediction 1. If investors are rational (h → ∞), the expected return, Et rt+1 , is indepen-
dent of expected future demand growth, Et ∆ct+1+j , for any j ≥ 0.

   Prediction 2. If investors are inattentive (h finite), the expected return, Et rt+1 , is
positively related to expected future demand growth h periods ahead, Et ∆ct+1+h . Moreover,
∂Et rt+1 /∂Et ∆ct+1+h = ρh θ [1 + (1 − w) ρ/ ((1 − ρ) n)].

   Prediction 3. If investors are inattentive with partial extrapolation (h finite and w < 1),
the expected return Et rt+1 is negatively related to Et ∆ct+1+h−i for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. In addition,
∂Et rt+1 /∂Et ∆ct+1+h > |∂Et rt+1 /∂Et ∆ct+1+h−i | for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.

                                                9
    Under the null hypothesis of rational investors, forecastable demographic shifts do not
aﬀect stock returns (Prediction 1). Under the alternative hypothesis of inattention, instead,
forecastable demand growth in period t + h + 1 predicts stock returns (Prediction 2). This
prediction also links the magnitude of forecastability to the sensitivity of accounting return on
equity to demand changes (θ); the value of ∂Et rt+1 /∂Et ∆ct+1+h may be as small as ρh θ (for
w = 1) or as large as ρh θ [1 + ρ/ (1 − ρ)] (for w = 0 and n = 1). Finally, Prediction 3 states
that, if investors extrapolate to some extent using short-term expectations (for w < 1), then
demand growth less than h + 1 periods ahead forecasts returns negatively. This occurs because
investors overreact to information in the near future. The negative relationship between short-
term demand growth and expected returns is smaller in absolute magnitude than the positive
relationship between Et rt+1 and Et ∆ct+1+h .
    In this analysis we have made two restrictive assumptions. First, we only consider a repre-
sentative agent model. An alternative model would consider a model of interactions between
inattentive investors and rational agents in the presence of limited arbitrage (DeLong et al.,
1990; Shleifer, 2000). We also make the unrealistic assumption that all investors have a hori-
zon of exactly h periods. If the horizon instead varied between h and h + H̃, industry returns
would be forecastable using demand growth rates due to demographics between years t+ h and
t + h + H̃. The empirical specification in Section 3.7 acknowledges that horizons may vary and
that the precision of the data does not permit separate estimates of each relationship between
returns and expected consumption growth at a specific horizon. Therefore, we form two de-
mand growth forecasts, one for short-term growth between t and t + 5, and one for long-term
growth between t + 5 and t + 10.


3     Empirical analysis
The empirical specification consists of six steps. First, we generate demographic forecasts and
estimate age patterns in consumption data for each good. Next, we combine the demographic
forecasts with the consumption data to obtain demographic-based forecasts of demand growth
by good. Then, we estimate the response of industry profitability and stock returns to fore-
casted demand changes. Finally, we evaluate the performance of a trading strategy designed
to exploit demographic information.

3.1   Demographic forecasts
We combine data sources on cohort size, mortality, and fertility rates to form forecasts of subse-
quent cohort.sizes. (Additional details are in Appendix B.1) All the demographic information
is disaggregated by gender and one-year-age groups. The cohort size data is from the Current
Population Reports, Series P-25 (US Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census). The


                                               10
cohort size estimates are for the total population of the United States, including armed forces
overseas. We use mortality rates from period life tables for the years 1920-2000 from Life
Tables for the United States Social Security Area 1900-2080. Finally, we take age-specific birth
rates from Heuser (1976) and update this information using the Vital Statistics of the United
States: Natality (US Department of Health and Human Services).
   We use demographic information available in year t to forecast the age distribution by
gender and one-year age groups for years u > t. We assume that fertility rates for the years
u > t equal the fertility rates for year t. We also assume that future mortality rates equal
mortality rates in year t except for a backward-looking percentage adjustment. We obtain the
adjustment by regressing mortality at a particular age for a specific decade on mortality at the
same age in the previous decade for each of the last 5 decades before year t. The adjustment
coeﬃcient is allowed to diﬀer by 10-year age groups. The estimated percentage improvement
in mortality rates for the ages 10-19 is about 20 percent per decade. For the ages 40-49 it is
about 10 percent per decade.
    Using cohort size in year t and these forecasts of future mortality and fertility rates, we
form preliminary forecasts of cohort size for each year u > t. To account for net migration, we
estimate the average percentage diﬀerence between the actual cohort size and the preliminary
forecasted cohort size formed the year before. We estimate the percentage diﬀerence separately
for each 10-year age group using data from the most recent five-year period prior to year t. We
attribute this diﬀerence to historical net migration and other systematic deviations generated
by the forecasting methodology. For the 10-19 age group, the average imputed net migration
is about .4 percent per year, while for the 40-49 age group it is approximately .05 percent per
year. We apply this imputed adjustment for migration to the initial population forecasts made
at time t.              h                           i
   We define Âg,u|t = Âg,0,u|t , Âg,1,u|t , Âg,2,u|t , ... as the future forecasted age distribution.
Âg,j,u|t is the number of people of gender g alive at u with age j forecasted using demographic
information available at t. Ag,j,u is the actual cohort size of gender g alive at u with age j.
Figure 1a plots the actual series of population aged 30-34 over the years 1930-2002, as well as
three forecasts as of 1935, 1955, and 1975. The forecasts track actual cohort sizes quite well,
except for very long-term forecasts that depend on predicting future births. Figure 1b for the
age group 70-74 shows that the forecasts for older people are less precise.
    Table 1 evaluates the precision of our demographic forecasts. We focus the analysis on the
same forecast horizons employed in our tests of return predictability: a short-term forecast
over the next 5 years and a long-term forecast 5 to 10 years in the future. In Column 1 we
regress the actual population growth rate over the next 5 years, log Ag,j,t+5 − log Ag,j,t , on the
forecasted growth rate over the same horizon, log Âg,j,t+5|t − log Âg,j,t|t . Each observation is a
(gender)x(one-year age group)x(year of forecast) cell; this specification includes all age groups



                                                  11
and years between 1937 and 1997.2 The R2 of 0.83 and the regression coeﬃcient close to 1
indicate that the forecasts are quite accurate. The precision of the forecasts is comparable for
the cohorts between 0 and 18 years of age (R2 = .82, Column 2) but lower for the cohorts
between 65 and 99 years of age (R2 = .56, Column 3). Columns 4 to 6 show the corresponding
results for forecasts 5 to 10 years in the future. The precision of these long-term forecasts is only
slightly inferior to the precision of the short-term forecasts for the total sample (Column 4)
and for the 65+ age group (Column 6). However, the accuracy of our forecasts is substantially
lower for the cohorts up to age 18 (Column 5) because a large fraction of the forecasted cohorts
are unborn as of year t.
    Overall, our demographic forecasts predict cohort size growth quite well over the horizons
of interest. These forecasts also parallel the Census Bureau population forecasts created using
data from the 2000 Census. In Column 7 we regress the oﬃcial forecast for population growth
for the next 5 years, log ÂC                      C
                             g,j,2005|2000 − log Âg,j,2000|2000 , on our forecast, log Âg,j,2005|2000 −
log Âg,j,2000|2000 , for age groups between 0 and 99. This regression has an R2 of .85 and
a coeﬃcient estimate slightly greater than 1. Column 8 reports similarly precise results for
forecasted demographic growth between 2005 and 2010.

3.2    Age patterns in consumption
Unlike demographic information, exhaustive information on consumption of diﬀerent goods
is available only after 1980. For the previous years, we use the only surveys available in an
electronic format: the Study of Consumer Purchases in the United States, 1935-1936, the
Survey of Consumer Expenditures, 1960-1961, and the Survey of Consumer Expenditures,
1972-1973.3 We combine these three early surveys with the 1983-1984 cohorts of the ongoing
Consumer Expenditure Survey4 . These four cross-sections provide information on the age
distribution of consumption throughout the past century. Appendix Table 1 reports summary
statistics on the most important household demographics. Family size decreases over time,
while the proportion of urban households increases. The sample sizes and sampling rules
diﬀer across surveys. While the post-War surveys cover a representative sample of the US
population, the 1935-36 survey includes only married couples and is therefore biased toward
younger families. The bottom part of Appendix Table 1 presents information on average yearly
income and total consumption in 1982-84 dollars.
    We cover all major expenditures on final goods included in the survey data. The selected
level of aggregation attempts to distinguish goods with potentially diﬀerent age-consumption
   2
     Cohort age groups older than 75 before 1940 or older than 85 from 1940 to 1979 are excluded from this
analysis because the actual cohort sizes are imputed (see Appendix B.1).
   3
     Costa (1999) discusses the main features of these surveys.
   4
     The cohorts in the Consumer Expenditure Survey are followed for four quarters after the initial interview.
Consequently, the data for the fourth cohort of 1984 includes 1985 consumption data.



                                                      12
profiles. For example, within the category of alcoholic beverages, we separate beer and wine
from hard liquor expenditures. Similarly, within insurance we distinguish among health, prop-
erty, and life insurance expenditures. We attempt to define these categories in a consistent
way across the survey years. Unfortunately, some surveys do not provide enough informa-
tion to construct certain expenditure categories. This problem is especially serious for the
1960-61 survey which classifies consumption data into broad categories. Table 2 presents the
summary statistics on good-by-good annual household expenditure for each survey year. The
expenditures are in 1982-84 dollars.5 Despite substantial diﬀerences across the four surveys in
the sample, in the survey procedure, and in the definition of the goods, the mean household
expenditure by good category is relatively stable over time.
    We can compare the age profile of consumption across survey years and across expenditure
categories. To illustrate the age profile of selected goods, we use kernel regressions of household
annual consumption on the age of the head of household6 . Figure 2a, for example, plots
normalized7 expenditure on bicycles and drugs for the 1935-36, 1960-61, 1972-73, and 1983-84
surveys. Across the two surveys, the consumption of bicycles (Figure 2a) peaks between the
ages of 35 and 45. At these ages, the heads of household are most likely to have children
between the ages of 5 and 10. The demand for drugs (Figure 2a), instead, is increasing with
age, particularly in the later surveys. Older individuals demand more pharmaceutical products.
The diﬀerences in age profiles occur not just between goods targeted at young generations (e.g.,
bicycles) and goods targeted to the old (e.g., drugs), but also within broad categories, such as
alcoholic beverages. The peak of the age profile of consumption for beer and wine (Figure 2b)
occurs about 20 years earlier than the peak of the profile for hard liquor (Figure 2b). These age
patterns are similar across the two surveys that have data on alcoholic consumption. In another
example, purchases of large appliances peak at 25-30 years of age, while purchases of small
appliances are fairly constant across the years 25-50 (results not shown). Large appliances are
largely associated with the purchase of the first house, while small appliances are purchased
on a more regular basis.
    This evidence supports three general statements. First, the amount of consumption for
each good depends significantly on the age of the head of household. Patterns of consumption
for most goods are not flat with respect to age. Second, these age patterns vary substantially
across goods. Some goods are consumed mainly by younger household heads (child care and
toys), some by heads in middle age (life insurance and cigars), others by older heads (cruises
and nursing homes). Third, the age profile of consumption for a given good is quite stable
across time. For example, the expenditure on furniture peaks at ages 25-35, whether we
   5
      Appendix B.2 provides additional information about the consumption data. Further details are also available
from the authors upon request.
    6
      We use an Epanechnikov kernel with a bandwidth of 5 years of age for all the goods and years.
    7
      For each survey-good pair we divide age-specific consumption for good k by the average consumption across
all ages for good k.


                                                       13
consider the 1935-36, the 1960-61, the 1972-73, or the 1983-84 cohorts. Taken as a whole, the
evidence suggests that changes in age structure of the population have the power to influence
consumption demand in a substantial and consistent manner.
    With this evidence in the background, we present the methodology we use to estimate
age consumption patterns. In order to match the consumption data with the demographic
data, we transform the household-level consumption data into individual-level information.
We use the variation in demographic composition of the families to extract individual-level
information–consumption of the head, of the spouse, and of the children–from household-
level consumption data. We use an OLS regression in each of the four cross-sections. We
denote by ci,k,t the consumption by household i of good k in year t and by Hi,t a set of
indicator variables for the age groups of the head of household i in year t. In particular,
Hi,t = [H18,i,t , H27,i,t , H35,i,t , H45,i,t , H55,i,t , H65,i,t ] where Hj,i,t is equal to 1 if the head of
household i in year t is at least as old as j and younger than the next age group. For example,
if H35,i,t = 1 then the head of household i is aged 35 to 44 in year t. The variable H65,i,t
indicates that the age of the head of household is greater than or equal to 65. Similarly,
let Si,t be a set of indicator variables for the age groups of the spouse. Finally, we add
discrete variables Oi,t = [O0,i,t , O6,i,t , O12,i,t , O18,i,t , O65,i,t ] that count the total number of other
individuals (children or old relatives) living with the family in year t. For instance, if O0,i,t = 2,
then two children aged 0 to 5 live with the family in year t.
    The regression specification is

                               ci,k,t = Bk,t Hi,t + Γk,t Si,t + ∆k,t Oi,t + εi,k,t .

This OLS regression is estimated separately for each good k and for each of the four cross-
sections t. The purpose is to obtain estimates of annual consumption of good k for individuals
at diﬀerent ages. For example, the coeﬃcient B35,cars,1960 is the average total amount that a
(single) head aged 35 to 44 spends on cars in 1960.8

3.3    Demand forecasts
In the third step of the research design, we combine the estimated age profiles of consumption
with the demographic forecasts in order to forecast future demand for diﬀerent goods. For
example, consider a forecast of toys consumption in 1975 made as of 1965. For each age
group, we multiply the forecasted cohort sizes for 1975 by the age-specific consumption of toys
estimated on the most recent consumption data as of 1965, that is, the 1960-61 survey. Next,
   8
    We do not include the set of spouse variables in the 1935-36 survey (only married couples were interviewed)
and in the 1960-61 survey (the age of the spouse was not reported). Since the size of sample for the 1935-1936
survey is only a third to a half as large as the sample sizes for the other surveys, for this survey we use broader
age groups for the head variables: 18, 35, 50, and 65.



                                                        14
we aggregate across all the age groups to obtain the forecasted overall demand for toys for
1975.
   Formally, let Âbg,u|t be the aggregation of Âg,u|t into the same age bins that we used for the
consumption data. For example, Âbf,35,u|t is the number of females aged 35 though 44 forecasted
to be alive in year u as of year t. We combine the forecasted age distribution Âbg,u|t with the
age-specific consumption coeﬃcients Bk,t , Γk,t , and ∆k,t for good k. In order to perform this
operation, we estimate the shares hg,j,t , sg,j,t , and og,j,t of people in the population for each age
group j. For instance, hf,35,t is the number of female heads 35-44 divided by the total number
of females aged 35-44 in the most recent consumption survey prior to year t. We obtain a
demographic-based forecast at time t of the demand for good k in year u which we label Ĉk,u|t :
                        P              P
          Ĉk,u|t =                                  Âbg,j,s|t (hg,j,t Bj,k,t + sg,j,t Γj,k,t + og,j,t ∆j,k,t ) .
                      g∈{f,m} j∈{0,6,12,18,...,65}

    The coeﬃcients B, Γ, and ∆ in this expression are estimated using the most recent con-
sumption survey prior to year t with information on good k. This forecast implicitly assumes
that the tastes of consumers for diﬀerent products depend on age and not on cohort of birth.
We assume that individuals of age 45 in 1975 consume the same bundles of goods that indi-
viduals of age 45 consumed in 1965. By construction, we hold the prices of each good constant
at its level in the most recent consumption survey prior to year t.9
     Figure 3 shows the results of the consumption forecasts for three subcategories of the general
book category–books for K-12 schools, books for higher education, and other books (mostly
fiction). We plot the predicted cumulative demand growth from 1975 to 1995 using the informa-
tion available in 1975 from the expression ln Ĉk,u|1975 −ln Ĉk,1975|1975 for u = 1975, 1976, ..., 1995.
For each of the three goods, we produce forecasts using the age-consumption profiles estimated
from each of the three consumption data sets that record detailed expenditure for books. The
demand for K-12 books is predicted to experience a decline as the baby-bust generation con-
tinues to enter schools, followed by an increase. The demand for college books is predicted
to increase and then decline, as the cohorts entering college are first large (baby boom) and
then small (baby bust). Finally, the demand for other books, which is mostly driven by adults
between the ages of 30 and 50, is predicted to grow substantially as members of the baby-
boom generation gradually reach these ages. These patterns do not depend on the year of
expenditure survey (1935-36, 1972-73, or 1983-84) used to estimate the age-consumption pro-
file for each category. We draw two main conclusions. First, within the entire book category
there is substantial variability in the pattern of demand growth across the subcategories. Sec-
ond, the time-series variation in consumption growth appears to be fairly independent of the
consumption survey used to estimate the age profile.
  9
   See Appendix B.2 for information on the calculation of forecasted demand growth rates for construction
machinery and residential construction.



                                                            15
    While we cannot present the same detailed information for all goods, we report the con-
sumption forecasts at three points in time. Columns 2, 4, and 6 of Table 3 summarize the
five-year predicted growth rate due to demographics, ln Ĉk,t+5|t−1 − ln Ĉk,t|t−1 , respectively for
years t = 1950, t = 1975, and t = 2000. In each case, data from the most recent consumer
expenditure survey is used. In 1950, child-related expenditures are predicted to grow very
quickly due to the boom in births starting in 1947. Demand for housing-related goods is rel-
atively low due to the small size of cohorts born in the 1930s. In 1975, the demand for child
care and toys is low due to the small size of the ‘Baby Bust’ generation. The demand for most
adult-age commodities is predicted to grow at a high rate (1.5-2 percent a year) due to the
entry of the ‘Baby Boom’ generation into prime consumption age. In 2000 the demand for
child-related commodities is relatively low. The aging of the ‘Baby Boom’ generation implies
that the highest forecasted demand growth is for goods consumed later in life, such as cigars,
cosmetics, and life insurance.
    Table 3 also categorizes goods by their sensitivity to demographic shifts. For example,
the demand for oil and utilities is unlikely to be aﬀected by shifts in the relative cohort
sizes, while the demand for bicycles and motorcycles depends substantially on the relative
size of the cohorts aged 15-20 and 20-30, respectively. We construct a forward-looking mea-
sure of Demographic Industries using information available at time t − 1 to identify the goods
where demographics shifts are likely to have the most impact. In each year t, we compute
the³ standard deviation of the one-year
                                    ´       consumption forecasts up to 15 years ahead given
by ln Ĉk,t+s+1|t−1 − ln Ĉk,t+s|t−1 for s = 0, 1, ..., 15. We define the set of Demographic Indus-
tries as the 20 industries with the highest standard deviation of growth10 . Column 3 shows
that in 1950 the Demographic Industries are associated with high demand by children (child
care, toys) and by young adults, such as housing. The classification is similar in the later years
1975 (Column 5) and 2000 (Column 7). Finally, Column 8 summarizes the percentage of years
in which an industry belongs to the Demographic Industries subsample.
    Since the demand forecasts use the most recent demographic and consumption informa-
tion, the forecasts for later years use diﬀerent consumption surveys than the forecasts for
earlier years. We verify that the impact of using diﬀerent consumption surveys is limited. For
each good and over the years 1939-2003, we generate annual consumption growth forecasts
ln Ĉk,t+1|t−1 − ln Ĉk,t|t−1 using estimates of the age profile of consumption from the 1935-36
survey. We repeat this process using age-consumption estimates from the 1960-61, the 1972-73,
and the 1984-84 surveys. Next, we compute the correlation between these four measures of
consumption growth. Using data for all goods and years, the correlations are in the .65 to
.8 range (results not shown). These correlations confirm that the consumption patterns are
  10
    A previous version of this paper used the standard deviation of annual forecasted demand growth over the
years 1939-2003 to classify the Demographic Industries. The results are similar, but the current definition has
the advantage that the classification in year t only uses information available up to year t − 1.



                                                      16
similar across surveys.

3.4      ROE predictability
In the fourth step of the research design, we test whether (forecastable) demand changes
aﬀect profitability by industry, a necessary condition for our attention test. As a measure
of profitability we use a transformation of the accounting return on equity (ROE). For each
firm, the return on equity at time t + 1 is defined as the ratio of earnings from the end of fiscal
year t through the end of fiscal year t + 1 (Compustat data item 172) to the book value of
equity at the end of fiscal year t (Compustat data item 60). If data item 172 is missing, we
calculate ROE using the clean surplus accounting identity from Vuolteenaho (2002). In order
to obtain an industry-level measure of profitability, we compute the average return on equity
for all companies in the industry, weighted by the book value of equity in year t.
    Since some industries require a higher level of disaggregation than provided by the standard
4-digit SIC codes, we create the industry classification ourselves whenever necessary. Using a
company-by-company search within the relevant SIC codes we partition the companies into the
relevant groups. For example, the SIC code 5092 (‘toys’) includes both companies producing
toys for children and companies manufacturing golf equipment, two goods clearly associated
with consumption by diﬀerent age groups. Appendix Table 2 displays the SIC codes associated
with a particular industry. The SIC codes in parentheses are those that are shared by diﬀerent
industries, and therefore require a company-by-company search. For larger industries such as
automobiles, oil, and coal, our SIC grouping system yields portfolios that are similar to the
industry portfolios generated by Fama and French. (See Appendix B.3 for details)
    We construct the annual industry return on equity ROEk,t+1 as the weighted average of
ROE for the companies in industry k. We use the book value for each company in year t
as the weights and drop companies with negative book values. The final measure is the log
return on equity, roek,t+1 = log (1 + ROEk,t+1 ). In order to avoid the possibility of accounting
outliers driving our results, we winsorize this accounting return measure at the 1 percent and
99 percent level.11 Columns 1 through 4 of Table 4 present summary statistics for the log
annual return on equity (mean and standard deviation), the average number of firms included
in the industry over time, and the number of years for which the ROE data is available. The
sample is limited to the years in which the consumption data is also available. The average log
return ranges from 4 percent (golf) to 26 percent (motorcycle). The within-industry standard
deviation of the return ranges between 2 percent (drugs) and 15 percent (cigars). The longest
series have 52 observations, but many series are shorter. The average number of firms per
industry varies between 1.2 (motorcycle) and 167 (food).
   In Table 5 we test the predictability of the one-year industry log return on equity (Table
 11
      The results are qualitatively similar for the unwinsorized measure.



                                                        17
4) using the forecasted contemporaneous growth rate in consumption due to demographics
(Table 3). Denote by ĉk,s|t the natural log of the forecasted consumption of good k in year s
forecasted as of year t.The following specification is motivated by equation (6):

             log (1 + ROEk,t+1 ) = λ + ηk + ϕt+1 + θ[ĉk,t+2|t−1 − ĉk,t|t−1 ]/2 + εk,t+1           (8)

The coeﬃcient θ indicates the responsiveness of log return on equity in year t + 1 to contem-
poraneous changes in demand due to forecasted demographic changes. Since the measure of
cohort size for year t + 1 refers to the July 1 value, approximately in the middle of the fiscal
year, we use the average demand growth between July 1 of year t and July 1 of year t + 2
as a measure of contemporaneous demand change. We scale by 2 to annualize this measure.
The forecast of consumption growth between years t and t + 2 uses only demographic and con-
sumption information available up to year t − 1. This lag ensures that all information should
be public knowledge by year t.12 We run specification (8) both with and without industry and
year fixed eﬀects.
    In this panel setting it is unlikely that the errors from the regression are uncorrelated across
industries and over time because there are persistent shocks that aﬀect multiple industries at
the same time. We allow for arbitrary correlation across industries at any given time by
calculating standard errors clustered by year. In addition, we correct these standard errors to
account for autocorrelation in the error structure.
   More formally, let X be the matrix of regressors, θ the vector of parameters, and ε the
vector of errors. The
                   q panel has T periods and K industries. Under the appropriate reg-
ularity conditions, T1 (θ̂ − θ) is asymptotically distributed N (0, (X 0 X)−1 S(X 0 X)−1 ) where
           P                               P                P
S = Γ0 + ∞              0                  K           0  K
            q=1 (Γq + Γq ) and Γq = E[( k=1 Xkt εkt ) ( k=1 Xkt−q εkt−q )]. The matrix Γ0 cap-
tures the contemporaneous covariance, while the matrix Γq captures the covariance structure
between observations that are q periods apart. While we do not make any assumptions about
contemporaneous covariation, we assume that Xkt  0 ε follows an autoregressive process given by
                                                    kt
  0 ε = ρX 0
Xkt              ε     +  η 0 where ρ < 1 is a scalar and E[(PK X              0 PK
     kt      kt−1 kt−1      kt                                 k=1 kt−q εkt−q ) ( k=1 ηkt )] = 0
for any q > 0.
    These assumptions imply Γq = ρq Γ0 and therefore, S = [(1 + ρ) / (1 − ρ)]Γ0 . (See derivation
in Appendix C) The higher the autocorrelation coeﬃcient ρ, the larger the terms in the matrix
                                                          P       0
S. Since Γ0 and ρ are unknown, we estimate Γ0 with T1 Tt=1 Xt ε̂t ε̂0t Xt where Xt is the matrix
of regressors and ε̂t is the vector of estimated residuals for each cross-section. We estimate ρ
from the pooled regression for each element of Xkt 0 ε̂ on the respective element of X 0
                                                       kt                              kt−1 ε̂kt−1 .
    We use the set of Demographic Industries for the years 1974-2003 as the baseline sample
for the paper. As discussed above, the Demographic Industries are more likely to be aﬀected
  12
   At present, the Bureau of the Census releases the demographic information for July 1 of year t around
December of the same year, that is, with less than a year lag.



                                                  18
by demographic demand shifts. As for the time period, data accuracy is higher over the
more recent time period in at least two respects. First, the number of companies included in
the accounting and return data increases substantially over time, and in particular it almost
doubles in 1974 with the introduction of Nasdaq data into CRSP. Second, the accuracy of the
industry classification increases with proximity to the present13 .
    In Column 1 of Table 5 we present the results of specification (8) for the baseline sample
without industry or year fixed eﬀects. The estimated coeﬃcient, θ̂ = 1.85, is significantly
positive and economically large. A one percent increase in yearly consumption growth due to
demographics increases the log return on equity from an average of 11.0 percent to an average
of 12.8 percent, a 16 percent increase. The R2 of the regression is low due to the modest role
of demographic changes relative to other determinants of profitability. In this specification,
as well as in the subsequent specifications, controlling for autocorrelation is important: the
estimated ρ̂ equals approximately .5, resulting in a correction coeﬃcient (1 + ρ̂) / (1 − ρ̂) = 3.
In Column 2 we introduce industry indicators. In this case, the identification depends only on
time-series changes in the growth rates and not on between-industry diﬀerences. The estimate
for θ is significantly positive and larger than in Column 1, with θ̂ = 2.86. In Column 3 we
introduce year indicators as well. In this specification, the identification depends on diﬀerential
time-series in demand changes across industries. The estimated coeﬃcient, θ̂, has a similar
magnitude as in Column 1, and is also statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero.
    In Columns 4-6 we reestimate the model for the whole time period 1939-2003. The es-
timates for θ are lower than our baseline results, but still economically large and significant
(except in Column 4). Finally, in Columns 7 through 12 we reestimate the same models for
the whole sample of 48 industries. The point estimates for θ are somewhat lower than the
corresponding ones for the subset of Demographic Industries, but are still large and signifi-
cant in most specifications. The standard errors in the whole sample are larger than those
for the Demographic Industries, despite a threefold increase in sample size, suggesting a lower
signal-to-noise ratio for the non-demographic industries.
    Overall, forecasted demand changes due to demographics have a statistically and econom-
ically significant eﬀect on industry-level profitability. It appears that entry and exit by firms
into industries does not fully undo the impact of forecastable demand changes on profitability.

3.5    Industry concentration
The impact of a demand change on profitability should depend on the market structure. At one
extreme, in a perfectly competitive industry with no barriers to entry, the consumers capture
all the surplus arising from a positive demand shift. In this scenario, demographic changes
  13
    The company-level information used to generate, for example, the book subcategories is accurate for the
present (2003), but less likely to be accurate in earlier time periods.



                                                    19
do not aﬀect abnormal profits. At the other extreme, a monopolist in an industry with high
barriers to entry generates additional profits from a positive demand change. We address this
issue by estimating how the impact of demand changes on profitability varies with measures
of barriers to entry.
    As a proxy for barriers to entry and/or market power, we use the concentration ratio C-4,
that is, the fraction of industry revenue produced by the 4 largest companies. Starting in 1947
this measure is available from the Census of Manufacturers for industrial sectors with 4-digit
SIC codes between 2000 and 3999. We create an industry concentration index by taking the
average C-4 ratio for the SIC codes included in the industry definition in the range 2000-
3999. The average is weighted by the aggregate revenue for an SIC code. To avoid industries
switching concentration ratio groups over time, we use the concentration measures as of 1972.
Unfortunately, concentration ratios are not available for many non-manufacturing industries,
such as insurance and utilities, that do not have an SIC code within the appropriate range.
Among the 32 industries with concentration data (Column 9 in Table 4), the median C-4 ratio
is .35.
    For the subsample of industries with above-median concentration (Columns 1 and 2 of Table
6), the magnitude of the coeﬃcient θ̂, capturing the impact of demographics on profitability,
is similar to the benchmark estimates (Table 5), but is not significant. For the sample of
unconcentrated industries (Columns 3 and 4), the coeﬃcient θ̂ is fifty percent smaller and
is also not significantly diﬀerent from zero. In an alternative specification, we estimate the
regression

           log (1 + ROEk,t+1 ) = λ + ηk + ϕt+1 + θ[ĉk,t+2|t−1 − ĉk,t|t−1 ]/2
                                    +θC C4k [ĉk,t+2|t−1 − ĉk,t|t−1 ]/2 + ςC4k,t + εk,t+1

where C4k is the (continuous) concentration measure for industry k. The coeﬃcient θC captures
the extent to which the sensitivity of profits to demand shifts is higher for more concentrated
industries. The estimated coeﬃcient, θ̂C , is positive and large but not significant (Columns
5 and 6). Over the period from 1939 to 2002 (results not shown), the estimated eﬀects are
larger, but are also mostly insignificant. Therefore, we find inconclusive evidence regarding
the prediction that the demand changes due to demographics alter profits more substantially
in the presence of barriers to entry.

3.6   Age groups
Our results suggest that demographic shifts aﬀect industry profitability. Are these eﬀects
driven by profitability shifts for the industries targeting children and the elderly? Do they
mainly depend on more subtle shifts in the demand for goods for adults? We address these
questions by separating industries in three broad groups, which we label Young, Adult, and


                                               20
Elderly. The Young group includes all the industries under the Children grouping (Appendix
Table 2), books for college, books for K-12, and bicycles. The Elderly group includes the
Health grouping and the Senior grouping. The Adult group includes the other 33 industries.
    In Columns 7 through 12 of Table 6 we replicate specification (8) relating profitability to
contemporaneous consumption growth for each of the three groups. For the Young group
of industries (Columns 7 and 8), we find a significant and large eﬀect of demand shifts on
profitability with and without industry fixed eﬀects. The estimated coeﬃcient θ̂ is comparable
to the coeﬃcient for the Demographic Industries. The standard error of θ̂ is also close to the
one estimated for the Demographic Industries, despite the fact that the regression in Columns
7 and 8 has only one third as many observations. The R2 in the specification without industry
fixed eﬀects is .064, substantially larger than the R2 of .015 over the Demographic Industries.
The small group of industries selling mainly to the young provides a quite precise estimation
of the profitability eﬀects.
    In the groups of industries selling to Adults (Column 9 and 10) and the Elderly (Column 11
and 12), the estimated eﬀect of demographics on profitability is positive and large (at least with
industry fixed eﬀects) but imprecisely estimated. In both cases, the eﬀect is only marginally
significant when industry indicators are included. The lower significance level relative to the
Young group is not due to lower point estimates, but to standard errors that are two to three
times as large. The demographic shifts for these industries are less drastic and do not allow
for as precise an estimation of the eﬀects on profitability.

3.7   Return predictability
In the fifth step, we examine the relationship between forecasted demand growth and stock
returns. We aggregate firm-level stock return data from CRSP to form value-weighted industry-
level measures of returns. The aggregation procedure is identical to the methodology used for
the profitability measure. The procedure employs SIC codes augmented by specific company-
by-company searches. Columns 5 through 8 of Table 4 display the summary statistics on one-
year value-weighted stock returns (mean and standard deviations), average number of firms,
and years covered. The sample of returns is larger than the sample of accounting profitability
because returns data is available for a longer time period and for more companies. As above,
the sample is limited to the years in which the consumption data is also available. The average
annual log stock return varies from 2.7 percent (bicycles) to 19.4 percent (motorcycles). The
standard deviation of the yearly stock returns–30 percent on average–is negatively correlated
with the number of firms in the industry. The longest series run for 65 years, and the average
number of firms in an industry ranges from 1.4 (motorcycles) to 180.7 (food).
    We choose specifications motivated by expression (7) in Section 2 and investigate when stock
prices incorporate the forecastable consumption changes generated by demographic variables.


                                               21
In the baseline specification we regress annual returns on the forecasted growth rate of demand
due to demographics from t to t + 5 (the short-term) and t + 5 to t + 10 (the long-term). We
beta-adjust industry returns to remove the market-wide shocks14 . Define rk,u,t to be the natural
log of the stock return for good k between the end of year t and the end of year u. The natural
log of the market return over the same horizon is given by rm,u,t . Further, let β̂k,t be the
coeﬃcient of a regression of monthly industry returns on market returns over the 48 months
previous to year t.15 The specification of the regression is

                rk,t+1,t − β̂k,t rm,t+1,t = γ + ηk + ϕt+1 + δ0 [ĉk,t+5|t−1 − ĉk,t|t−1 ]/5 +   (9)
                                               +δ1 [ĉk,t+10|t−1 − ĉk,t+5|t−1 ]/5 + εk,t+1

Since the consumption growth variables are scaled by 5, the coeﬃcients δ0 and δ1 represent the
average increase in abnormal yearly returns for one percentage point of additional annualized
growth in demographics. Once again, the forecasts of consumption as of time t only use
information available in period t − 1.
   The model in Section 2 suggests that, if the forecast horizon h is shorter than 5 years, the
coeﬃcient δ0 should be positive and δ1 should be zero. If the forecast horizon is between 5 and
10 years, the coeﬃcient δ0 should be zero or negative and the coeﬃcient δ1 should be positive.
Finally, if the investors have a horizon greater than 10 years (including rational investors with
h → ∞), both coeﬃcients should be zero. A significantly positive coeﬃcient indicates that
stock prices adjust as the demographic information enters the forecast horizon.
    Columns 1 through 3 of Table 7 present the estimates of (9) for the sample of Demo-
graphic Industries during the years 1974-2003. In the specification without year or industry
indicators (Column 1), the coeﬃcient on short-term demographics, δ̂0 , equals -0.8 and is not
significantly diﬀerent from zero. The coeﬃcient on long-term demographics, δ̂1 , equals 10.1
and is significantly larger than zero. A one percentage point annualized increase in demand
from year 5 to year 10 increases the average abnormal yearly stock return by 10.1 percentage
points. In this specification as well as in the subsequent specifications, the estimated ρ̂ equals
approximately 0.2, resulting in a correction coeﬃcient (1 + ρ̂) / (1 − ρ̂) = 1.5. The coeﬃcients
have the same magnitude and significance when industry fixed eﬀects (Column 2) are intro-
duced. The introduction of year fixed eﬀects (Column 3) lowers the estimated δ̂1 to a still
large and marginally significant estimate of 6.0. In the longer sample (Columns 4 through 6),
we observe a similar pattern of results, with smaller coeﬃcients: the coeﬃcient on short-term
demographics is negative and insignificant, while the coeﬃcient on long-term demographics
is positive and marginally significant (except in Column 6). The estimated coeﬃcients for
the sample of all industries (Columns 7 through 12) are slightly smaller than the estimates
for the Demographic Industries, with the same pattern of significance. While the coeﬃcient
 14
      The results are essentially the same if we use net returns instead of abnormal returns.
 15
      We require a minimum of 30 observations for the estimation of β.


                                                        22
δ0 on short-term demand forecast is not statistically significant, the point estimate is always
negative.
    Barriers to entry. As we discussed above, testing attention using stock market reaction
to demand changes is more meaningful for industries with substantial barriers to entry. In
the first six columns of Table 8 we replicate specification (9) separately for industries with
C-4 concentration ratio above and below the median. For the industries with above-median
concentration (Column 1) the coeﬃcient δ̂1 on demand growth between t + 5 and t + 10 is
significantly positive and larger than in the overall sample of all industries; the coeﬃcient
remains large and is marginally significant with industry fixed eﬀects (Column 2). For the
industries with below-median concentration (Columns 3 and 4) the point estimates are only
a third as large and there is no significant relationship between demand changes and stock
returns. As an alternative specification, in columns 5 and 6 we interact the continuous measure
of concentration C-4 with demand growth at the diﬀerent horizons:

    rk,t+1,t − β̂k,t rm,t+1,t = λ + ηk + ϕt+1 + δ0 [ĉk,t+5|t−1 − ĉk,t|t−1 ]/5
                                 +δ1 [ĉk,t+10|t−1 − ĉk,t+5|t−1 ]/5 + δ0C C4k [ĉk,t+5|t−1 − ĉk,t|t−1 ]/5
                                 +δ1C C4k [ĉk,t+10|t−1 − ĉk,t+5|t−1 ]/5 + ςC4k,t + εk,t+1

    The baseline estimate (Column 5) of δ1C = 60.9 is large and significantly diﬀerent from
zero. For an industry with a low concentration ratio of .2, the predicted responsiveness of
stock returns to long-term demand growth is δ̂1 + .2δ̂1C = 1.5. For an industry with a high
concentration ratio of .5, the predicted responsiveness is δ̂1 +.5δ̂1C = 19.8, a very large response.
We find similarly large magnitudes in the specifications with industry fixed eﬀects (Column 6).
Over the period from 1939 to 2003 (results not shown), the estimated eﬀects are smaller but the
pattern of statistical significance is similar. The evidence suggests that return predictability is
stronger in industries with higher concentration.
    Age Groups. In Columns 7 through 12 of Table 8 we replicate specification (9) for each
of the three main demographic sub-groups. For the Young group of industries (Columns 7 and
8), we find a significant and large eﬀect of long-term demand shifts on stock returns with and
without industry fixed eﬀects. The estimates for δ̂1 , and the standard errors, are comparable
to the estimates for the sample of Demographic Industries, and the R2 of .062 is substantially
higher. The small group of industries selling mainly to the young provides a quite precise
estimation of the forecastability of returns.
    In the Adult group of industries (Column 9 and 10) we also obtain a large eﬀect of long-term
demand shifts on stock returns. The estimated coeﬃcient δ̂1 is even higher than the estimate
in the sample of Demographic Industries and is significantly diﬀerent from zero. This second
group of industries also contributes to the predictability findings. Finally, in the Elderly group
of industries, the estimates are much more imprecise, with standard errors three times as large
as in the other two groups. The slow-moving demographic shifts for these industries may not

                                                    23
allow for a precise estimation of the eﬀect of forecasted demand on returns.
    Investor Horizon. We consider a specification of return predictability that is more closely
linked with the model of short-sighted investors in Section 2. We estimate the specification

            rk,t+1,t − β̂k,t rm,t+1,t = λ + ηk + ϕt+1 + δH (ĉk,t+h+1|t−1 − ĉk,t+h|t−1 ) + εk,t+1

on the sample of Demographic Industries16 over the years 1974-2003, for investor horizon
h between 0 and 13 years. The coeﬃcient δH measures the extent to which consumption
growth h years ahead forecasts stock returns in year t + 1 (Figure 4). The coeﬃcient δH on
contemporaneous demand growth (h = 0 or h = 1) is small and insignificant. The coeﬃcient
increases with the horizon h and becomes significantly positive, reaching the peak value of
9.42 at the horizon h of 7 years. The coeﬃcient then decreases for larger h, becoming half as
large for h = 10 and insignificant for h past 11 years. These findings suggest that stock return
predictability is highest for forecasted demand growth occurring 5 to 8 years in the future.

3.8      Portfolio returns
These results provide evidence of return predictability using long-term demand growth due to
demographics. We now analyze whether rational market participants could exploit the under-
reaction to long-term demographic information with a trading strategy. This provides another
measure of the predictability of stock returns induced by underreaction to demographics.
    We follow a strategy from 1974 to 2003 for sector indices belonging to the sample of De-
mographic Industries. We create the zero-investment portfolio by double-sorting the group
of industries at the beginning of each year, as suggested by the model. In the presence of
inattention with partial extrapolation, both Et [∆ct+1+h ] and Et [∆ct+1+h − ∆ct+1+h−n ] will
positively predict stock returns. Therefore, we first sort the industries into two equal groups
based on long-term forecasted demand growth, ∆ĉLR ≡ ĉt+10 −ĉt+5 . Next, within each of these
two groups we sort the industries into two equal sub-groups based on the diﬀerence between
long-term and short-term forecasted growth, that is, ∆ĉLR−SR ≡ (ĉt+10 − ĉt+5 ) − (ĉt+5 − ĉt ).
The zero-investment portfolio is long in industries with high predicted long-term growth ∆ĉLR
and high ∆ĉLR−SR , and is short in industries with low predicted long-term growth ∆ĉLR and
low ∆ĉLR−SR . The portfolio is designed to exploit both inattention to long-term information–
measured by ∆ĉLR – and extrapolation–measured by ∆ĉLR−SR .
    We compute monthly portfolio returns by equally weighting the relevant industry returns.
We control for market performance by regressing the series on the CRSP value-weighted stock
index, net of the one-month Treasury rate. The standard errors are corrected for heteroskedas-
ticity and autocorrelation using the Newey-West estimator with 6 lags17 . The results in Col-
 16
      The results are similar if all industries are included in the analysis.
 17
      The results do not change qualitatively if the lag length for the Newey-West standard errors is 12.


                                                        24
umn 1 of Table 9 indicate that the portfolio earns a monthly abnormal return of .71 percent.18
The outperformance remains essentially the same if we also include the size and the book-to-
market factors (Column 2), as well as the momentum factor (Column 3). These magnitudes
are consistent with the estimates from the predictability regressions in Table 7. The annualized
abnormal return for the portfolio (8.5%) is only slightly lower than the product of δ̂1 (10.1)
from Table 7 (Column 1) and the average diﬀerence between forecasted demand growth from
t + 5 to t + 10 for the long and short constituent portfolios (1 percentage point).
   In Columns 4 through 6 we report the abnormal performance of the investment strategy
over the longer time period 1939-2003. For this sample the portfolio has an average abnormal
annualized return of about 5% per year. This outperformance is significant with a 1-factor
or a 3-factor model (Columns 4 and 5), and is marginally significant with a 4-factor model
(Column 5). The lower abnormal returns over this longer time period are consistent with the
OLS findings in Table 7. During the early years of this sample period the portfolio is formed
using a substantially smaller set of industries, and each industry contains fewer firms.
    In Columns 7 through 12 we report the performance of the long and the short portfolio un-
derlying the zero-investment portfolio of Columns 1 through 3. In general, the outperformance
of the zero-investment portfolio depends more heavily on the long portfolio.
    In Table 10 we present the results for a similar zero-investment portfolio constructed using
all 48 industries over the years 1974-2003. This portfolio earns average annual abnormal
returns of about 3 percentage points (Columns 1 through 3). Unlike the other estimates, the
outperformance is only marginally significant after controlling for the 3-factor risk-adjustment
procedure and insignificant after controlling for the 4 factors. The weaker performance of
the portfolio strategy in this sample is roughly consistent with the OLS results in Table 8.
The diﬀerence between average forecasted consumption growth for the industries in the long
portfolio and the industries in the short portfolio is only 0.5 percentage points.
   In Columns 4 through 9 of Table 10 we split the overall sample into above-median and below-
median concentration industries. The average abnormal return for the high-concentration
sample is over 7 percent per year and is statistically significant. The portfolio return for the
low-concentration sample, instead, is approximately 1 percent per year and is insignificant.
Abnormal returns are more sensitive to forecasted demand growth for more concentrated in-
dustries, a finding consistent with the OLS results (Table 8).
    We also examine whether the outperformance depends uniformly on large and small compa-
nies within an industry. In Columns 10 through 12 we replicate the portfolio results of Columns
4 through 6, except that here the industry returns refer to the returns for the largest company
in the industry. The levels of outperformance are similar to the those found in Columns 4
through 6, suggesting that a portfolio strategy can be successfully implemented even for stocks
with relatively low trading costs.
 18
      The average monthly return (without a market control) is .66 percent (s.e. .26).


                                                       25
    The average abnormal returns from trading on demographic information, therefore, are
large and statistically significant. The estimates from the predictability regressions and the
abnormal returns for the trading strategy are broadly consistent with one another.


4     Interpretation of the results
4.1   Attention interpretation
Three stylized facts emerge from the empirical analysis of industry stock returns. First, fore-
castable future demand changes due to demographic variables predict abnormal annual stock
returns. Second, while demographic changes in the more distant future (t+5 to t+10) forecast
returns, demographic changes in the near future (t to t + 5) do not have significant forecast-
ing power. Third, return predictability is stronger in industries with higher concentration
ratios (a proxy for high barriers to entry) and with more volatile demand shifts induced by
demographics.
   The first stylized fact is inconsistent with the predictions of the model for fully rational
(attentive) investors. According to Prediction 1 in Section 2, if investors are rational, then
stock returns should not be forecastable using expected demand changes.
    Prediction 2 in Section 2 oﬀers a straightforward explanation of return predictability. If
investors neglect information beyond a particular horizon h, then returns at t + 1 should be
predictable using long-term demographic information emerging between t + h and t + 1 + h.
The results in Tables 7 and 8 suggest that the horizon h could be between 5 and 10 years.
Figure 4 shows that stock return predictability is highest using predicted consumption growth
between 5 and 8 years ahead. Since demographic information is measured in July rather than
at the end of the year, these findings suggest that investors have a horizon between 4.5 and
7.5 years.
    The model in Section 2 also makes a prediction regarding the magnitude of the coeﬃcient
on long-term forecasted demand growth in the return predictability regression (Table 7). The
estimate δ̂1 ≈ 10, is approximately 5 times larger than θ̂ ≈ 2, the estimate for the responsive-
ness of accounting return on equity to forecasted demand growth These magnitudes are not
consistent with a model of unconditional inattention (w = 1) which predicts that δ1 should
be smaller than θ: δ1 = ρh θ < θ. However, a model of inattention with partial extrapolation
(w < 1) can match the estimated magnitude of δ1 . For example, set the annual discount factor
ρ equal to 0.96, the extrapolation weight w equal to 0.25, and the number of periods of extrap-
olation n equal to 4. For these parameters the model of inattention with partial extrapolation
implies δ1 = θρh [1 + (1 − w) ρ/ ((1 − ρ) n)] ≈ 5θ when the horizon h is equal to 5 years. The
estimated coeﬃcient of stock returns on long-term demand growth δ̂1 , therefore, is consistent
with the estimate of the responsiveness of profitability to demand growth, θ̂.


                                              26
   The direction and magnitudes of the estimated coeﬃcients are, therefore, consistent with
investor underreaction to information beyond a horizon of approximately 5 years. The cali-
bration exercise provides indirect evidence of partial extrapolation. The negative (although
statistically insignificant) point estimate for δ0 in Table 7 is also consistent with partial ex-
trapolation according to Prediction 3.
   The third stylized fact is readily explained by the industrial organization of the diﬀerent
sectors. For industries with low barriers to entry, demand changes should not have a significant
impact on firm profitability. Demand shifts might lead to entry or exit, but profitability and
stock returns are unaﬀected. Similarly, in industries with relatively uniform age profiles of
consumption, changes in cohort sizes have a limited impact on demand. As a consequence,
profitability and expected stock returns are unaltered.
    Our interpretation of the overall evidence is that investors do not pay attention to infor-
mation beyond a horizon of approximately 5 years. This estimated horizon for investors is
consistent with the observed horizon of analyst forecasts. In Table 11 we use the I/B/E/S
data to document the availability of earnings forecasts by analysts at diﬀerent horizons. In
Column 1 we consider forecasts made in 1990 and report the number of companies with at least
one earning forecast h years into the future. Almost all companies in the sample have earnings
forecasts for the next two years. The number of forecasts further in the future, however, decays
quickly with distance. Less than half of the companies have forecasts 3 years ahead and less
than 10 percent of the companies have forecasts 5 years in the future. Forecasts beyond 5
years are not even reported in the data set in 1990. Not surprisingly, the share of firms with
forecasts 3, 4, and 5 years ahead is higher among the firms with at least 5 analysts (Columns
2 and 3). However, even in this group the percentage of firms with 5-year-ahead forecasts is
only 15 percent. Columns 4 through 6 present similar evidence for analyst forecasts recorded
in 2000.
    According to I/B/E/S, analysts do not produce forecasts of annual earnings beyond a 5
year horizon. While such long-term forecasts may be available in privately-held data sources,
investors are unlikely to possess readily available information regarding profitability in the
distant future. Given this evidence, it is not surprising that investors tend to ignore outcomes
more than 5 years in the future.
   Ignoring information about the distant future, after all, is a reasonable rule of thumb in
many circumstances. Long-term patterns, such as consumer taste changes, are often already
observed in the short-term data, making long-term information redundant. For other long-
term variables, such as GDP growth, the forecasts are surrounded by so much uncertainty
that neglecting the long-term future is approximately correct. While such a rule may work
well in general, its implementation is costly when applied to demographic information. Long-
term demographic variables can be precisely estimated and may diﬀer significantly from their
short-term pattern.


                                               27
4.2      Alternative interpretations
Rational predictability. Demographic information could proxy for a state variable that
systematically alters the future investment opportunity set. Demographic changes might be
an unknown risk factor that is not considered in the standard model. In this setting, return
predictability would be rational according to Merton (1973).
Poor estimation of systematic risk. For the specifications in Tables 7 and 8 the industry
beta is estimated using the previous 48 months of industry returns. If the actual beta increases
for industries with high demand growth rates 5 to 10 years in the future, then the estimated beta
understates the actual systematic risk. This estimation problem could explain the observed
outperformance. To test for this, we regress annual changes in estimated beta, β̂k,t+1 − β̂k,t ,
on forecasted short-term and long-term demand growth. We find no evidence of a relationship
between changes in estimated beta and long-term demand growth.19
Persistent regressors. The predictability results in Tables 7 and 8 could suﬀer from bias
from persistent regressors. Following Stambaugh (1999), assume that the demand growth due
to demographics, denoted x, follows an AR(1) process, xt = θ + ρxt−1 + vt , with |χ| < 1.
Denote by σv2 the variance of v and denote by σεv the covariance between vt and εt , the error
term
   ³ in (9).
          ´ In¡ this case,  Stambaugh shows that the bias in the estimate of δ̂1 is equal to
                      2
                        ¢
E δ̂1 − δ1 = σεv /σv E (ρ̂ − ρ).
    To evaluate the seriousness of this problem, we estimate ρ̂ and v̂k,t by a panel regression of
the 5- to 10-year growth rate due to demographics xk,t on its lagged value xk,t−1 . We include
industry fixed eﬀects and assume that ρk = ρ for each industry k. We obtain a point estimate
for ρ̂ of .9546, with a standard error of .0102. We use this to generate the series for v̂k,t . We
then regress the estimated errors ε̂k,t from the return regression (including industry indicators)
on the series v̂, again including industry fixed eﬀects. We obtain an estimate for σεv /σv2 of
-4.7539, with standard error 4.3368. First, this estimate is not statistically diﬀerent from
zero and, consequently, we fail to reject the null hypothesis of no bias. Second, since the bias
E (ρ̂
  ³ − ρ) would
            ´      be negative and bounded below by (ρ̂ − 1) , the point estimate for the bias
E δ̂1 − δ1 is approximately (−.04) ∗ (−4.7) = .188, a small correction relative to the 10.1
estimate for δ̂1 . The persistence of regressors does not appear to be a main concern in our
setting.
Generated regressors. In the predictability regressions, the forecasted demand growth rates
are estimates created from demographic and consumption data. In general, the standard errors
should be corrected for the uncertainty in these preliminary estimates. However, Pagan (1984)
shows that the standard errors do not require adjustment under the null hypothesis that the
generated regressors do not have any predictive power–the null hypothesis evaluated in the
paper.
 19
      These results are available from the authors upon request.


                                                       28
Asset manager horizon. Money managers are usually evaluated based on short-term perfor-
mance. These managers may not be able to expose themselves to risk for a long enough period
to reap the returns from trading on long-term information. However, the trading strategy on
demographics has substantial abnormal returns even at an annual frequency. These returns
should be relevant even for professionals with relatively short investment horizons.
Neglect of slowly-moving variables. A second attention-based interpretation of the re-
sults is based on the neglect of slowly-moving variables. In the frenzy of earnings and merger
announcements, liquidity-driven orders, and media headlines about world news, investors may
disregard variables that display little daily variation, like demographics. Studies on just-
noticeable diﬀerences (Weber, 1834) suggest a minimum size of a stimulus necessary for de-
tection, let alone to attract attention. Demographic information may therefore be neglected
until the information is incorporated in earnings announcements, which are discrete events.
This hypothesis could explain the stock return forecastability, but not its horizon. This story
suggests that short-horizon, rather than long-horizon, demographic information should predict
stock returns.


5    Conclusions
We present evidence relating demographic variables to consumption patterns, industry prof-
itability, and stock returns. Diﬀerent goods have substantially dissimilar age patterns of con-
sumption and these patterns are remarkably stable through time. While age patterns of con-
sumption are obvious for goods such as childrens books and nursing homes, other patterns are
not as straightforward. For example, the age-consumption profile of liquor peaks 20 years after
the profile for beer and wine.
   We combine our estimates of consumption by age with forecasts of cohort size by age. Our
methodology produces forecasts of demand growth due to demographic changes for 48 diﬀerent
expenditure categories over 65 years. We match the expenditure categories to industry-level
accounting measures and stock market returns. The forecasted demand growth due to de-
mographics predicts the contemporaneous industry-level accounting return on equity. This
predictability result is more substantial for industries with larger variations of forecasted de-
mand growth and higher concentration ratios.
    We regress industry returns on growth rates of consumption due to demographics. We
find that long-term growth rates of demand forecast annual abnormal returns, while short-
term growth rates do not have significant forecasting power. This predictability result is
more pronounced for those groups of industries that exhibit a stronger relationship between
profitability and forecastable demand growth.
   The evidence supports the hypothesis that investors are inattentive at longer horizons. In
particular, investors appear to neglect information about expected profitability beyond a 5-

                                               29
year horizon. This finding is consistent with the near absence of earnings forecasts by analysts
at this horizon.
    We have identified a novel form of predictability in financial markets based on long-term
demographic information. The evidence in this paper complements the existing results on the
response of stock returns to short-term events, such as earnings surprises. Our findings have
implications for other economic decisions beyond portfolio allocation. Voters and consumers
may neglect relevant information about long-term outcomes for their decisions. Workers might
disregard forecastable future demand changes in their choice of careers (Zarkin, 1985). Man-
agers may neglect long-term demand shifts in their strategic decisions.
   Further examination of consumer, investor, and firm response to anticipated events will
cast more light on the phenomena presented in this paper.




                                              30
A     Appendix A. Model
We summarize the derivation of equation (3) in Section 2 (Vuolteenaho, 2002). We assume
that the market price, M , book equity, B, and dividend payments, D, are positive in any
time period. Define m, b, and d as the log transformation of each variable, respectively. We
assume the ‘clean-surplus identity’ between earnings, X, book equity, and dividend payments,
Bt+1 = Bt + Xt+1 − Dt+1 . Earnings that are not paid to shareholders as dividends increase
book equity. We define log stock return, rt+1 , and log accounting return on equity, roet+1 , as

                   rt+1 ≡ log [(Mt+1 + Dt+1 ) /Mt ] ,                                         (10)
                 roet+1 ≡ log [(Bt + Xt+1 ) /Bt ] = log [(Bt+1 + Dt+1 ) /Bt ] .               (11)

The second expression for roet+1 follows from the clean-surplus identity. Finally, we assume
that dt+1 −mt+1 and dt+1 −bt+1 follow stationary processes. By construction, the unconditional
mean of dt+1 − mt+1 , denoted d − m, is equal to the average log dividend-price ratio. We log-
linearize (10) and (11) around the expansion point d − m:

                              rt+1 ≈ k + ρmt+1 + (1 − ρ)dt+1 − mt
                            roet+1 ≈ k + ρbt+1 + (1 − ρ)dt+1 − bt

with ρ = [1 + exp(d − m)]−1 and k = − log(ρ) − (1 − ρ)(d − m). Ignoring the approximation
errors, we subtract the log-linearization for roet+1 from the log-linearization for rt+1 to get a
diﬀerence equation for the log market-to-book ratio:

                             mt − bt = ρ(mt+1 − bt+1 ) − rt+1 + roet+1                        (12)

Solving equation (12) forward and imposing the condition limj→∞ ρj (mt+j − bt+j ) = 0, we get
              ∞
              X                                              ∞
                                                             X
                                                        bt
                    ρj [roet+1+j − rt+1+j ] = mt − bt = E          ρj [roet+1+j − rt+1+j ].   (13)
              j=0                                            j=0


The second equality follows from taking expectations with respect to operator E     b and noting
b
Et (mt − bt ) = mt − bt . Substituting the right hand-side of (13) into (12) leads to (3):
                                           ∞
                                           X                             ∞
                                                                         X
                        bt rt+1 = ∆E
                 rt+1 − E          bt+1                         bt+1
                                                 ρj roet+1+j − ∆E              ρj rt+1+j .
                                           j=0                           j=1



B     Appendix B. Data

B.1    Demographic forecasts
Cohort size adjustment. The cohort size data is from the Current Population Reports,
Series 25. For the years before 1980, these series lump together all age groups above the age
of 84. In order to match the cohort sizes with the mortality rates, we disaggregate the group
of age 85+ into 1-year age groups using the relative cohort sizes in 1980. Let Ag,j,t be the

                                                  31
population size at age j for gender g in year t. For any t < 1980 we impute population sizes
                                        P
                                        99               P
                                                         99
for ages 85 to 99 using Ag,j,t = (            Ag,j,t /          Ag,j,1980 ) ∗ Ag,j,1980 . This imputation20 imposes
                                       j=85              j=85
a constant population distribution in each year for ages beyond 84. Therefore, forecasts of
population growth for ages beyond 84 will not match the imputed age distribution in the
following year. Given the small size of population above 84 years of age (2,197,000 individuals
in 1979), this issue is unlikely to matter.
    Mortality rate adjustment. We use the mortality rates from period life tables in Life
Tables for the United States Social Security Area 1900-2080. To adjust for improvements in
mortality rates over time, we compute mortality rate adjustment for each ten-year age range
using data from the previous 5 decades. Let qg,j,d be the mortality rate for gender g, age j,
and decade d from the life tables and let d(t) be the end of the most recent decade before
t. If t = 1951, then the mortality adjustment for ages 10 to 19 is based on the coeﬃcient
(κ[10,19],1951 ) from the regression qg,j,d = k[10,19],1951 ∗ qg,j,d−1 + g,j,d for all observations with
d ∈ {1910, 1920, 1930, 1940, 1950} and 10 ≤ j ≤ 19. Therefore, q̂g,j,u|t , the forecast from year t
                                                                                        ³       ´ u−t
                                                                                                  10
of mortality rates at age j in year u > t, is given by q̂g,j,u|t = qg,j,d(t) ∗ κz(j),t                  , where z (j)
is the 10-year age range corresponding to age j.
    Fertility. We take the fertility rate by one-year age of the mother from Heuser (1976) and
update it for the more recent years using the Vital Statistics of the United States: Natality.
We assume that the forecasted fertility rate b̂j,u|t for women of age j in year u, forecasted as
of year t, equals the actual fertility rate bj,t|t for women of age j in year t: b̂j,u|t = bj,t|t .
   Cohort size forecast. By combining the present population profile with the forecasts of
mortality and fertility, we produce a preliminary forecast of the future population profile with
an iterative procedure. Starting with the preliminary population profile Âpg,u−1|t = [Âpg,0,u−1|t ,
Âpg,1,u−1|t , Âpg,2,u−1|t , ...] for year u − 1, we generate a forecasted population profile for the next
year u using two relationships. First, for any age j ≥ 1 we calculate Âpg,j,u|t as Âpg,j,u|t =
Âpg,j−1,u−1|t ∗ (1 − q̂g,j−1,u−1|t ). Second, the forecasted number of newborns in year u (age 0) is
                              P
                              49
given by Âpg,0,u|t = srg ∗          Âpf,j,u−1|t ∗ b̂j,u−1|t , where srm = 0.501 is the average probability
                              j=14
that a newborn will be male (srf = 1 − srm by construction).
   Immigration adjustment. We compute a backward-looking adjustment for net mi-
gration by regressing the percentage diﬀerence between the actual cohort size and the pre-
liminary forecasted cohort size formed the year before, on a constant. We produce these
adjustment coeﬃcients separately for each 10-year age group using data from the most re-
cent five-year period prior to year t.21 For instance, if t = 1951, then the immigration
adjustment for ages 10 to 19 is based on the coeﬃcient (ψ[10,19],1951 ) from the regression
³                              ´
 Ag,j,t−i+1 − Âpg,j,t−i+1|t−i /Âpg,j,t−i+1|t−i = ψ[10,19],1951 + νg,j,t−i for all observations with 0 ≤
    20
     In the years before 1940, the series lump together age groups above 74. We apply the same imputation
procedure using the age distribution of 1940 up to age 84 and the age distribution of 1980 beyond age 84.
  21
     For the age group 0-9, we allow for a separate adjustment coeﬃcient for age 1, and we do not adjust the
forecast for the unborn (age 0).



                                                            32
i ≤ 5 and 10 ≤ j ≤ 19. Therefore, Âg,j,u|t , the forecast of cohort size for gender g and
                                                                           Q ³
                                                                          u−t                ´
age j in year u as of year t, is given by Âg,j,u|t = Âpg,j,u|t ∗              1 + ψz(j−i),t , where the
                                                                          i=1
function z converts j − i to an age range.22              The forecasted cohort size profile Âg,u|t =
h                               i
 Âg,0,u|t , Âg,1,u|t , Âg,2,u|t , ... is the basis for the empirical analysis in the paper.


B.2      Consumption data
Expenditure categories. The dependent variable in the regressions in Section 3.2 is the
yearly expenditure, ci,k,t , on each category k listed in Appendix Table 2. In particular, the
automobile and motorcycle categories include expenditures on both new and used vehicles.
The coal category includes expenditure on both coal and electricity. The health care and
medical equipment categories are estimated using total expenditure on health, including health
insurance. The health insurance category, instead, is limited to health insurance expenditure.
The residential mortgage category is estimated using expenditure on mortgage interest. The
utilities category includes expenditure on electricity, water, and natural gas.
    Housing. The residential development category is estimated using the housing value. For
some of the observations, the information on housing value is not available for renters. In this
case, we compute an implicit conversion rate from yearly rent to housing value for the sample
for which both measures are available, and apply it to the yearly rent value. The conversion
rate from yearly rent to housing value equals 1/.028 in 1936-37, 1/.088 in 1972-73, and 1/.076
in 1983-84. Since the conversion rate for 1960-61 cannot be computed, we use the rate for 1972-
73. Table 2 reports the annualized rental value. The expenditures for residential construction
and for construction equipment, which depend on changes in the housing stock, rather than
on levels, is computed diﬀerently. First, we compute the forecasted housing value Ĉhousing,u|t
for year u, given information of year t. Then we compute the forecasted demand for residential
construction and construction equipment as Ĉhousing,u|t − Ĉhousing,u−1|t + .1Ĉhousing,u−1|t , that
is, the change in the forecasted housing stock plus housing depreciation.
    Other issues. The value of income and housing in the 1960-61 survey is reported in
discrete categories. We assign it the mean value in the interval, and 1.5 times the value for the
top category. Housing value is top-coded in the 1983-84 survey. We use the 1972-73 category
to compute the appropriate adjustment coeﬃcient of 1.53. Finally, in the 1983-84 survey some
households are interviewed for fewer than 4 quarters. We compute an annualized consumption
value for these records.


B.3      Industry classification
The industry classification system is designed to satisfy three basic criteria: (i) aggregate
goods with a relatively homogeneous age profile of consumption; (ii) define categories that
are consistent over time; (iii) minimize deviations from the Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC). These criteria lead to 48 industries (Appendix Table 2) belonging to three groups.
    22
    The forecasts for the unborn are obtained by applying the adjustment coeﬃcient to the mothers, computing
the forecasted number of births, and aging the cohort.


                                                     33
    Standard industries–such as oil, telephone, and health insurance–are constructed from a
list of 4-digit SIC codes. For example, the health insurance industry is defined by the SIC codes
6320-6329. A company belongs to industry k in year t if its SIC code for year t coincides with
one of the listed codes for industry k. In Appendix Table 2 these industries are characterized
by the absence of codes in parentheses. The classification for these industries closely resembles
the Fama-French classification.
    Searched industries–such as toys, cruises, and furniture–are also constructed on the basis
of a list of 4-digit SIC codes. In addition, we eliminate the companies in these SIC codes whose
core business does not belong in the industry (from our standpoint). For example, we eliminate
golf equipment manufacturers and retailers from the toys industry. Further, we define a list of
additional SIC codes and identify companies in these codes that belong to the industry. The
searched industries are identifiable in Appendix Table 2 by the presence of SIC codes without
parentheses (the basic codes) and with parentheses (the additional codes).
   Reclassified industries–the book industry subcategories, as well as golf, motorcycles, and
bicycles–are not uniquely associated with any SIC codes. Companies in these industries are
identified from within a list of SIC codes. For example, in order to construct the four book
categories, we search the SIC codes 2730-2739 and determine the companies whose core business
consists of books for children, books for K-12, etc. In Appendix Table 2 these expenditure
categories only have SIC codes in parentheses.


C     Appendix C. Standard errors
                ∙³                   ´0 ³P                       ´¸
                  PK                          K                                   0 ε = ρX 0            0
Define Γq = E        k=1 Xkt εkt              k=1 Xkt−q εkt−q         and assume Xkt kt   kt−1 εkt−1 + ηkt ,
                                     ∙³                          ´0 ³P              ´¸
                                       PK                                 K
where ρ < 1 is a scalar and E             k=1 Xkt−q εkt−q                 k=1 ηkt        = 0 ∀ q > 0. Then,
                     ⎡⎛          ⎛                                             ⎞⎞0 Ã                       !⎤
                           K
                           X                              q
                                                          X                               K
                                                                                          X
          Γq = E ⎣⎝              ⎝ρq Xkt−q εkt−q +              ρq−j ηkt−q+j ⎠⎠                 Xkt−q εkt−q ⎦
                           k=1                            j=1                             k=1
                     ⎡Ã                  !0 Ã K            !⎤
                        K
                        X                    X
              = ρq E ⎣    ρq Xkt−q εkt−q        Xkt−q εkt−q ⎦ +
                             k=1                           k=1
                     ⎡⎛                               ⎞0 Ã                     !⎤
                           q
                           X            K
                                        X                     K
                                                              X
                   E ⎣⎝          ρq−j         ηkt−q+j ⎠             Xkt−q εkt−q ⎦
                           j=1          k=1                   k=1
                     ⎡Ã                  !0 Ã K            !⎤
                        K
                        X                    X
              = ρq E ⎣    ρq Xkt−q εkt−q        Xkt−q εkt−q ⎦ = ρq Γ0 .
                             k=1                           k=1

Using the relationship for Γq , we obtain
                                  ⎛⎛              ⎞       ⎞
                   ∞
                   X                     ∞
                                         X                            µ                     ¶        µ       ¶
                                                                           2   1−ρ                       1+ρ
      S = Γ0 + 2         ρq Γ0 = ⎝⎝2           ρq ⎠ − 1⎠ Γ0 =                −     Γ0 =                      Γ0 .
                   q=1                   q=0
                                                                          1−ρ 1−ρ                        1−ρ



                                                          34
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Linn. “Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence
     From the Pharmaceutical Industry”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 199, 1049—
     1090, 2004.
 [2] Bakshi, Gurdip S, and Zhiwu Chen. “Baby Boom, Population Aging, and Capital Mar-
     kets”, Journal of Business, Vol. 67, 165-201, 1994.
 [3] Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean. “All that Glitters: The Eﬀect of Attention and
     News on the Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors”, mimeo, 2002.
 [4] Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. “A model of investor sentiment”,
     Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 49, 307-343, 1998.

 [5] Bell, Felicitie C., Alice H. Wade, and Stephen C. Goss. “Life Tables for the United States
     Social Security Area 1900-2080”, Actuarial Study No. 107, SSA Pub. No. 11-11536.
 [6] Bernard, Victor L. and Jacob K. Thomas. “Post-Earnings-Announcement Drift: Delayed
     Price Response or Risk Premium?”, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 27, 1-36, 1989.

 [7] Campbell, John Y. “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns”, Economic Journal,
     Vol. 101, 157-179, 1991.
 [8] Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller. “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations
     of Future Dividends and Discount Factors”, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 1, 195-228,
     1988.

 [9] Costa, Dora. “American Living Standards: Evidence from Recreational Expenditures”,
     NBER Working Paper 7148, 1999.
[10] Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam. “Investor Psychology
     and Security Market Under- and Overreactions”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 53, 1839-1885,
     1998.
[11] DeBondt, Werner F.M. and Thaler, Richard. “Does The Stock Market Overreact?”, Jour-
     nal of Finance, Vol. 40, 793-805, 1985.
[12] DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, Robert J. Waldmann. “Noise
     Trader Risk in Financial Markets”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, 703-738, 1990.
[13] Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. “The Cross-section of Expected Stock Returns”,
     Journal of Finance, Vol. 47, 427-465, 1992.

[14] Gabaix, Xavier, David Laibson, Guillermo Moloche and Stephen Weinberg.“Information
     Acquisition: Experimental Analysis of a Boundedly Rational Model”, mimeo, 2004.
[15] Geneakoplos, John, Michael J.P. Magill and Martine Quinzii. “Demography and the Long-
     Run Predictability of the Stock Market”, Yale Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No.
     1380, 2002.


                                              35
[16] Heuser, Robert L. “Fertility tables for birth cohorts by color”,U.S. Department of Health,
     Education, and Welfare. DHEW Publication No. 76-1152, 1976.
[17] Hirshleifer, David, Sonya S. Lim, and Siew H. Teoh. “Disclosure to an Audience with
     Limited Attention”, mimeo, 2004.

[18] Hong, Harrison and Jeremy C. Stein. “A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Momentum
     Trading, and Overreaction in Asset Markets”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 54, 2143-2184,
     1999.
[19] Hong, Harrison, Walter Torous, and Ross Valkanov. “Do Industries Lead the Stock Mar-
     ket?”, mimeo, 2003.
[20] Huberman, Gur, and Tomer Regev. “Contagious Speculation and a Cure for Cancer: A
     Nonevent that Made Stock Prices Soar”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 56, 387-396, 2001.
[21] Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman. “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling
     Losers: Implications For Stock Market Eﬃciency”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 48, 65-91,
     1993.
[22] Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert. W. Vishny. “Contrarian Investment, Ex-
     trapolation, and Risk”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 49, 1541-1578, 1994.

[23] Mankiw, N. Gregory and David N. Weil. “The Baby Boom, the Baby Bust, and the
     Housing Market”, Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 19, 235-258, 1989.
[24] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Michael D. Whinston. “Free Entry and Social Ineﬃciency”,
     RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 17, 48-58, 1986.
[25] Merton, Robert C. “An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model”, Econometrica, Vol.
     41, 867-87, 1973.
[26] Moskowitz, Tobias J. and Mark Grinblatt. “Do Industries Explain Momentum?”, Journal
     of Finance, Vol. 54, 1249-1290, 1999.
[27] Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West. “Hypothesis Testing with Eﬃcient Method of
     Moments Estimation”, International Economic Review, Vol. 28, 777-787, 1987.

[28] Pagan, Adrian R., “Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated
     Regressors”, International Economic Review, Vol. 25, 221-247, 1984.
[29] Peng, Lin and Wei Xiong. “Limited Attention and Asset Prices”, mimeo, 2004.

[30] Poterba, James M. “Demographic Structure and Asset Returns”, The Review of Eco-
     nomics & Statistics, Vol. 83, 565-584, 2001.
[31] Shleifer, Andrei. Ineﬃcient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance. Clarendon
     Lectures in Economics. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
[32] Stambaugh, Robert F. “Predictive regressions”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 54,
     375-421, 1999.

                                              36
[33] U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Census of Manufacturers, Wash-
     ington DC: US Government Printing Oﬃce, various years.
[34] U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. “Estimates of the Population of
     the US by Age, Sex, and Race”, Current Population Reports, Series P-25 (Numbers 311,
     519, 917, 965, and 985) Washington DC: US Government Printing Oﬃce, various years.

[35] US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health service, Centers for Disease
     Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, Vital Statistics of The
     United States 1992: Natality Vol. 1, 1996.
[36] U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Consumer Expenditure Survey,
     1960-1961. ICPSR 9035. Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research,
     1983.
[37] U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Survey of Consumer Expenditures,
     1972-1973. ICPSR 9034. Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research,
     1987.
[38] U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics and United States Department
     of Agriculture, Bureau of Home Economics, et al. Study of Consumer Purchases in the
     United States, 1935-1936. ICPSR 8908. Inter-university Consortium for Political and So-
     cial Research, 1999.
[39] Vuolteenaho, Tuomo. “What Drives Firm-Level Stock Returns”, Journal of Finance, Vol.
     57, 233-264, 2002.

[40] Watts, Ross L. “Systematic ‘Abnormal’ Returns After Quarterly Earnings Announce-
     ments”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 6, 127-150, 1978.
[41] Weber, E. H. De Pulsu, Resorptione, Auditu, et Tactu. Annotationes Anatomicae et Phys-
     iologicae. Koehler, Leipzig, 1834.
[42] Zarkin, Gary. “Occupational Choice: An Application to the Market for Public School
     Teachers”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 100, 409-446, 1985.




                                            37
                                          Figure 1a. Forecasted and Actual Population Ages 30-34

                                  26

                                  24

                                  22
       Population (in millions)




                                  20

                                  18
                                                                                                  Census Data
                                  16
                                                                                                  Forecast 1935
                                  14                                                              Forecast 1955

                                  12                                                              Forecast 1975

                                  10

                                   8
                                   1930     1940   1950   1960      1970     1980   1990   2000
                                                                 Year


                                          Figure 1b. Forecasted and Actual Population Ages 70-74

                                  10

                                  9

                                  8
   Population (in millions)




                                  7
                                                                                                   Census Data
                                  6
                                                                                                   Forecast 1935
                                                                                                   Forecast 1955
                                  5
                                                                                                   Forecast 1975
                                  4

                                  3

                                  2

                                  1
                                  1930     1940    1950   1960      1970     1980   1990   2000
                                                                 Year

Notes: Figures 1a and 1b display time series of actual and forecasted cohort size for the age groups 30-34
and 70-74. Each Figure shows the actual time series as well as three different 40-year forecasts, as of 1935,
1955, and 1975.




                                                                        38
                                                                  Figure 2a. Age Profile of Consumption for Bicycles and Drugs

                               2.5



                                                    2
                                                                                                                                  Bicycles
                                                                                                                                  (1972-73)
  Normalized consumption




                                                                                                                                  Bicycles
                                                                                                                                  (1983-84)
                               1.5
                                                                                                                                  Drugs
                                                                                                                                  (1935-36)
                                                                                                                                  Drugs
                                                                                                                                  (1960-61)
                                                    1                                                                             Drugs
                                                                                                                                  (1972-73)
                                                                                                                                  Drugs
                                                                                                                                  (1983-84)
                               0.5



                                                    0
                                                        20           30           40            50            60         70
                                                                                  Age for Head of Household


                                                                   Figure 2b. Age Profile of Consumption for Beer and Liquor

                                                    1.8

                                                    1.6

                                                    1.4
                                                                                                                                 Beer
                           Normalized Consumption




                                                                                                                                 (1972-73)
                                                    1.2
                                                                                                                                 Beer
                                                                                                                                 (1983-84)
                                                        1
                                                                                                                                 Liquor
                                                                                                                                 (1972-73)
                                                    0.8
                                                                                                                                 Liquor
                                                                                                                                 (1983-84)
                                                    0.6

                                                    0.4

                                                    0.2
                                                             20        30          40            50           60        70
                                                                                  Age for Head of Household

Notes: Figures 2a and 2b display kernel regressions of normalized household consumption for each good as
a function of the age for the head of the household. The regressions use an Epanechnikov kernel and a
bandwidth of 5 years. Each different line for a specific good uses an age-consumption profile from a
different consumption survey. Expenditures are normalized so that the average consumption for all ages is
equal to 1 for each survey-good pair. For bicycles and alcohol consumption, no data is available for the
1935-36 and the 1960-61 surveys.




                                                                                                39
                                          Figure 3. Forecasted Demand Growth for Books

                                50%
                                                                                                                           Books K-12
                                                                                                                           (1935)

                                                                                                                           Books K-12
                                40%                                                                                        (1972)
Forecasted Consumption Growth




                                                                                                                           Books K-12
                                                                                                                           (1983)
                                30%
                                                                                                                           Books College
                                                                                                                           (1935)


                                20%
                                                                                                                           Books College
                                                                                                                           (1972)

                                                                                                                           Books College
                                                                                                                           (1983)
                                10%
                                                                                                                           Books Other
                                                                                                                           (1935)

                                 0%                                                                                        Books Other
                                   1975   1980               1985                     1990                    1995
                                                                                                                           (1972)

                                                                                                                           Books Other
                                                                                                                           (1983)
                                -10%

                                                                Year
     Notes: Figure 3 displays the predicted consumption growth due to forecasted demographic changes for three subcategories of books: books for
     K-12 schools, books for higher education, and other books (mainly fiction). The forecasts are computed combining the demographic information
     of year 1975 and age-consumption profiles for the 1935-36, 1972-73, and 1983-84 consumption surveys. Each distinct line for a good uses an
     age-consumption profile from a different data set. Forecasts for book expenditure in 1960 are missing since the 1960-61 survey does not record
     book expenditures with a sufficient level of detail.



                                                                             40
                                                                      Figure 4: Return Predictability Coefficient for Demand Growth Forecasts at Different Horizons

                                                             16


                                                             14
Estimated Coefficient for Forecasted Demand Growth Between




                                                             12


                                                             10

                                                                                                                                                      Coefficient Estimate
                    Periods t+h and t+h+1




                                                             8                                                                                        Upper Bound
                                                                                                                                                      Lower Bound

                                                             6


                                                             4


                                                             2


                                                             0
                                                                  0       1       2       3       4       5      6         7     8       9      10      11        12         13

                                                             -2


                                                             -4
                                                                                                                 Horizon (h)

               Notes: The estimated coefficient for each horizon is from a univariate regression of abnormal returns at t+1 on forecasted consumption growth
               between t+h and t+h+1. The confidence interval is constructed using robust standard errors.



                                                                                                                      41
                                          Table 1. Predictability of Population Growth Rates By Cohort

Dependent Variable:                                            Actual population growth for each cohort                                                 Census projection
                                                                                                                                                       of population growth
                                                      0 to 5 years ahead                                 5 to 10 years ahead                           0 to 5 yrs 5 to 10 yrs
                                         Ages 0-99 Ages 0-18               Ages 65+            Ages 0-99 Ages 0-18                 Ages 65+            Ages 0-99 Ages 0-99
                                            (1)       (2)                     (3)                 (4)       (5)                       (6)                 (7)       (8)
Constant                                    0.0060            -0.0079        0.0283             0.0125     0.0044                    0.0397              -0.0286           -0.0270
                                         (0.0005)***        (0.0012)***    (0.0019)***        (0.0007)*** (0.0022)**               (0.0020)***         (0.0049)***       (0.0043)***

Forecasted population                       0.9024             0.9121        0.7574                                                                      1.1705
growth: 0 to 5 yrs                       (0.0039)***        (0.0088)***    (0.0124)***                                                                 (0.0354)***

Forecasted population                                                                            0.8413            0.7097            0.6798                                1.1155
growth: 5 to 10 yrs                                                                            (0.0056)*** (0.0177)*** (0.0143)***                                       (0.0320)***

R2                                          0.8312             0.8188        0.5593              0.6928            0.4250            0.4665              0.8466             0.8601

N                                        N = 11000 N = 2356                N = 2940           N = 10000 N = 2166                   N = 2590             N = 200            N = 200
Notes: Reported coefficents from the regression of actual population growth rates on our forecasted growth rates in Columns (1) through (6). In Columns (7) through (9) we report
coefficients from the regression of Census projections of population growth rate as of 2000 on our forecasted growth rates. In Columns (1) through (3) and in column (7) the growth
rates refer to the next 5 years. In Columns (4) through (6) and in column (8) the growth rates refer to the period between 5 and 10 years ahead. The regression specification is yit = a +
bxit + eit where t is a year ranging form 1935 to 2000 and i is a age-gender observation within the relevant age range indicated at the top of each column. Age is defined by one year
cells. The OLS standard errors are in parentheses.
Actual population sizes for both sexes between the ages 0 and 99 are from the P-25 Series from the Current Population Reports provided by U.S. Census. Forecasted population sizes
for each age-gender observation are calculated using the previous year's P-25 data and mortality rates from the period life table at the beginning of the decade from Life Tables for the
United States Social Security Area 1900-2080. The forecasted number of newborns is calculated by applying birth rates from the previous year to the forecasted age profile of the
female population. The Census projection of population growth rate is calculated using data from the Census website. The actual and estimated growth rates are defined as the
difference in the log population for a particular age-gender pair.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                      42
                                              Table 2. Summary Statistics: Expenditure by Good

Consumer Survey                                       1935-36                          1960-61                            1972-73                            1983-84
                                               (1)           (2)                 (3)             (4)                (5)             (6)               (7)           (8)
                                             Mean         Std. Dev.            Mean         Std. Dev.            Mean          Std. Dev.            Mean          Std. Dev.
Yearly Expenditure                           (in $)         (in $)             (in $)         (in $)             (in $)          (in $)             (in $)          (in $)
Child Care                                    1.43           (32.36)             (.)             (.)             91.31           (384.58)          117.20           (602.53)
Children's Books                                (.)             (.)              (.)             (.)              0.47            (15.59)           2.70             (39.01)
Children's Clothing                          7.42            (35.16)           18.56           (65.07)           21.37            (87.63)          38.42            (122.59)
Toys                                         24.90           (56.37)             (.)             (.)             13.77            (65.22)          75.36            (211.85)
Books -- college text books                  12.94           (99.00)             (.)             (.)             20.87           (141.47)          32.50            (129.94)
Books -- general                             8.82            (56.52)             (.)             (.)             18.00            (92.56)          37.41            (102.77)
Books -- K-12 school books                   25.09           (53.24)             (.)             (.)              5.75            (41.59)           5.15              (30.4)
Movies                                       84.33          (135.70)             (.)             (.)            101.76           (256.79)          77.44            (168.88)
Newspapers                                   77.52           (56.61)          147.71          (161.14)           36.73            (49.14)          55.98             (62.84)
Magazines                                    23.80           (39.58)             (.)             (.)             16.44            (42.31)          31.29             (58.25)
Cruises                                         (.)             (.)              (.)             (.)              2.40            (73.91)          12.79            (334.96)
Dental Equipment                            92.26           (220.23)          151.89          (331.08)          148.63           (400.42)          122.33           (396.62)
Drugs                                       75.18           (138.43)          223.29          (300.52)          109.58           (214.28)          105.30           (219.93)
Health Care (Services)**                   338.53           (688.64)          688.70          (890.59)          800.52          (1160.57)          549.19          (1035.64)
Health Insurance                            48.65           (145.31)          298.47          (317.23)          467.57           (521.43)          284.22           (494.05)
Medical Equipment**                        338.53           (688.64)          688.70          (890.59)          800.52          (1160.57)          549.19          (1035.64)
Funeral Homes and Cemet.                    21.03           (248.98)             (.)             (.)              3.24            (95.05)          51.98            (531.13)
Nursing Home Care                           18.70           (208.13)             (.)             (.)             14.31           (273.54)          13.84            (298.35)
Construction Equipment*                    1796.14         (1743.86)         3218.38         (2551.48)          4083.81         (3574.06)         4304.69          (4068.31)
Floors                                      37.51           (167.73)          86.83           (358.19)           94.26           (389.43)          59.37            (400.31)
Furniture                                   87.56           (297.42)          246.19          (578.63)          295.62           (772.49)          277.51          (1078.15)
Home Appliances Big                        164.52           (408.67)          231.24          (495.04)          408.62           (666.92)          322.09           (675.65)
Home Appliances Small                       15.17            (48.06)          25.01            (65.31)           54.77            (150.7)          61.53            (179.32)
Housewares                                  18.18            (55.41)          46.01           (121.71)           21.36            (94.45)          31.66            (125.94)
Linens                                      44.17            (80.35)          108.89          (177.62)          108.02           (238.89)          75.46            (226.54)
Residential Construction*                  1796.14         (1743.86)         3218.38         (2551.48)          4083.81         (3574.06)         4304.69          (4068.31)
Residential Development*                   1796.14         (1743.86)         3218.38         (2551.48)          4083.81         (3574.06)         4304.69          (4068.31)
Residential Mortgage                       217.45           (636.88)          379.23          (735.42)          636.00          (1449.82)         1140.54          (2635.34)
Beer (and Wine)                             61.02           (255.37)          525.30         (1116.88)          337.49           (802.86)          508.11           (849.15)
Cigarettes                                 137.78           (203.99)          299.85          (328.04)          264.14           (365.08)          201.98           (304.69)
Cigars and Other Tobacco                    63.36           (133.88)             (.)             (.)             24.90           (110.19)          14.43             (67.44)
Food                                       3130.90         (2041.04)         4104.13         (2369.29)          3968.45         (2847.73)         3084.30          (2004.85)
Liquor                                          (.)             (.)              (.)             (.)             19.55            (54.01)          49.36            (114.78)
Clothing (Adults)                           931.04         (1054.04)         1092.44         (1163.94)          868.30           (989.58)          605.21           (865.95)
Cosmetics                                    69.53           (96.77)             (.)             (.)            148.58           (243.73)          111.70            (165.3)
Golf                                         12.80           (99.65)             (.)             (.)                (.)              (.)               (.)              (.)
Jewelry                                      4.33            (13.33)             (.)             (.)             30.05             (195.)          83.30            (493.15)
Sporting Equipment                           21.84            (68.1)          98.29           (254.94)          103.80           (210.47)          80.49            (229.07)
Life Insurance                              672.52         (1462.62)          460.57          (838.06)          531.77           (951.55)          240.33           (866.86)
Property Insurance                           98.15          (169.49)          329.21          (339.97)          389.85            (431.1)          442.40           (555.45)
Airplanes                                       (.)             (.)              (.)             (.)             97.26           (353.83)          179.70           (633.14)
Automobiles                                 764.45         (2105.43)         1002.87         (2437.16)          1571.92         (3323.69)         1729.10          (5085.54)
Bicycles                                     6.49            (37.03)             (.)             (.)             24.06            (83.33)          11.19             (98.27)
Motorcycles                                     (.)             (.)              (.)             (.)             36.38            (296.6)          27.06            (331.38)
Coal                                        205.40          (254.93)             (.)             (.)             11.14            (70.34)           2.84             (42.57)
Oil                                         480.00          (614.89)         1504.18          (964.36)          893.12           (811.44)         1076.62           (930.53)
Telephone                                   106.19          (141.12)          253.18          (224.38)          390.99           (339.01)          409.22           (359.85)
Utilities                                   383.44          (350.99)         1161.90          (792.22)          768.81           (568.66)         1045.84           (832.67)
Number of households                                  N = 6113                     N = 13728                          N = 19975                          N = 13133
Notes: Columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 present the average yearly household expenditure in the featured category. Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 present the standard deviation across households.
Columns 1 and 2 refer to the Study of Consumer Purchases in the United States, 1935-36. Columns 3 and 4 refer to the Survey of Consumer Expenditures, 1960-1961. Columns 5
and 6 refer to the Survey of Consumer Expenditures, 1972-1973. Columns 7 and 8 refer to the Consumer Expenditure Survey, 1983-84.
* The expenditure for the categories "Construction Equipment", "Residential Construction" and "Residential Development" refers to the imputed annual rent estimated from the value
of the dwelling of residence. See Appendix B for details on the construction of the housing expenditure.
** The expenditure for the categories "Health Care (Services)" and "Medical Equipment" is the total expenditure in health insurance, physicians, and hospitals.




                                                                                    43
                                Table 3: Summary Statistics For Predicted Demand Growth Rates
                                          No.         Forecasted Demogr.                 Forecasted Demogr.                  Forecasted Demogr.                  % Dem.
 Expenditure Category
                                         Years        0-5 Growth Industry                0-5 Growth Industry                 0-5 Growth Industry                Industry
                                                              1950                               1975                                2000
                                           (1)            (2)       (3)                      (4)       (5)                       (6)       (7)                      (8)
Child Care                                 65            0.0268             Yes             0.0001              Yes             -0.0035            Yes            100%
Children's Books                           28                .               .                  .                .               0.0036            Yes             40%
Children's Clothing                        65            0.0157             Yes             0.0226              Yes              0.0087            No              97%
Toys                                       65            0.0270             Yes             0.0044              Yes              0.0051            No              89%
Books -- college text books                65            -0.0083            Yes             0.0270              Yes              0.0133            Yes            100%
Books -- general                           65            0.0064             No              0.0205              Yes             0.0077             No              88%
Books -- K-12 school books                 65            0.0241             Yes             -0.0087             Yes              0.0075            Yes            100%
Movies                                     65            -0.0006            Yes             0.0232              Yes              0.0093            No              49%
Newspapers                                 65            0.0077             No              0.0174              No              0.0119             No              12%
Magazines                                  65            0.0042             No              0.0206              Yes             0.0097             No              35%
Cruises                                    28                .               .                  .                .               0.0118            No              12%
Dental Equipment                           65            0.0046             No              0.0138              No              0.0111             No              20%
Drugs                                      65            0.0111             No              0.0167              No              0.0137             No              11%
Health Care (Services)**                   65            0.0108             No              0.0173              No              0.0114             No              20%
Health Insurance                           65            0.0053             No              0.0168              No              0.0125             Yes             11%
Medical Equipment**                        65            0.0108             No              0.0173              No              0.0114             No              17%
Funeral Homes and Cemet.                   53            0.0243             Yes                 .               No               0.0152            Yes             37%
Nursing Home Care                          65            0.0104             No              0.0198              Yes             0.0107             Yes             83%
Construction Equipment*                    65            0.0060             Yes             0.0200              Yes              0.0092            Yes             98%
Floors                                     65            0.0065             No              0.0177              No              0.0118             Yes             51%
Furniture                                  65            0.0007             Yes             0.0201              Yes              0.0077            No              71%
Home Appliances Big                        65            0.0043             Yes             0.0169              No              0.0091             No              37%
Home Appliances Small                      65            0.0050             No              0.0153              No              0.0108             No              22%
Housewares                                 65            0.0061             No              0.0192              Yes             0.0115             Yes             31%
Linens                                     65            0.0082             No              0.0170              No              0.0107             No              31%
Residential Construction*                  65            0.0060             Yes             0.0200              Yes              0.0092            Yes            100%
Residential Development*                   65            0.0088             No              0.0168              No              0.0107             No              12%
Residential Mortgage                       65            0.0146             No              0.0164              Yes             0.0036             No              52%
Beer (and Wine)                            65            0.0035             Yes             0.0209              No              0.0081             No              68%
Cigarettes                                 65            0.0009             Yes             0.0178              No              0.0108             No              43%
Cigars and Other Tobacco                   65            0.0104             No              0.0141              No              0.0140             Yes             6%
Food                                       65            0.0090             No              0.0145              No              0.0104             No              0%
Liquor                                     28                .               .                  .               No               0.0120            No              3%
Clothing (Adults)                          65            0.0031             Yes             0.0197              Yes              0.0106            Yes             51%
Cosmetics                                  65            0.0018             Yes             0.0222              Yes              0.0129            No              34%
Golf                                       65            0.0014             Yes             0.0217              Yes              0.0123            Yes             68%
Jewelry                                    65            0.0031             Yes             0.0189              Yes              0.0110            Yes             31%
Sporting Equipment                         65            0.0031             Yes             0.0183              No              0.0069             Yes             45%
Life Insurance                             65            0.0081             No              0.0140              No              0.0129             Yes             37%
Property Insurance                         65            0.0081             No              0.0177              No              0.0110             No              8%
Airplanes                                  28                .               .                  .                .               0.0118            Yes             3%
Automobiles                                65            0.0032             Yes             0.0199              Yes              0.0086            No              31%
Bicycles                                   65            0.0193             Yes             0.0027              Yes              0.0010            Yes             88%
Motorcycles                                28                .               .                  .                .               0.0090            Yes             40%
Coal                                       65            0.0097             No              0.0149              No              0.0112             No              3%
Oil                                        65            0.0062             No              0.0161              No              0.0105             No              0%
Telephone                                  65            0.0075             No              0.0185              No              0.0104             No              11%
Utilities                                  65            0.0084             No              0.0149              No              0.0114             No              6%
Notes: Complete list of expenditure categories, with number of years of availability of data (Column 1) and average predicted five-year demand growth rate due to demographic
changes in 1950 (Column 2), in 1975 (Column 4), and in 2000 (Column 6). Table also indicates whether the industry belongs to the subsample of Demographic Industries in 1950
(Column 3), in 1975 (Column 5), and in 2000 (Column 7). Each year the subset Demographic Industries includes the 20 industries with the highest standard deviation of
forecasted annual consumption growth over the next 15 years. Column 8 presents percentage of years in which expenditure category belongs to the subsample of "Demographic
Industries".




                                                                                  44
                 Table 4. Summary Statistics: Compustat Data, CRSP Data and Concentration Ratios

                                                                                                             Value Weighted Annual                                   Conc.
                                              Log Yearly Return on Equity                                       Log Stock Return                                     Ratio
                                            (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)                              (5)      (6)      (7)     (8)                                (9)
                                                                                                                                                                   Largest
Industry Category                         Mean        Std. Dev. # Years              # Firms           Mean         Std. Dev. # Years              # Firms         4 Firms
Child Care                                0.116         (0.123)           29           2.76            0.104          (0.422)           30          3.47               (.)
Children's Books                          0.077         (0.093)           20           2.05            0.066          (0.286)           22          2.27             0.202
Children's Clothing                       0.160         (0.091)           40           2.08            0.076          (0.342)           42          2.93             0.170
Toys                                      0.110         (0.076)           39           9.74            0.075          (0.438)           42         12.10             0.337
Books: college texts                      0.196         (0.060)           24           2.00            0.146          (0.291)           42          1.98             0.202
Books: general                            0.126         (0.054)           40           7.23            0.115          (0.246)           42          8.45             0.202
Books: K-12 texts                         0.139         (0.045)           36           2.22            0.116          (0.276)           39          2.77             0.202
Movies                                    0.073         (0.113)           52           17.81           0.114          (0.304)           65         22.51               (.)
Newspapers                                0.178         (0.081)           50           10.44           0.137          (0.257)           65         10.38             0.197
Magazines                                 0.097         (0.068)           40           6.25            0.127          (0.291)           42          7.81               (.)
Cruises                                   0.194         (0.077)           16           3.63            0.176          (0.309)           18          3.78               (.)
Dental Equipment                          0.091         (0.125)           41           3.05            0.064          (0.356)           65          3.21             0.350
Drugs                                     0.184         (0.021)           52           84.75           0.127          (0.190)           65         97.60             0.282
Health Care (Services)                    0.115         (0.063)           34           42.06           0.115          (0.337)           36         55.67               (.)
Health Insurance                          0.099         (0.043)           31           11.45           0.096          (0.220)           42         14.00               (.)
Medical Equipment                         0.141         (0.030)           52           55.79           0.149          (0.225)           65         61.89             0.374
Funeral Homes, Cemet.                     0.068         (0.109)           28           2.75            0.118          (0.511)           30          2.93             0.250
Nursing Home Care                         0.071         (0.091)           33           13.54           0.046          (0.433)           35         17.11               (.)
Construction Equip.                       0.124         (0.092)           40           21.58           0.119          (0.242)           42         23.90             0.430
Floors                                    0.082         (0.040)           46           5.17            0.081          (0.356)           65          6.17             0.400
Furniture                                 0.099         (0.029)           52           15.69           0.093          (0.260)           65         15.38             0.166
Home Appliances Big                       0.147         (0.070)           52           19.58           0.115          (0.305)           65         20.97             0.632
Home Appliances Small                     0.153         (0.050)           52           4.73            0.136          (0.253)           55          5.49             0.430
Housewares                                0.099         (0.075)           38           2.97            0.091          (0.313)           42          3.21             0.575
Linens                                    0.100         (0.107)           37           3.97            0.101          (0.544)           39          4.51             0.263
Residential Const.                        0.079         (0.094)           39           11.87           0.075          (0.460)           42         12.71               (.)
Residential Develop.                      0.066         (0.049)           40           41.68           0.071          (0.311)           42         51.57               (.)
Residential Mortgage                      0.137         (0.145)           37           11.59           0.092          (0.382)           42         14.55               (.)
Beer (and Wine)                           0.122         (0.040)           52           7.04            0.111          (0.227)           65          8.69             0.519
Cigarettes                                0.169         (0.045)           52           4.04            0.128          (0.216)           65          5.12             0.930
Cigars, Other Tobacco                     0.194         (0.148)           52           4.75            0.127          (0.214)           65          5.92             0.656
Food                                      0.132         (0.023)           52          167.19           0.114          (0.163)           65         180.75            0.360
Liquor                                    0.126         (0.111)           27           4.41            0.145          (0.147)           28          5.32             0.470
Clothing (Adults)                         0.128         (0.034)           52           44.00           0.103          (0.263)           65         48.11             0.158
Cosmetics                                 0.221         (0.112)           47           9.49            0.110          (0.299)           65          9.43             0.380
Golf                                      0.037         (0.115)           30           4.27            0.051          (0.401)           31          5.58               (.)
Jewelry                                   0.087         (0.051)           40           9.45            0.116          (0.349)           42         11.21             0.203
Sporting Equipment                        0.120         (0.104)           52           6.38            0.083          (0.383)           65          6.91             0.280
Life Insurance                            0.096         (0.072)           39           13.23           0.120          (0.273)           41         34.49               (.)
Property Insurance                        0.112         (0.054)           30           27.40           0.096          (0.189)           65         23.46               (.)
Airplanes                                 0.097         (0.068)           27           41.59           0.124          (0.212)           28         48.82             0.621
Automobiles                               0.126         (0.084)           52           57.08           0.108          (0.235)           65         66.20             0.807
Bicycles                                  0.070         (0.118)           35           1.40            0.027          (0.421)           37          1.49             0.650
Motorcycles                               0.258         (0.115)           18           1.22            0.194          (0.364)           22          1.45             0.650
Coal                                      0.069         (0.103)           45           6.87            0.112          (0.248)           65          9.91               (.)
Oil                                       0.111         (0.038)           52          156.87           0.117          (0.175)           65         172.25            0.300
Telephone                                 0.078         (0.050)           52           18.46           0.086          (0.240)           65         25.80               (.)
Electricity                               0.102         (0.033)           44          161.34           0.097          (0.171)           65         146.15              (.)
Notes: The measure of ROE in year t+1 is the ratio of earnings (Compustat data172) in year t+1 to the book value of equity in year t (Compustat data60). The industry measure of
ROE is the average of ROE weighted by the book value of equity in year t. Column 1 displays the log of 1 plus the industry ROE. Column 2 reports the within-industry standard
deviation. Also featured are the number of years for which the data is available (Column 3) and the average number of firms in the industry (Column 4). The measure of value-
weighted yearly stock return in year t+1 is the average yearly stock return for all companies belonging to the industry between December 31 in year t and December 31 in year t+1
(Column 5). The average is value-weighted by the market capitalization at the end of year t . Columns 6 through 8 are parallel to Columns 2 through 4.
The Concentration Ratio measure (Column 9) is the ratio of revenue produced by the largest 4 companies over the total industry revenue in 1972. The data source is the Bureau of
Manufacturers. The measure is the average across all the 4-digit SIC codes that define the industry, weighted by the revenue in the sector. The measure is missing for industries
with no SIC codes within the manufacturing range (2000-3999).




                                                                                    45
                                                     Table 5. Predictability of Return on Equity Using Demographic Changes

                                                                                  Dependent Variable: Annual Log Return on Equity (ROE) at t+1
Sample                                                                  Demographic Industries                                                                    All Industries
                                                (1)             (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)           (9)           (10)          (11)           (12)
Constant                                     0.0850          0.1385        0.1258    0.1029         0.0785         0.1291          0.0907         0.0301        0.0217         0.1071        0.0537         0.0912
                                          (0.0146)*** (0.0228)*** (0.0194)*** (0.0138)*** (0.0216)*** (0.0184)*** (0.0172)*** (0.0408)                          (0.0427) (0.0147)*** (0.0268)** (0.0243)***

Forecasted annualized
demand growth                                1.8523          2.8637        1.8805    1.1597         1.8248         2.3046          1.8145         2.8426        2.0261         1.0270        1.5416         1.8037
between t and t+2                          (0.8010)** (0.8169)*** (0.7900)** (0.7937) (0.7261)** (0.8099)***                      (1.0518)* (1.0101)*** (0.8369)** (0.9361)                 (0.8735)* (0.8525)**

Industry Fixed Effects                                              X        X                          X              X                              X             X                            X              X

Year Fixed Effects                                                           X                                         X                                            X                                           X

Sample: 1974 to 2003                             X                  X        X                                                         X              X             X

Sample: 1939 to 2003                                                                     X              X              X                                                           X             X              X
    2
R                                            0.0149          0.2522        0.3240    0.0075         0.2474         0.3350          0.0081         0.2703        0.3201         0.0036        0.2223         0.2768

N                                           N = 540 N = 540 N = 540 N = 825 N = 825 N = 825                                      N = 1334 N = 1334 N = 1334 N = 1940 N = 1940 N = 1940

Notes: Columns 1 through 12 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of log yearly return on equity at t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth due to demographics between years t and t+2 . The forecast is
made using information available as of year t-1. The coefficients on the forecasted annual demand growth are normalized by the number of years of the forecast, 2. The coefficient indicates the typical increase in log
industry return on equity (an accounting measure of profitability) due to an annualized one percentage point increase in consumption due to demographics. Each year the subset Demographic Industries includes the 20
industries with the highest standard deviation of forecasted annual consumption growth over the next 15 years. Standard errors are clustered by year and then scaled by a function of the autocorrelation coefficient
estimated from the sample orthogonality conditions. A more thorough description of the concentration ratio measure and the standard errors is available in the text.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                        46
                           Table 6. Predictability of Return on Equity, Industry Concentration, and Industry Target Demographic

                                                                                     Dependent Variable: Annual Log Return on Equity (ROE) at t+1
Sample                                      C-4 > median                   C-4 <= median                   All Industries                           Young                           Adults                       Elderly
                                             (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)                (7)            (8)              (9)           (10)            (11)           (12)
Constant                                  0.1095         0.2395          0.0998         0.1415           0.1101         0.2269             0.0832         0.1213           0.1115         0.0235          0.0451        0.1246
                                        (0.0507)** (0.0515)*** (0.0165)*** (0.0166)*** (0.0340)*** (0.0507)***                           (0.0182)*** (0.0160)*** (0.0355)*** (0.0404)                    (0.0478) (0.0296)***

Forecasted annualized
demand growth                             2.4718         2.1281          1.0367         0.8910          -0.1939         -0.9128            2.6081         2.1431           0.3740         3.3089          4.9537        5.2951
between t and t+2                        (3.1927)        (3.4464)        (0.9309)       (0.9119)        (2.1168)        (2.0971)         (0.9981)*** (0.9072)**           (2.1658)       (1.8841)*       (3.4053)      (2.8365)*
C-4 x (Forecasted
annualized demand
growth between t and                                                                                     5.3765         6.9705
t+2)                                                                                                    (8.2430)        (8.4480)

Industry Fixed Effects                                       X                              X                               X                                 X                               X                             X
    2
R                                         0.0080         0.2915          0.0052         0.1870           0.0183         0.2728             0.0638         0.1397           0.0002         0.2896          0.0279        0.2882

N                                        N = 413 N = 413                N = 416 N = 416                 N = 829 N = 829                   N = 176 N = 176                 N = 942 N = 942                N = 216 N = 216

Notes: Columns 1 through 10 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of log yearly return on equity at t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth due to demographics between year t and year t+2 from 1974 until 2003.
The forecast is made using information available as of year t-1 . The coefficients on the forecasted annual demand growth are normalized by the number of years of the forecast, 2. The coefficient indicates the typical increase in
log industry return on equity (an accounting measure of profitability) due to an annualized one percentage point increase in consumption due to demographics.
The concentration ratio measure C-4 is the ratio of revenue for the largest 4 firms to total industry revenue, from the Census of Manufacturers conducted in 1972. Columns 1 and 2 report the results for the subsample of industries
with a concentration ratio higher than the median of .35. Columns 3 and 4 report the results for the subsample of industries with a concentration ratio lower than or equal to the median. Columns 5 and 6 report the results for the
whole sample of industries, with an interaction term between the concentration ratio and forecasted annualized demand growth. In columns 5 and 6 the concentration ratio is an unreported control variable. Columns 7 through 12
report the results for different subsets of industries based on the age group most likely to actually consume the various products. Standard errors are clustered by year and then scaled by a function of the autocorrelation
coefficient estimated from the sample orthogonality conditions. A more thorough description of the concentration ratio measure and the standard errors is available in the text.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                              47
                                                   Table 7. Predictability of Stock Returns Using Demographic Changes

                                                                          Dependent Variable: Beta-Adjusted Log Industry Stock Returns at t+1
Sample                                                            Demographic Industries                                                                             All Industries
                                             (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)          (10)           (11)           (12)
Constant                                  -0.1089        0.0547         0.2944        -0.0603        -0.0723         0.0488          -0.0906       -0.0851         0.0896        -0.0428       -0.0461        0.0050
                                          (0.0665)      (0.1180) (0.0871)*** (0.0397)                (0.0459)       (0.0396)         (0.0608)      (0.0712)       (0.0662)       (0.0370)      (0.0414)       (0.0332)

Forecasted annualized
demand growth                             -0.8231       -0.5300        -2.1120        -1.5905        -1.4977        -2.6454          -1.8324       -1.1504        -2.0459        -1.8714       -1.9479        -2.9338
between t and t+5                         (4.6208)      (4.4568)       (3.2943)       (2.8413)       (3.0650)       (2.7822)         (4.5509)      (4.9956)       (3.0883)       (2.7358)      (2.9038)       (2.3055)

Forecasted annualized
demand growth                            10.1148 11.1968                5.9619         5.8350         5.9943         4.7945          9.3010        11.0032         5.2254        5.1586         5.4245        4.3055
between t+5 and t+10                    (3.6036)***(3.5706)*** (3.5673)* (3.4108)* (3.4099)*                        (2.7378)       (3.1419)***(3.5824)*** (3.8584) (3.0857)* (3.2318)* (2.7595)

Industry Fixed Effects                                       X              X                             X              X                              X              X                            X             X

Year Fixed Effects                                                          X                                            X                                             X                                          X

Sample: 1974 to 2003                          X              X              X                                                            X              X              X

Sample: 1939 to 2003                                                                       X              X              X                                                           X              X             X

R2                                        0.0325         0.1201         0.3237         0.0110         0.0752         0.3262          0.0186         0.0595         0.1944        0.0060         0.0272        0.1888

N                                        N = 565 N = 565 N = 565 N = 916 N = 916 N = 916                                           N = 1385 N = 1385 N = 1385 N = 2272 N = 2272 N = 2272

Notes: Columns 1 through 12 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of log yearly beta-adjusted industry stock returns at t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth due to demographics between t and t+5
and between t+5 and t+10. The forecasts are made using information available as of year t-1 . The industry betas for year t are obtained by regressing monthly industry returns on market returns for the 48 months
previous to year t. The coefficients on the forecasted annual demand growth are normalized by the number of years of the forecast (5 for both coefficients). The coefficient indicates the typical increase in log industry
abnormal stock return due to an annualized one percentage point increase in forecasted consumption due to demographics. Each year the subset Demographic Industries includes the 20 industries with the highest
standard deviation of forecasted annual consumption growth over the next 15 years. Standard errors are clustered by year and then scaled by a function of the autocorrelation coefficient estimated from the sample
orthogonality conditions. A more thorough description of the concentration ratio measure and the standard errors is available in the text.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                           48
                          Table 8. Predictability of Stock Market Returns, Industry Concentration, and Industry Target Demographics

                                                                                 Dependent Variable: Beta-Adjusted Log Industry Stock Returns at t+1
Sample                                         C-4 > median                 C-4 <= median        All Industries            Young               Adults                                                             Elderly
                                               (1)      (2)                  (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)       (10)                                                      (11)      (12)
Constant                                    -0.0702          0.0515       -0.0521        -0.0455           0.0032        -0.0073            -0.0951          0.0381          -0.0806 -0.0818                -0.0930        -0.0610
                                            (0.0762)        (0.1049)      (0.0575)       (0.0530)         (0.0642)       (0.1213)           (0.0658)        (0.0821)         (0.0783)      (0.0849)         (0.1439)       (0.1190)

Forecasted annualized
demand growth                              -11.8684         -8.6716       0.4621          0.5679           9.0352         6.7764             0.7729         -0.9288          -7.6901 -2.5510                -1.6711         1.3835
between t and t+5                          (6.9137)*        (6.5962)      (4.5074)       (4.4957)         (6.4745)       (6.3223)           (4.3876)        (4.5646)         (6.3541)      (6.6393)        (18.8003) (21.5727)


Forecasted annualized
demand growth                               18.7337         14.2421       3.0260          5.0031         -10.7217 -5.6762                    9.8249         11.4864          15.0172 12.3324                7.7081          5.5776
between t+5 and t+10                       (7.8139)** (7.526982)*         (3.2129)       (3.5418)        (5.5232)*       (5.9098)          (4.5912)** (5.0212)** (5.4828)***(5.3214)**                     (18.3862) (18.8958)

C-4 x (Forecasted
annualized demand
growth between t and                                                                                     -40.5195 -29.0355
t+5)                                                                                                    (18.0495)** (16.4257)*

C-4 x (Forecasted
annualized demand
growth between t+5                                                                                        60.9772 44.0491
and t+10)                                                                                              (20.9165)***(21.7250)**

Industry Fixed Effects                                              X                        X                               X                                   X                              X                               X
    2
R                                            0.0207          0.0524       0.0035          0.0530           0.0138         0.0554             0.0618          0.1070           0.0160        0.0534          0.0041          0.0321

N                                          N = 425 N = 425               N = 445 N = 445                 N = 870 N = 870                    N = 193         N = 193          N = 969 N = 969               N = 223         N = 223

Notes: Columns 1 through 12 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of log yearly beta-adjusted industry stock returns at t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth due to demographics between t and t+5 and between
t+5 and t+10 from 1974 until 2003. The forecast is made using information available as of year t-1 . The industry betas for year t are obtained by regressing monthly industry returns on market returns for the 48 months previous to
year t. The coefficients on the forecasted annual demand growth are normalized by the number of years of the forecast (5 for both coefficients). The coefficient indicates the typical increase in log industry abnormal stock return due
to an annualized one percentage point increase in consumption due to demographics.
The concentration ratio measure C-4 is the ratio of revenue for the largest 4 firms to total industry revenue, from the Census of Manufacturers conducted in 1972. Columns 1 and 2 report the results for the subsample of industries
with a concentration ratio higher than the median. Columns 3 and 4 report the results for the subsample of industries with a concentration ratio lower than or equal to the median. Columns 5 and 6 report the results for the whole
sample of industries with two interaction terms between the industry concentration ratio and forecasted consumption growth from t to t+5 and from t+5 to t+10. In columns 5 and 6 the concentration ratio is an unreported control
variable. Columns 7 through 12 report the results for different subsets of industries based on the age group most likely to actually consume the various products. Standard errors are clustered by year and then scaled by a function of
the autocorrelation coefficient estimated from the sample orthogonality conditions. A more thorough description of the concentration ratio measure and the standard errors is available in the text.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                       49
                                                Table 9. Performance of the Zero-Investment Portfolio for Demographic Industries

                                                                                      Dependent Variable: Monthly Return on the Zero-Investment Portfolios

                                                (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)            (5)             (6)               (7)             (8)             (9)              (10)            (11)            (12)
Constant                                     0.0071          0.0057          0.0066           0.0048          0.0043          0.0042            0.0081          0.0027          0.0042            0.0009          -0.0030        -0.0024
                                           (0.0026)*** (0.0025)** (0.0028)**                 (0.0021)** (0.0022)**           (0.0022)*        (0.0031)***       (0.0028)        (0.0030)          (0.0024)        (0.0020)       (0.0019)

VW Index Excess Return                       -0.1037        -0.0783         -0.0900           -0.0135         -0.0494         -0.0489            0.9514         1.0840          1.0648            1.0551          1.1623          1.1547
(VWRF)                                       (0.0753)       (0.0772)        (0.0790)          (0.0580)        (0.0579)        (0.0576)        (0.0779)*** (0.0810)***           (0.0778)        (0.0571)*** (0.0637)*** (0.0596)***

Size Factor Return                                           0.1902          0.1961                            0.1997         0.2004                            0.5480          0.5577                            0.3578          0.3616
(SMB)                                                       (0.1104)*       (0.1097)*                        (0.0955)** (0.0956)**                            (0.1680)*** (0.1499)***                           (0.1304)*** (0.1214)***

Value Factor Return                                          0.1723          0.1483                            0.0673         0.0691                            0.6850          0.6453                            0.5126          0.4971
(HML)                                                       (0.1043)*       (0.1049)                          (0.1054)        (0.1013)                        (0.1516)*** (0.1303)***                             (0.1139)      (0.1005)***

Momentum Factor Return                                                      -0.0897                                           0.0075                                            -0.1478                                          -0.0581
(UMD)                                                                       (0.0871)                                          (0.0732)                                          (0.1052)                                         (0.0520)

Sample: 1974 to 2003                             X               X               X                                                                  X               X               X                 X               X               X

Sample: 1939 to 2003                                                                               X               X              X

High Predicted Growth                                                                                                                               X               X               X

Low Predicted Growth                                                                                                                                                                                  X               X               X

R2                                           0.0084          0.0257          0.0306            0.0001          0.0115         0.0115             0.4412         0.5611          0.5695            0.6059          0.6732          0.6746
N                                           N = 360         N = 360         N = 360           N = 780         N = 780        N = 780           N = 360         N = 360         N = 360           N = 360         N = 360         N = 360
Notes: Columns 1 through 12 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of the zero-investment portfolio monthly returns on different sets of monthly benchmark factors. We create the zero-investment portfolio by double sorting the select
group of demographic industries at the beginning of each year. First, we sort the industries into two equal groups based on long-term predicted demand growth. Next, within each of these two groups we sort the industries into two equal sub-
groups based on the difference between predicted long-term and short-term demand growth. In columns 1 through 6, the zero-investment portfolio is long in industries with high predicted long-term demand growth and high long-term minus
short-term predicted demand growth and short in industries with low predicted long-term demand growth and low long-term minus short-term predicted demand growth. Columns 1 through 3 report results from 1974 to 2003 and columns 4
through 6 report results from 1939 to 2003.
In columns 7 through 9, the zero-investment portfolio is long in industries with high predicted long-term demand growth and high long-term minus short-term predicted demand growth and short in the 1-month treasury rate. In columns 10
through 12, the zero-investment portfolio is long in the 1-month treasury rate and short in industries with low predicted long-term demand growth and low long-term minus short-term predicted demand growth. VWRF is the return on the
CRSP value-weighted stock index minus the 1-month treasury rate. SMB and HML are the returns on the Fama-French factor-mimicking portfolios for size and book-to-market, respectively. UMD is the return on the factor-mimicking portfolio
for momentum. Heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors are calculated using the Newey-West estimator with 6 lags (in parentheses). The constant is interpreted as the average monthly abnormal return for the
investment strategy.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                   50
                                                            Table 10. Performance of the Zero-Investment Portfolio for All Industries

                                                                                              Dependent Variable: Monthly Return on the Zero-Investment Portfolio

                                                     (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)                (7)             (8)             (9)               (10)            (11)            (12)
Constant                                          0.0031           0.0028          0.0024            0.0057          0.0074          0.0064              0.0002          0.0007          0.0010            0.0063           0.0076          0.0060
                                                 (0.0016)*       (0.0017)*        (0.0017)         (0.0025)** (0.0026)*** (0.0026)**                    (0.0029)        (0.0032)        (0.0039)          (0.0034)*       (0.0037)**       (0.0036)*

VW Index Excess Return                            -0.1290         -0.1069         -0.1009            -0.1148         -0.1210         -0.1087            -0.0342         -0.0401         -0.0435            -0.0553         -0.0418         -0.0208
(VWRF)                                          (0.0392)*** (0.0516)** (0.0504)**                   (0.0675)*       (0.0761)*        (0.0769)           (0.0916)        (0.1021)        (0.1032)           (0.0802)        (0.0934)        (0.0934)

Size Factor Return                                                -0.0288         -0.0318                            -0.2932          0.2994                            -0.0673         -0.0656                            -0.3168         -0.3274
(SMB)                                                             (0.0828)        (0.0827)                          (0.1162)** (0.1039)***                              (0.1333)        (0.1400)                          (0.1389)** (0.1217)***

Value Factor Return                                                0.0562          0.0684                            -0.1611         -0.1358                            -0.0511          0.0580                            -0.1103         -0.0671
(HML)                                                             (0.0802)        (0.0784)                           (0.1002)        (0.0914)                           (0.1656)        (0.1894)                           (0.1322)        (0.1165)

Momentum Factor Return                                                             0.0458                                             0.0944                                            -0.0256                                             0.1612
(UMD)                                                                             (0.0453)                                           (0.0723)                                           (0.1302)                                           (0.0837)*

Concentration Ratio > 0.35                                                                               X                X               X                                                                     X               X               X

Concentration Ratio <= 0.35                                                                                                                                  X               X               X

Large Company Only                                                                                                                                                                                              X               X               X
  2
R                                                 0.0374           0.0415          0.0452            0.0124           0.0515          0.0582             0.0007          0.0021          0.0024            0.0017           0.0268          0.0382

N                                                N = 360          N = 360         N = 360           N = 360          N = 360         N = 360            N = 360         N = 360         N = 360           N = 360          N = 360         N = 360
Notes: Columns 1 through 12 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of the zero-investment portfolio monthly returns from 1974 to 2003 on different sets of monthly benchmark factors. We create the zero-investment portfolio by double sorting
all industries at the beginning of each year. First, we sort the industries into two equal groups based on long-term predicted demand growth. Next, within each of these two groups we sort the industries into two equal sub-groups based on the
difference between predicted long-term and short-term demand growth. The zero-investment portfolio is long in industries with high predicted long-term demand growth and high long-term minus short-term predicted demand growth and short in
industries with low predicted long-term demand growth and low long-term minus short-term predicted demand growth. VWRF is the return on the CRSP value-weighted stock index minus the 1-month treasury rate. SMB and HML are the returns
on the Fama-French factor-mimicking portfolios for size and book-to-market, respectively. UMD is the return on the factor-mimicking portfolio for momentum.
The concentration ratio measure is the ratio of revenue for the largest 4 firms to total industry revenue, from the 1972 Census of Manufacturers. In columns 1 through 3, we report results for all industries. In columns 4 through 6, we report results
for industries with above-median concentration ratios. In columns 7 through 9, we report results for industries with below-median concentration. In columns 10 through 12, we report results using the returns for the company with the largest market
capitalization at the beginning of the month instead of value-weighted returns for each industry with above-median concentration ratios. The constant is interpreted as the average monthly abnormal return for the investment strategy.
Heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors are calculated using the Newey-West estimator with 6 lags (in parentheses).
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                        51
                        Table 11. Analyst Forecasts of Earnings at Different Time Horizons

                                                 Number of companies with at least one forecast for the fiscal period

                                                (1)                 (2)                 (3)                    (4)                 (5)                (6)

Fiscal Year 1                                  4144                2003                2141                   5425               2767               2658

Fiscal Year 2                                  3992                2002                1990                   5326               2763               2563

Fiscal Year 3                                  1961                1435                 526                   3164               2087               1077

Fiscal Year 4                                   537                 478                 59                    485                 269                216

Fiscal Year 5                                   337                 317                 20                    173                 121                 52

Fiscal Year 6                                    2                   0                   2                      3                   0                  3

Fiscal Year 7                                    1                   0                   1                      1                   0                  1

Analysts >= 5 for FY1                                                X                                                              X

Analysts < 5 for FY1                                                                     X                                                             X

Year of Forecast                               1990                1990                1990                   2000               2000               2000
Notes: The Table reports the number of companies in the I/B/E/S data set with at least one analyst forecast for the Fiscal Year h, where h is the horizon of the
forecast. For example, the row Fiscal Year 2 denotes the availability of analysts making forecasts for the Fiscal Year 2 years ahead. The sample for columns 2 and
5 is restricted to companies with at least 5 analysts making forecasts for fiscal year 1 and the sample for columns 3 and 6 is restricted to companies with fewer
than 5 analysts making forecasts for fiscal year 1. Columns 1 through 3 are formed using forecasts made in 1990. Columns 4 through 6 are formed using
forecasts ade in 2000. Columns 2 and 5 restrict the sample to companies with at least 5 analysts in the base year. Columns 3 and 6 restrict the sample to
companies with less than 5 analysts in the base year.




                                                                              52
                       Appendix Table 1. Summary Statistics: Household Demographics

Consumer Survey                                             1935-36                   1960-61                    1972-73                   1983-84

Demographic Variables                                           (1)                       (2)                       (3)                        (4)

     Age of Head                                              44.26                     48.28                     47.87                      44.17
                                                              (12.7)                    (15.68)                   (17.38)                    (18.3)
     Male Head                                                1.00*                      0.83                      0.78                       0.66
                                                                 (.)                     (.37)                     (.42)                      (.47)
     White Head                                                0.90                      0.88                      0.90                       0.85
                                                               (.29)                     (.32)                      (.3)                      (.35)
     Married Head                                             1.00*                      .77*                      0.68                       0.52
                                                                 (.)                     (.42)                     (.47)                       (.5)
     Age of Spouse                                            40.36                       (.)*                    42.96*                    43.16*
                                                             (12.12)                       (.)                     (15.1)                   (15.54)
     No. of Children Living at Home                            1.29                      1.12                      1.05                       0.74
                                                              (1.28)                    (1.46)                     (1.52)                    (1.15)
     No. of Old People Living at Home                          0.06                      0.04                      0.03                       0.03
                                                               (.26)                     (.21)                     (.18)                      (.18)
     Family Size                                               3.76                      3.28                      2.99                       2.57
                                                              (1.59)                    (1.87)                     (1.86)                     (1.6)
     Urban Household                                           0.50                      0.75                      0.84                       0.91
                                                                (.5)                     (.43)                     (.37)                      (.28)
Economic Variables
     Total Income (in 1982-84 $)                           12879.05                  21092.61*                 27347.78*                 23725.39*
                                                           (15532.21)                (16178.67)                (28872.33)                 (21230.03)
     Total Consumption (in 1982-84 $)                      10211.25                   16792.38                  18108.06                  17935.47
                                                            (8092.03)                (10247.24)                 (11743.3)                 (13339.84)


Number of Observations                                     N = 6113                  N = 13728                 N = 19975                 N = 13133

Notes: Columns 1-4 present household-level summary statistics on demographic and economic variables in the consumption surveys. Standard deviations are
in parentheses. Column 1 refers to the Study of Consumer Purchases in the United States, 1935-36. Column 2 refers to the Survey of Consumer Expenditures,
1960-1961. Column 3 refers to the Survey of Consumer Expenditures, 1972-1973. Column 4 refers to the Consumer Expenditure Survey, 1983-84.

* The variable White Head is defined for 5,435 observations in the 1935-36 survey. The information on the age of the spouse is missing in the 1960-61 survey,
is defined for 13,534 observations in 1972-73 and for 6,798 observations in 1983-84. In the 1935-36 survey only male married heads are interviewed. The
variable Married Head is defined for 13,722 observations in the 1960-61 survey and 19,974 observations in the 1972-73 survey. The variable Urban Household
is defined for 13,727 observations in the 1960-61 survey. The variable Total Income is defined for 5,266 observations in 1935-36, 13,694 observations in 1960-
61, 18,861 observations in 1972-73, and 9,230 observations in 1983-84. Finally, the variable Total Consumption is defined for 6,005 observations in the 1935-
36 survey.




                                                                          53
                   Appendix Table 2. Industries and their Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes

Expenditure Category                        Grouping Standard Industrial Classification Codes
Child Care                                  Children         8350-8359
Children's Books                            Children         (2730-2739)
Children's Clothing                         Children         2360-2369, 5640-5649, (5130, 5137)
Toys                                        Children         (3940), 3941-3948, (3949), (5090), 5092, (5940), 5945, (6711), (7990)
Books -- college text books                 Media            (2730-2739)
Books -- general                            Media            5942, (2720-2739, 5192)
Books -- K-12 school books                  Media            (2720-2739)
Movies                                      Media            7810-7819, 7820-7849
Newspapers                                  Media            2710-2719, (5192)
Magazines                                   Media            2720-2729, (2730-2739, 5192)
Cruises                                     Health           4480-4481, (4410, 4411, 7990, 7999)
Dental Equipment                            Health           3843, 8020-8029, (3840, 5047, 8090)
Drugs                                       Health           2830-2839, 5120-5129 (8090)
Health Care (Services)                      Health           8000-8019, 8030-8049, (8050-8059), 8060-8071, (8072), 8080-8089, (8090-8092)
Health Insurance                            Health           6320-6329
Medical Equipment                           Health           3840-3842, 3844-3849, 5047, (5040, 5120-5129, 8090)
Funeral Homes and Cemet.                    Senior           3995, 7260-7269, (3990, 6550, 6553)
Nursing Home Care                           Senior           8050-8059, (6510, 6513, 6798, 8080-8089, 8360-8361)
Construction Equipment                      House            3531, 5031-5039, 5210-5259, (3530, 5080, 5082)
Floors                                      House            2270-2279, 5713, (5020, 5710, 5719)
Furniture                                   House            2510-2519, 5021, 5712 (5020, 5710, 5719)
Home Appliances Big                         House            3631-3633, 3639, 5720-5729 (3630, 3651, 5060, 5075, 5078)
Home Appliances Small                       House            3634, (3630, 3645, 5020, 5023, 5060)
Housewares                                  House            3262, 3263, 3914, (3260, 3269, 3910, 5944, 5719)
Linens                                      House            2391-2392, 5714, (2390, 5020, 5710, 5719)
Residential Construction                    House            1520-1529, (1540-1549)
Residential Development                     House            6513, 6530-6539, 6552, (1520-1529, 6510, 6550)
Residential Mortgage                        House            6160-6169
Beer (and Wine)                             Perishable       2082, 2083, 2084, 5181, (2080, 2084, 2085, 5180, 5182, 5813)
Cigarettes                                  Perishable       2100-2119
Cigars and Other Tobacco                    Perishable       2120-2199
Food                                        Perishable       0100-0299, 2000-2079, 2086, 2087, 2090-2099, 5140-5149, 5400-5499, 5812 (5810)
Liquor                                      Perishable       2085 (2080, 2084, 5180, 5182, 5810, 5813, 5920-5921)
Clothing (Adults)                           Clothing         2310-2349 5136, 5137, 5610-5619, (5130), 5136
Cosmetics                                   Clothing         2844, 7231, (2840, 5120, 5122, 5130)
Golf                                        Clothing         (2320, 2329, 3940, 3949, 5090, 5130, 5940, 7990, 7999)
Jewelry                                     Clothing         3911, 3915, 5944, (3910, 5090, 5094, 5940)
Sporting Equipment                          Clothing         3949, 5941, (2320, 2329, 2390, 3940-3948, 5090-5091, 5130, 5940, 5945, 7999)
Life Insurance                              Insurance        6310-6319
Property Insurance                          Insurance        6330-6339
Airplanes                                   Transport        3720-3729, 4511-4512, (4510, 4513)
Automobiles                                 Transport        3010-3019, 3710-3719, 5010-5019, 5510-5529
Bicycles                                    Transport        (3710, 3750-3759, 3714, 5090)
Motorcycles                                 Transport        (3750-3759, 3571)
Coal                                        Utilities        1200-1299
Oil                                         Utilities        1300-1399, 2910, 2911
Telephone                                   Utilities        4810-4811, 4813-4819
Utilities                                   Utilities        4910-4959
Notes: Complete list of expenditure categories (Column 1) with Industry grouping (Column 2) and SIC industry classification (Column 3). Each expenditure category is associated with
two sets of codes. The first set of codes (not in parentheses) corresponds to the 4-digit SIC codes that are uniquely identified with one category. The second set of codes (in
parentheses) identifies the SIC codes that are explicitly associated with multiple categories or have a large number of misclassified companies. Randomly selected companies within
each SIC code are searched to determine if an SIC code has many mis-classified companies or multiple expenditure categories. All companies in each SIC code listed in parentheses
are subjected to an internet search to determine their expenditure category classification. If the internet search cannot identify the specific category for one of these companies, then the
company is excluded from our analysis.




                                                                                          54
