                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              COMMODITY PRICES, OVERSHOOTING, MONEY
                  SURPRISES, AND FED CREDIBILITY




                       Jeffrey   A. Frankel

                      Gikas A. Hardouvelis



                     Working Paper No. 1121




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                            May 1983




We would like to thank Richard Just and Gordon Rausser for
generously providing necessary commodity data, Raul Nicho and Kim
Rupert of Money Market Services, Inc., for providing their survey
data on nney stock expectations, Andreas Fisher for research
assistance, Dominique van der Mensbrugghe for programming con—
suiting, and Rudiger Dornbusch and Richard Meese for useful
discussion. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #1121
                                                      May 1983



                         Commodity Prices, Overshooting,
                      Money Surprises, and Fed Credibility


                                    ABSTRACT


      The general price level does not provide a sensitive indicator of

 whether monetary policy is tight or loose, because most prices are sticky.

 Interest rates are free to move, but they are an ambiguous indicator of

monetary policy: one does not know whether changes in the interest rate are

due to changes in the expected inflation rate or the real interest rate.

Commodity prices provide the ideal sensitive indicator.

     This paper has two distinct aims. First, a theoretical model of Tover_

shooting" in commodity markets is presented. A known change in the money

supply is shown to cause an instantaneous change in commodity prices that

is greater than the proportionate change that describes long—run equilibrium.

Second, we take the occasion of the Fed's Friday money supply announcements

to test the theory. We find that an unexpectedly large money announcement

causes significant negative reactions in prices of six commodities. This

supports at once the sticky—price or overshooting view, and the notion that

the market has confidence in the Fed's commitment to correct any deviations

from its money growth targets.




            Jeffrey A. Frankel                  Gikas Hardouvelis
            Department of Economics             Department of Economics
            University of California            University of California
            Berkeley, CA. 94720                 Berkeley, CA. 94720
            (415) 642—8084                      (415) 642—6971
                                                                               1




  1.   Introduction

       Strict monetarist theory holds that excessive money growth, or the

 expectation of future money growth, shows up immediately in rapid inflation

 of goods prices. However, it is widely agreed that for most goods, prices

 are in fact sticky in the short run, and reflect money growth only in the

 long run. If one seeks a sensitive market measure of the perceived

 looseness or tightness of monetary policy, one must look elsewhere than at

 the general price level.

       Interest rates, being determined in quickly adjusting financial

markets, are free to respond immediately to expectations
                                                           regarding monetary
policy. For example, every Friday at 4:10 p.m. Eastern Standard Time the

Federal Reserve Board announces the money stock for the week ending nine

days previously. If the announced money supply is greater than what the

market had been expecting, interest rates generally jump in the same

direction. Clearly they are responding to revisions of the expected future

money supply path. But they are an ambiguous indicator of expectations.

On the one hand, an announced increase in the money supply may be received

by the market as a sign that the Fed has increased its
                                                         target money growth
rate. The higher expected money growth rate would then imply a higher

expected inflation rate, and the rise in interest rates would be explained

as an inflation premium. On the other hand, the market may have confidence

in the Fed's commitment to stick to its money growth target and may

interpret the money supply change as an unintended fluctuation originating

in money demand or in the banking system. The market would then expect the

Fed to contract the money supply in the near future to get back to the

target path. The rise in nominal interest rates would be explained as an
                                                                            2




increase in real interest rates, without any necessary change in expected

inflation.
                                                distinction between manu-
     Arthur Okun (1975), among others, drew a
                                             and services) and basic cotnmo—
factured goods (and other "customer goods"

dities (or "auction goods"). The former are the ones with sticky prices:

they are differentiated products traded in imperfectly competitive markets

where there is no instantaneous arbitrage to insure perfect price

flexibility. But the latter do have flexible prices: they are homogeneous

products traded in competitive markets where arbitrage does insure
                                   Commodities are more like assets in this
instantaneous price adjustment.
                                   free to adjust from day to day, and even
respect. Since their prices are
                                                measure of the market's
from minute to minute, they offer a potential
                                          And, unlike interest rates, they
perception of current monetary policy.
                                of the direction in which monetary expecta-
are an unambiguous indication

tions are revised, as we will see.

      While the literature on commodity prices is extensive, the macro-

 economic side of the subject has been relatively neglected. Okun himself

 recognized that commodity prices would be sensitive indicators of infla-

 tionary expectations. It is not just that commodity prices are free to

 adjust and others are not.   Commodities tend to be more easily stored and

                                                quality of assets as well. An
 resold, so that they take on the speculative
                                                                         and
 expectation of future inflation will raise demand for commodity stocks,
                                   Indeed the sensitivity of commodity prices,
 thus drive up the price today.
                                                   growth is a familiar pheno-
 particularly precious metals, to expected money
                                                                        the
 menon to market participants and the financial press. (See for example

 editorial in the Wall Street Journal of January 21, 1983, which points to
                                   indicator that the Fed is anew losing its
 rising gold prices as the first
                                                                             3




 grip on the money supply.)' The dampening effect that high real interest

 rates have on commodity prices is also recognized, though less often. In

 the short—term financial markets, high interest rates are thought of as

 reducing commodity prices because they make bonds more attractive to

 investors and commodity contracts less attractive. In the longer—term

 context of the fundamental supply and demand for the commodity, high

 interest rates are thought of as reducing the demand for commodities and

 therefore the prices because, along with storage costs, they constitute the

cost of carrying inventories over into the next period.

     What is missing from the literature, so far as we know, is a complete

model of monetary policy and the determination of commodity prices that

recognizes both the positive effect of an expected long—run rate of money

growth and inflation, and the negative effect of currently tight liquidity

and high real interest rates. We wish in particular to analyze the over-

shooting phenomenon that is familiar from models of the foreign exchange

market.2 Consider a sudden kno one percent drop in the money supply

that is expected to be permanent. In the long run we would expect all

prices, manufactured goods as well as commodities, to fall by one percent,

in the absence of new disturbances. But in the short run manufacture

prices are fixed. Thus the reduction in the nominal money supply is a

reduction in the real money supply. To equilibrate money demand, interest

rates of course rise. But we have an arbitrage condition that must hold in

the commodity markets: since commodities are storable, the rate of return

on Treasury bills can be no greater than the expected rate of increase of

commodity prices, plus storage costs. This means that the spot price of

commodities must fall today, and must fall by more than the one percent

that it is expected to fall in the long run. In other words, commodities
                                                                            4




prices must overshoot their long—run value. Only then can there be a

rational market anticipation of future capital gain that is sufficient to

offset the higher interest rate. The overshooting phenomenon can be

thought of as a macroeconomic example of the Le Chatelier principle:

because one variable in the system (manufactured goods prices) is not free

to adjust, the other variables in the system (commodity prices) must jump

correspondingly farther in order to compensate.

     Consider now a sudden increase in the expected long—run rate of money

growth, with no change in the current actual money supply.   Of course the

rate of increase of all prices, manufactured goods as well as commodities,

will in the long run be equal to the new rate of money growth, in the

absence of new disturbances.   (We are taking secular growth in real income

and in velocity as exogenous, and for simplicity equal to zero.)   In the

long run the inflation rate will be built into a high nominal interest

rate.3 But in the short run the nominal interest rate does not rise

fully to reflect the higher inflation rate. The real interest rate falls.

Now recall the arbitrage condition that precludes a difference between the

interest rate and the expected rate of increase of commodity prices plus

storage costs. At the moment of the increase in the expected rate of money

growth, commodity prices must jump up above their long—run equilibrium

path. Only then can there be a rational market anticipation of future de-

preciation (relative to the long—run inflation rate in the economy) that is

sufficient to offset the lower (real) interest rate. Thus we have over-

shooting of equilibrium in this case as well.

     In Section 2 we develop the model of determination of commodity prices

that formalizes this notion of overshooting in response to changes in the

expected level or growth rate of the money supply. However, the over—
                                                                            5




shooting theory is only the first stage of this paper. In Section 3 we go

on to examine empirically how futures prices for six commodities (gold,

silver, sugar, cocoa, cattle and feeders) respond to the Fed's weekly money

supply announcements. We find significant negative reactions to money

surprises between the close of the market on Friday and the open on Monday.

Clearly the market responds to positive money surprises by anticipating a

future monetary contraction and an increase in the real interest rate,

which causes commodity prices to fall immediately. These empirical

findings can be used for two distinct purposes. First they can be thought

of as a clean test of the sticky—price or overshooting theory, one with

remarkably favorable results. Second, they can be thought of as a test of

the credibility of the Fed to stick to its money growth targets. The

results are evidence that the Fed did have high credibility with the market

during the 1980—82 period.
                                                                                         6




2. The Overshooting Model of Commodity Prices4

    We define two prices, the price of commodities, PC in log form, and the

price of manufactures, p              in log form. Commodities are storable and thus
                                                                                    e
subject to the arbitrage condition that their expected rate of change

minus storage costs sc           ,   is   equal to the short—term nominal interest rate

i

                      Sc     .
                                                                                     (1)

(We assume that the risk premium is either equal to zero or is subsumed in

the storage costs, which are assumed constant.) It will turn out that the

level of p       is determined by equation (1) together with the rest of the

model and the assumption that expectations are rational. Any readers who

are not thrilled by the algebra of saddle—path equilibria are invited to

skip   to   equation (15).

       Unlike the commodities, the level of manufacture prices is fixed by its

own past history. It can adjust in response to excess demand only gradually

over time, in accordance with an expectations—augmented Phillips curve:
                                                                                     (2)


where d is the log of demand for manufactures, y                   is the log of potential

output in that sector, and p is a term representing the expected secular

rate of Inflation. Here we can think of p as the expected rate of money

growth.5 Excess demand is in turn defined to be an increasing function of

the price of commodities relative to manufactures, and adecreasing function

of the real interest rate:6

                                                           .                            (3)
              d_y=(Pc_Pm)_a(i_P_r)
We can think of         as any constant term. But our definition of long—run

equilibrium will be zero excess demand                 =       .   So in long—run equilibrium
                                                                                                        7




 the relative price of the two commodities (p —                      p)       settles down to a

 given value ( — p)                ,   for    convenience normalized at zero in log form,

 and the real interest rate (i —                 ii)   settles down to the given constant

 value r

      We substitute (3) in (2).

                  =
                      Tf[(Pc
                               -         -        -    - r)]   +     .
                                                                                                   (4)
      The last sector of our model is the money market. We assume a simple

money demand equation:

            m—p=cy--Ai ,                                                                          (5)
where m is the log of the nominal money supply,                          p is the log of the

overall price level, y is the log of total output,                               is the elasticity

of money demand with respect to output, and A is the semi—elasticity of

money demand with respect to the interest rate. The overall price level is

an average of manufacture prices, with weight a                          ,   and commodity prices,

with weight (1 — a)

                        + (1 —     a)p                                                            (6)

Substituting in (5),

            m —
                  m     —   (1 —             =    — Xi    .
                                                                                                  (7)
We now consider the long—run equilibrium version of the money demand

equation:

             —ct— (1—a)=—XI
                                                                                                  (8)

where we have used our result that the long—run real interest rate i —

is
     We take the difference of the two equations (7) and (8)

             ct(p —            + (1— ct)(p —              =    X(i   —       — r)   ,          (9)
                                                                                                                8




where we have assumed that there are no expected changes in the money supply

(m     rn)
                other than the expected rate of constant growth, and we have for

simplicity here taken output to be fixed at the level of potential output:7

y=y
       Now we bring the different components of our model together.                                    We combine

equations (1) and (9):


                            = m —          + (1 'c                   + i + r + se         .                 (10)


We also combine equations (4) and (9) (and use the normalization p —                                        m       0 ):

                =
                             c        -
                                           m-            -
                                                                         m    -       +   (1 -              - c1 +
                =       -[   + /X](p -             + [—(l - a)/X](p               -           +    .        (11)

We close the model by assuming that expectations are formed rationally:

PC =    P           .    Equations (10) and (11) can be represented in matrix form:


            m
                                 + ac/A)          -   a(1    -   )/X)    (pm
                                                                                                       —        (12)
                                                   (1 - )/X              (p                       + r + SC
                        L
                                                                                      and              to
The characteristic roots for (12) are the solutions

        [-               + /X) + ][(1 -           )/X    + ei    - (/X) (l    -       -   )/X)     = 0



     -O =           [-(1-    )/2X +        + /X)/2] +                                                        (13)



The solutions for the expected future paths of the two prices in level form,

 as T goes from 0 to                          ,   are:
                        — Pm(T) = exp(—0 T)[Pm(O) —
                                                                 m(0)1

 and p(T) —                 (T)    = exp(—O                  —
                                                                 (0)]                                        (14)

where               —O       is the negative root from (13).
                                                                                                   9




 (We have thrown out the positive root to insure stability.) In rate—of—

change form the equations are:8


                   —
                       em—              +


                        (p_)+p++5c                       .
                                                                                            (15)

Notice that in the special case in which manufacture prices are perfectly

flexible   (ii   , their       responsiveness to excess demand, is infinite), B is

infinite, and the entire system adjusts to its long—run equilibrium

instantaneously.

     Most of the preceding was simply to establish that the rationally expected

rate of change of commodities prices takes the simple regressive form of (15).

Combining with the arbitrage condition (1):


                  —        1     .
                                            —

                                                                                            (16)

Notice that an increase in the real interest rate i —              i   above its long—run

equilibrium level r causes commodity prices p                  to fall below their long—run

equilibrium path           .     It   is necessary that commodities be currently "under-

valued" so that there will be an expected future rate of increase in the

price sufficient to offset the high real interest rate. Notice further that

the higher is the speed of adjustment 0              ,   the less will p       react. It is

a slow speed of adjustment in manufactured goods markets               (7r ,   to which 0
is directly related that causes overshooting in the commodity riarkets.

    What determines the long—run equilibrium path                  ?   In the long run,

relative prices are determined exogenously, so


           Pc=Pm=P=rn_+A(+1) ,                                                            (17)
                                                                                 10




where we have used the long—run money demand equation (8). Substituting into

(16),


                                                                              (18)



We see that, aside from the effect of the real interest rate, an increase

in the expected long—run rate of money growth increases the current

and therefore the current pc    .   We thus have what we wanted, a model of

commodity prices that shows both the negative effect of the real interest rate

and the positive effect of the expected long—run money growth rate. We

will call it the "overshooting model" to distinguish it from the special

case in which all prices are perfectly flexible and so the system is always

at its long—run equilibrium.



3. The Market Reaction to Weekly Money Announcements

        The positive reaction of short—term interest rates to surprises in the

Fed's weekly money announcements is by now well—documented.9 Several papers

have looked at the reactions in other markets: Engel and Frankel (1982) and

Cornell (1982b) for foreign exchange, Pearce and Roley (1982) for equities, and

Hardouvelis (1982) for both. The motivation has often been similar to ours

here. If the explanation for the increase in the interest rate is an increase

in expected inflation, then the price of foreign exchange or equities, like the

price of commodities, should in theory move in the same direction.     If the

explanation for the increase in the interest rate is an increase in the real

interest rate, then the price of foreign exchange or equities, like the price

of commodities, should move in the other direction. In each market, expected

inflation raises the long—run equilibrium price. And in each market the real
                                                                                    11




   interest rate reduces the current spot price relative to the long—run equilib-

  rium price.10 But, to our knowledge,
                                           no one has previously looked at the
  reactions of commodity prices to the money announcements.

       It is of course the money surprise that
                                                 should matter, the excess of the
  announced money supply over what had been expected by the market. If

  markets are efficient, whatever component of the announcement that was

  predictable will already have been incorporated into the interest rate and

  other financial market prices. The
                                        market's expectations are determined not

  only by past money supply figures, but by official pronouncements and many

 other factors as well. Any
                              attempt to measure expected money growth by, for
 example, an ARIMA model of the money supply time
                                                     series, is unlikely to be
 accurate. Fortunately there exists a convenient measure of market expectations.

 Money Market Services, Inc., each week surveys sixty individuals who make

 predictions of what the Friday
                                  money announcement will be, and reports the
            11
 average.

      Before we turn to the empirical
                                        results, let us backtrack for a moment and
examine why the weekly money announcement
                                             phenomenon is a good way to test
the overshooting theory that we developed in the previous section. One
                                                                       can
imagine other ways of testing the theory. For
                                                  example, we could estimate
equation (18), regressing monthly commodity prices against the money supply

real income, the short—term interest
                                        rate, and some measure of the expected
inflation rate. But we could not hope for good results. Commodity
                                                                  prices are
determined by weather and a whole host of other real factors that
                                                                  probably
overwhelm the monetary factors considered
                                            here. Our monetary model was
intended to be nothing more than a model of how commodity prices
                                                                 move relative
to their real equilibrium. (One could add an exogenous, though
                                                               changing,
                                                                                            12




real term        —
                     p     in equations (17) and (18).) We would have to try to model

the other real factors if we were to have any hope of getting statistically
                                                                        only
significant results. Nor would the high sum of squared residuals be our
                                                variables in equation (18) can be con-
problem. Each of the righthand—Side

vincingly argued to be endogenouS.             Thus the regression estimates would be

biased and inconsistent.
                                                                   is a perfect opportunity
     The weekly money supply announcement phenomenon
                                                    First, if we look at the change between
to test the theory, for two reasons.
                                                                          for
the close of the market on Friday and the open on Monday, we have grounds
                                      will happen in between to affect market prices,
hope that relatively little
                                                        Of course some relevant news will
other than the Fed's money announcement.
                                            the other factors will be far less important
come out over the weekend. But

than they would be ma context of week—to—week or month—to—month changes.

Second, there is good reason to believe that the money surprise is predeter-
                                                      from other weekend news will be
mined, i.e. that the error term arising
                                                both the money announcement and the expec-
independent of the money surprise:

 tations survey are cormuitted to paper before the Friday market close. Thus

 endogeneity problems vanish.
                                                      in conunodity prices in response to a
      From our equation (18), the change
                                            change in the actual current money supply on
 money announcement (assuming no

 Friday at 4:10) is:


                     = (X +   l/e)   Ai —   1/0i
                     =                  -   (1/0)                                           (19)
                         (x + lie)                      ,




 where E    is       the market estimate of the transitory component of last week's
                                                                                       13




  money supply, which is expected to be removed, and i        indicates   its effect
  on the interest rate.'2 Thus


            Ap = [(A + 1/0)   a —   (l/0) b] DME   ,
                                                                                   (20)

  where DME is the money surprise, "a" is the proportion of it assigned to

  Ai and "b" is the proportion of it assigned to AE .
                                                                (See Mussa (1975
  for a model showing that this form of expectations is rational, for the
                                                                          money
  supply process we have assumed and for particular values of a and b ; and

  see Hardouvelis (1982) for an example.)

      In Table 1 we show the results of
                                          regressing various market prices against
 the money surprise. The money surprise is defined as the logarithmic change in

 the money supply announced at 4:10 p.m. on Friday from that announced one week

 previously, minus the change predicted by the survey. The dependent variable

 is the logaritljc change in the market price at the Monday opening from the

 price at the Friday close (times 100, to get the change in percent).13'14

      We begin with the results for bond and
                                               foreign exchange markets,
 territory that has been covered in earlier
                                              papers. The highly significant
negative coefficient on the price of 3—month
                                                Treasury bills illustrates once
again the well—documented fact that the interest
                                                       rate reacts positively to a
money surprise. The negative reaction in the prices of the longer—term bonds
is even more significant.5

     The statistically significant negative coefficient for the dollar price

of Swiss francs, and the almost—significant
                                               negative coefficient for the
dollar price of Canadian dollars, in
                                       themselves constitute evidence that the
reaction in the nominal interest rate is a reaction in the real interest

rate, not in the expected inflation rate.
                                                                            14




                                  Table 1

Dependent Variable: Percentage change in market price, Open Monday over
                     Close Friday
Independent Variable: Percentage money growth announced in excess of
                         expectations
Sample: December 5, 1980—November 1, 1982 (100 observations)

                                 Money Growth    2
                                                R       D—W         SSR
Market        Constant             Surprise

                .081               _l.087*      .207     1.84    115.98
Treasury
  Bond         (.109)              (.215)

                                                         1.92      74.20
GNMA            .131               _l.OOl*      .258
               (.087)              (.172)

                                   _.428*       .249     1.81      14.19
Treasury        .087*
  Bill         (.038)              (.075)

                                   _.520*       .081     2.17      79.08
Swiss Franc     .084
               (.090)              (.177)

                                   —.087        .035     1.95       5.42
Canadian       —.008
 Dollar        (.024)              (.046)


                                   _•944*       .064     2.36      337.09
Gold           —.096
               (.186)              (.366)

                                  _1.005*       .050     2.37      489.98
Silver         —.383
               (.225)              (.441)

                                   _.878*       .047     1.89      400.87
Sugar          —.360
                (.203)             (.399)

                                   —.255         .008    1.55      219.40
Cocoa            .044
                (.150)              (.295)

                                   _•443*        .041     2.25     116.87
Cattle           .160
                (.110)              (.215)

                                   —.267         .031     2.21      57.57
 Feeders         .010
                (.077)              (.151)



 *Significant at the 95% level (standard errors in parentheses).
                                                                             15




                                  Table 2

 Stacked Commodity Regressions

 Dependent Variable: Percentage change in market price

 Independent Variable: Announced money growth in excess of expectations

 Sample: December 5, 1980—November 1, 1982 (6 x 100     600 observations)

                                 Money Growth
                   Constant                        2
                                   Surprise       R        D—W       SSR
 Open Monday       —.128            —.632*       .036      2.11    1659.07
 over               (.068)          (.134)

 Close Friday      — .061          —.432*        .029      2.09    599.73
                    (.041)          (.102)
Mid—day Monday     —.166*            .133        .005      1.97    594.84
over               (.041)           (.080)

Open Monday        —.173*           .053         .001      2.03    600.94
                   (.041)          (.068)

Close Monday       — .163*          .085         .001      1.87   1911.89
over               (.073)          (.144)

Mid—day Monday     —.090*          —.001        .000       1.88    591.40
                   (.041)          (.105)

Close Monday       — .330*          .218        .003       1.88   2261.84
over               (.080)          (.157)

Open Monday        —.177*           .036        .000       1.90    594.28
                   (.041)          (.113)

Close Monday      —.458*           —.414*       .007       2.04   3897.91
over               (.105)          (.206)

Close F'riday     — .172*          -.406*       .012       2.03    590.92
                   (.041)          (.150)

(a) * implies significance at the 95% level (standard errors in parentheses).

(b) The second line of estimates corrects for heteroscedasticity across the
     six different commodities.
                                                                                 16




     But the new results are those for the six commodities.      In each case

the reaction is negative, and in every case but cocoa and feeders it is

significant. Even gold and silver, which are so widely reputed to be hyper-

sensitive to fears of monetary growth and inflation, clearly move inversely

to the money announcement.

     The levels of econometric significance in Table 1 are already high by

macroeconomic standards. But to get more efficient estimates, we "stacked"

the observations for all six commodities in a single regression.      In other

words, we constrained all reaction coefficients to be the same.      This constraint

comes out of the theory. A consultation with equation (18) or (19) will

recall the fact that an increase in the real interest rate causes overshooting

of commodity prices to an extent determined only by 0      ,
                                                               the speed of adjust-

ment of the sticky manufacture prices, because that is what drives the whole

macroeconomy, not by any characteristic of the individual commodities. And

an increase in the expected inflation rate causes an upward shift in equilibrium

commodity prices of a magnitude determined by X ,   the   semi—elasticity of

money demand with respect to the interest rate, again not by any characteristics

of the individual commodities. Only if a change in the steady—state inflation

rate implied a change in the relative price of commodities in long—run

equilibrium, i.e. only if money were non—neutral even in the long run, would

expected inflation have more effect on some commodity prices than on others.16

The same is true of effects on foreign exchange prices.

     The stacked regression is reported in the first two rows of Table 2.

The second row of estimates corrects for heteroscedasticity across the six

commodities. Either way, the negative coefficient on the money surprise is
                                                                                  17




 indeed more highly significant than those in the regressions for individual

markets.

      It is of some interest to see what happens Monday after the opening.

If the commodity prices were to continue to move in the same direction during

the course of trading on Monday, this would constitute evidence of less—than—

perfect efficiency in the market and an opportunity for speculative profits.

A sharp movement in the opposite direction would constitute evidence of the

same.17 Table 2 shows regressions of the changes during Monday morning and

Monday afternoon against the Friday money surprise. The positive coefficients

show some movement in the opposite direction, but it is not statistically

significant. Nor is the movement enough to undo the   significance   of the

negative reaction computed from the Friday close to mid—day Monday or to the

close Monday.



3.   Conclusions

     Our empirical findings can be used for two distinct purposes:     (1) they

support the notion that during the 1980—82 period, the market had confidence

in the Fed's commitment to stick to its money growth targets, and (2) they

support the overshooting model of commodity prices.

     If one looked at the reaction of interest rates alone to Fed announce-

ments, one could conceivably doubt the Fed's credibility. When a positive

money surprise causes interest rates to rise, it could be interpreted as a

sign that the market has revised upwards its expectations of money growth

and inflation. But our examination of the reaction of commodity prices refutes

this possibility. The movement of commodity prices in the opposite direction
                                                                                18




can only mean that the market expects the Fed to tighten the money supply

in the near future. In terms of equation (20), b must be large relative

to a
     On the other hand, if one looked only at the reaction of commodity prices

                                  conceivabJy doubt the sticky—price or over-
to Fed announcements, one could

shooting model, and cling to a strict inonetarist view of the world in which

all prices are perfectly flexible. When a positive money surprise causes

commodity prices to fall, it would be interpreted as a sign that the market
                                                                        which
expects the Fed to reduce the money supply in the near future, a change

in a flexible—price world is reflected equally and instantaneously in all

prices. But our knowledge of the reaction of interest rates refutes this

possibility. The movement of interest rates in the same direction as the

money surprise can only mean that the anticipated future decrease in the

nominal money supply is a decrease in the real money supply, causing higher

real interest rates and the other effects of tightened liquidity.
                                                                            19




                                 Footnotes


1. Examples from the academic literature are Bordo (1980), who shows that

     raw goods prices respond more quickly to monetary growth than do manu-

     factures prices, and Van Duyne (1979), who models the speculative

     quality of commodities and gives further references.

2. The overshooting model of the exchange rate was developed by Rudiger

     Dornbusch (1976).

3.   Furthermore, the higher interest rate implies a fall in real money

     demand in the long run. With no jump in the current level of the money

     supply (as opposed to its growth rate), the long—run equilibrium path

     of the price level must shift up discretely (in addition to becoming

     steeper) in order to reduce the equilibrium real money supply. In the

     exchange rate literature, e.g. Frenkel (1976), this is sometimes called

     the "magnification effect". See equation (17) below.

4. The model is an application of Dornbusch (1976) with the price of

     commodities substituted for the price of foreign exchange. We modify

     the money supply process to allow for disturbances to the rate of

     growth, in addition to the disturbances to the level that Dornbusch

     considered. The two degrees of freedom in this money supply process

     are sufficient to capture the two possible directions of reaction to

     the weekly money supply announcements that we wish to choose between in

     Section 3. But we could generalize the money supply process as much as

     we want, as in Engel and Frankel (1982). The commodity price would

     then be seen to move to reflect revisions in a presented discounted sum

     of all expected future money supplies, whatever path they may follow.

5. The model is qualitatively unchanged if we adopt other interpretations

     of .i   such as the rate of change of p   or j   defined below. See
                                                                                 20




   Obstfeld and Rogoff (1982) or Engel and Frankel (1983).

6. The description of i —     i   as the real interest rate is loose, because

   i is the short—term interest rate, while p is the expected long—term

   inflation rate. However, the model is again qualitatively unchanged if
                                                                 •e
   we substitute the expected short—term inflation rate p             .   See, for

   example, Obstfeld and Rogoff (1982).

7. The assumption that output is fixed means that the excess demand

   referred to in equations (1) and (2) must be coming out of inventories.

    It would be preferable to have manufactured output endogenously deter-

   mined by demand: y       d (and y = y +            ).    Once again, the

   model is not qualitatively altered by such an extension. See the

    appendix to Dornbusch (1976).

8. Notice that the secular inflation term in pC            exceeds that in pm

    by ?   + Sc    This is a general problem with the commodity arbitrage

    condition (1). There are two possibilities. First, for an agricul-

    tural commodity, p    may gradually increase relative to p

    (monetary considerations aside) during most of the year, as long as

    some of the previous harvest peak is being stored, and fall discon-

    tinuously when the new harvest comes in. (In anticipation, the stocks

    held would dwindle to zero before the harvest.) Thus there is no long—

    run trend in              .   Alternatively,   for a nonperishable,

    nonrenewable commodity such as gold or oil, there may indeed be a

    long—run trend in     —         ,   la Hotelling. We are grateful to

    Peter Berck and Rudiger Dornbusch for both of these explanations.

9. Grossman (1981), Conrad (1981), Engel and Frankel (1982), Roley

    (1982), Urich and Wachtel (1981), Urich (1982), Cornell (1982a), and

    Hardouvelis (1982).
                                                                          21




10. The empirical finding in the foreign exchange and equity markets is

    also the same as this paper's empirical finding from the commodities

    market: a significant negative reaction to money surprises. This

    supports (1) the sticky—price or overshooting view, and (2) Fed credi-

    bility in the market during the 1980—82 period.

11. The claim that the Money Market Services numbers do in fact represent

    market expectations, and that these expectations are rational, is

    supported in Grossman (1981) and in Engel and Frankel (1982), by a

    demonstration that one cannot use exchange rates or interest rates on

    the morning of the announcement, or relevant lags, to improve on the

    survey number as a predictor of what the money announcement will be.

12. In this section we are using i to represent the, say, one—month

    interest rate. If we were still using it to represent the instanta-

   neously short—term interest rate as in the theory of the preceding

    section, then the money demand equation (5) would preclude it from

   jumping when m does not jump. The one—month interest rate can jump

   even if the instantaneously short—term rate does not, because of an

   increase in the future instantaneously short—term rates expected during

   the following month. In Engel and Frankel (1982) it is shown in a

   discrete—time version of our Section 2 model, that equation (19) holds,

   with (1/@)ip    (1 +   Xe)/e(1   +   A)
13. The price is the price of the nearest maturing futures contract. The

   data on opening (9:00 am Eastern Standard Time) and closing (3:00 pm

   E.S.T.) prices coincide with those reported in the Wall Street Journal.

   The data for cattle and feeders are from the Chicago Merchantile

   Exchange, for cocoa and (world) sugar are from the New York Coffee,

   Sugar & Cocoa Exchange, for gold and silver are from the New York
                                                                          22




   Commodity Exchange, for the foreign currencies and Treasury bills are

   from the International Money Market at the Chicago Merchantile

   Exchange, and for Treasury bonds and GNMA's are from the Chicago Board

   of Trade. Some futures contracts are traded during the same month that

   they mature. Whenever this was the case, we skipped to the next

   maturing contract. To insure consistency, whenever the month of the

   nearest maturing contract changed, we made sure that the change did

   not occur between Friday close to Monday close. The cash markets are

   distinct from the futures markets. We did not use them because cash

   price data are not available recorded at precise times before and after

   the 4:10 money announcements.

14. On a few occasions, the Fed did not announce the money supply until

   Monday. In that case we used the change in market price in the Tuesday

   open from the Monday close. When Friday or Monday was a market

   holiday, we used the preceding market close or next market opening,

   respectively.

15. While we would expect long—term interest rates to react in the same

   direction as short—term interest rates, their reaction should be

   damped. Cornell (1982a) shows that, while the reaction does decline

    somewhat with the term of maturity, long—term bonds still react far

   more than one would expect. Hardouvelis (1982) isolates this pheno-

   menon by showing that the forward interest rates (implicit in the term

    structure) react significantly as far out as ten years. These findings

    seem to contradict the joint hypothesis of sticky prices (overshooting)

    and Fed credibility, which all the other empirical evidence supports.

    Hardouvelis argues that the paradox is explainable by a combination of

    inflationary expectations and the real interest rate (in equation (20)
                                                                           23




    above, "a" is large, but "b" is large as well). Or the excess reaction

    in the long—term interest rates may be due to a risk premium, a factor

    omitted from these monetary models.

16. One cannot rule out this possibility a priori. (Technically it would

    be a failure of "superneutrality") For example, in a model

   with risk, gold and silver might be considered the only effective

   hedges against hyperinflation or nuclear war, and so their relative

   prices might rise permanently in response to an increase in infla-

    tionary fears. However Table 1 shows that the tendency of their prices

   to move in the opposite direction from the money surprise is even

   stronger than that for the other commodities.

17. The overshooting theory tells us that the commodity prices will come

   back, but only very gradually over time, as the entire price level of

   the economy adjusts to excess supply. This counter—movement should not

   show up in one day of trading. But some market observers feel that

   prices in fact overshoot by far more than is rational.
                                                                            24




                                  References


Bordo, Michael. "The Effects of Monetary Change on Relative Commodity

     Prices and the Role of Long—Term Contracts," J.P.E., 88, no. 6

     (December 1980), PP. 1088—1109.

Conrad, William. "Treasury Bill Market Response to Money Stock Announce-

     ments." Federal Reserve Board (1981).

Cornell, Bradford. "Money Supply Announcements and Interest Rates:

     Another View," UCLA Working Paper, March 1982. Forthcoming, Journal

     of Business.

     •
          "Money Supply Announcements, Interest Rates, and Foreign Exchange,"

     J. mt. Money and Finance 1 (August 1982), pp. 208

Dornbusch, Rudiger. "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," J.P.E., 84

        (December 1976), pp. 1161—76.

Engel, Charles and Frankel, Jeffrey. "Why Money Announcements Move

     Interest Rates: An Answer from the Foreign Exchange Market.t' UCB

        (January 1982). NBER Working Paper No. 1049.

_____      "The Secular Inflation Term in Open—Economy Phillips Curves: A

     Comment on Flood." UCB (February 1983).

Frenkel, Jacob. "A Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate: Doctrinal

     Aspects and Empirical Evidence," Scand. J. Econ., 78 (May 1976), pp.

        200—24.

Grossman, Jacob. "The 'Rationality' of Money Supply Expectations and the

        Short—Run Response of Interest Rates to Monetary Surprises," J.M.C.B.,

        13, no. 4 (November 1981), pp. 409—24.

Hardouvelis, Gikas. "Market Perceptions of Federal Reserve Policy and the

        Weekly Money Announcements." UCB (May 1982, revised March 1983).

Mussa, Michael. "Adaptive and Regressive Expectations in a Rational Model
                                                                            25




      of the Inflationary Process," J.Mon. Econ., 1 (1975), PP. 423—42.

 Obstfeld, Maurice and Rogoff, Kenneth. "Exchange Rate Dynamics with

      Sluggish Prices Under Alternative Price—adjustment Rules." Discussion

      Paper No. 149, Columbia University (May 1982). Forthcoming, mt. Ec.
     Rev.

Okun, Arthur. "Inflation: Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs,"
                                                                Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2 (1975), Pp. 351—401.

Pearce, Douglas and Roley, V. Vance. "The Reaction of Stock Prices to

     Unanticipated Changes in Money," NBER Working Paper No. 958 (August

     1982).

Roley, V. Vance. "Weekly Money Supply Announcements and the Volatility of

     Short—Term Interest Rates," Fed. Res. Bank of Kansas City Econ. Rev.

     (April 1982).

Urich, Thomas. "The Information Content of Weekly Money Supply Announce-

     ments," J. Mon. Econ., 10, no. 1 (July 1982), pp. 73—88.

Urich, Thomas and Wachtel, Paul. "Market Response to the Weekly Money

     Supply Announcements in the 1970's," J. Finance, 36, no. 5 (December

     1981), pp. 1063—72,

Van Duyrie, Carl. "Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Disruptions in Open

    Economies," J. mt. Ec., 9 (1979), pp. 559—82.
