                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    RURAL WINDFALL OR A NEW RESOURCE CURSE?
                   COCA, INCOME, AND CIVIL CONFLICT IN COLOMBIA

                                           Joshua D. Angrist
                                           Adriana D. Kugler

                                         Working Paper 11219
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11219


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




Special thanks go to Hector Mejia, Ines Parra, and Carlos Troncoso at DANE in Bogota, and to Patricia
Cortes, Francisco Gallego, Jennifer Lao, Veronica Paz and Chris Smith for outstanding research assistance,
and to David Autor, Alberto Abadie, Eli Berman, Robin Burgess, David Card, Joe Hotz, Ed Lazear, Daniel
Mejia, Yona Rubinstein and seminar participants at Hebrew University, the NBER, Rochester, SOLE,
Stanford GSB, Tel Aviv University, UCLA, UC-Berkeley, and UT Austin for helpful discussions and
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Joshua D. Angrist and Adriana D. Kugler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Rural Windfall or a New Resource Curse? Coca, Income, and Civil Conflict in Colombia
Joshua D. Angrist and Adriana D. Kugler
NBER Working Paper No. 11219
March 2005
JEL No. O1, R0, Q0, J2, K4

                                            ABSTRACT

Natural and agricultural resources for which there is a substantial black market, such as coca, opium,

and diamonds, appear especially likely to be exploited by the parties to a civil conflict. On the other

hand, these resources may also provide one of the few reliable sources of income in the countryside.

In this paper, we study the economic and social consequences of a major shift in the production of

coca paste from Peru and Bolivia to Colombia, where most coca leaf is now harvested. This shift,

which arose in response to the disruption of the "air bridge" that previously ferried coca paste into

Colombia, provided an exogenous boost in the demand for Colombian coca leaf. Our analysis shows

this shift generated economic gains in rural areas, primarily in the form of increased self-employment

earnings and increased labor supply by teenage boys. There is little evidence of widespread economic

spillovers, however. The results also suggest that the rural areas which saw accelerated coca

production subsequently became much more violent. Taken together, these findings support the view

that the Colombian civil conflict is fueled by the financial opportunities that coca provides. This is

in line with a recent literature which attributes the extension of civil conflicts to economic rewards

and an environment that favors insurgency more than to the persistence of economic or political

grievances.

Joshua D. Angrist                                      Adriana Kugler
Department of Economics                                University of Houston
MIT, E52-353                                           Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive                                      204 McElhinney Hall
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                               Houston, TX 77204-5019
and NBER                                               and NBER
angrist@mit.edu                                        adkugler@uh.edu
“If it weren’t for the armed groups, I think we could reach a consensus on what the region needs to
progress. But all the armed groups want is to control the economic question, and all are willing to
massacre or murder or force people from their homes to win.

        -- Gloria Cuartas, major of Apartadó (quoted in Kirk, 2003).



I. Introduction

        The consequences of changing regional economic conditions are of longstanding economic and

policy interest. American examples include the fate of regions with declining industries such as coal

(Black, Daniel, and Sanders, 2002; Black, McKinnish and Sanders, 2005) and, in the other direction, the

Alaskan pipeline boom (Carrington, 1996). But nowhere is the interest in regional economic conditions

more acute than in war-torn nations or regions embroiled in civil conflict. Perhaps not coincidentally,

many such areas appear to have local economies that depend to a large extent on natural resources,

especially those related to illegal economic activities or for which there is a black market. Examples

include the drug trade in Latin America and Afghanistan and so-called blood diamonds in Africa. The

regional concentration of these activities raises the question of whether economic activity in conflict

zones sustains or dampens conflict. One possibility is that increasing income reduces poverty, thereby

moderating combatants’ desire to fight. But increases in the value of easily exploited economic resources

may also contribute to instability and violence.

        The idea that resource wealth can be bad for development is sometimes known as the “resource

curse” (e.g., Sachs and Warner, 2000). Economic analyses of the resource curse typically focus on the

possibilities of an export-induced Dutch disease and effects on government corruption or rent seeking

(e.g., Sala-i-Martin and Subramanian, 2003; Hausmann and Rigobon, 2003). The effect of natural

resources on the incidence and duration of civil wars provides a less-explored channel by which natural

resources may have perverse effects. This channel features in a burgeoning political science literature,

which includes empirical contributions by Collier, Hoeffler and Sodbom (2004), Fearon (2004), and Ross

(2003). An antecedent in economics is the theoretical analysis by Grossman (1991). There is some

circumstantial evidence that illegal resources such as drugs increase the duration of civil conflicts (Ross,


                                                     1
2004), but economists and political scientists have yet to produce evidence on this question from a

compelling natural experiment.

        In this paper we use a quasi-experimental research design to study the impact of demand shocks

for illicit resources on rural economic conditions and civil conflict.           The setting for our study is

Colombia, an excellent laboratory in this case since almost all of the cocaine consumed in North America

and Europe comes from the Andean nations of Bolivia, Colombia, and Peru (United Nations, 2001).

Moreover, we exploit a sharp change in the structure of the Andean drug industry: before 1994, most of

the cocaine exported from Colombia was refined from coca leaf grown in Bolivia and Peru. Beginning in

1994, however, in response to increasingly effective air interdiction by American and local militaries, the

so-called air bridge that ferried coca paste from growers to Colombian refiners was disrupted. In

response, coca cultivation and paste production shifted to Colombia’s countryside, where it eventually

surpassed pre-interdiction levels as Colombian growers became more productive. We use this shift to

assess the consequences of the coca economy for Colombia’s rural population.

        The first question considered here is whether increased demand for coca affected economic

conditions for the rural population in ways we can measure using survey data. In particular, the end of

the air bridge provides a mirror which can be used to look at the claim that drug interdiction has

substantial economic costs for rural producers (see, e.g., Leons, 1997, and Chauvin, 1999). If interdiction

is costly, then the post-air-bridge Colombian coca boom of the early 1990s should have had substantial

economic benefits. We therefore look at effects on earnings, labor supply, and income, as well as child

labor and school enrollment. Of course, coca cultivation per se may do little to enrich the cultivators,

since – as with the relationship between the farmgate price of coffee and the beans we buy at Starbucks –

the price of raw coca leaf makes up a small fraction of the price of cocaine (Alvarez, 1995). On the other

hand, most estimates suggest cocaine plays a large enough role in the Colombian economy for changes in

the demand for coca to have a perceptible economic effect.1


1
 For example, Steiner (1998) estimates total Colombian income from illegal drugs at 4-6 percent of GDP in the first
half of the 1990s. See also Thoumi (2002).

                                                        2
        The widely observed association between illicit crops and civil strife raises the related question of

whether increased coca cultivation has an impact on violence. The link with violence is especially

relevant in Colombia, which has experienced some of the highest homicide rates in the world in spite of

substantial economic growth through most of the 20th Century and Colombia’s status as one of the oldest

democracies in Latin America. The effect of the drug trade on violence has been widely debated in

Colombian policy circles (see, e.g., Cardenas, 2001). While a link at first seems obvious, it bears

emphasizing that the historical record is ambiguous. Marijuana became an important crop only in the

1960s and the cocaine trade began in the 1970s, with significant coca plantings appearing only in the

1990s (see, e.g., Bagley, 1998). Yet violence and civil conflict, especially outside the major cities, have

been a major factor in Colombian political life since independence. During ‘La Violencia’ (1948-57), for

example, as many as 200,000 Colombians were killed (Winn, 1999). Clearly, cocaine cannot be blamed

for starting this conflict, though it may have a role in perpetuating it.

        Weighing in favor of a link between the Colombian drug trade and violence is the fact that some

of the more recent violence is the work of drug cartels or individuals operating on their behalf. Thus,

homicide rates peaked in the late 1980s and early 1990s, when the cartel leadership rebelled against

extradition efforts. Probably more importantly, the major Colombian Guerilla groups, especially the

Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN), are widely

believed to derive substantial income by taxing drug proceeds, as do illegal self-defense groups or

paramilitaries (Rangel, 2000; Rabasa and Chalk, 2001; Villalon, 2004).

        Although our focus is on a Colombian case study, the links between economic activity and

violence are of long-standing interest to economists.         On one hand, our study provides additional

evidence in the spirit of Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004), who link exogenous changes in

economic conditions (generated by rainfall) to civil conflict in Africa. As noted above, our work is also

related to a growing political economy literature on the forces that generate civil conflict. Collier and

Hoeffler (2004) argue that modern civil wars are sustained in large part by economic forces such as easy

financing for rebel groups and the opportunity to extract rents from economic activity. Fearon and Laitin


                                                       3
(2003) similarly focus on the “pull” of opportunity as opposed to the “push” of grievances in generating

and sustaining conflict.2

        Two broad features of our findings support the new opportunistic view. First, in contrast with the

Black, Daniel, and Sanders (2005) study of coal-mining regions in the US, we find no evidence that coca

substantially benefits an entire growing region. While coca cultivation is associated with increased self-

employment income for those already active in this sector, it does not raise employment or overall

earnings. This is consistent with anecdotal evidence that the economic benefits of coca growing are

largely taxed away by combatants or otherwise dissipated through non-productive activities. Second, in

spite of the fact that coca appears to increase income and hours worked for some groups, violence

increased sharply in the coca-growing regions when growing increased. This is consistent with the view

that coca fuels Colombia’s seemingly interminable civil conflict.3

        The paper is organized as follows. The next section provides additional background and shows

why a cross-country analysis of the impact of coca growing in Latin America is unsatisfactory. Section

III outlines the approach we used to divide Colombia into coca-growing and non-growing regions for the

purposes of our within-country survey-based analysis. Section IV discusses estimates of the effect of

coca growing on rural economic conditions and Section V presents the mortality estimates. Section VI

summarizes and interprets the results.



II. Institutional Background and Economic Framework

        Coca is grown in thousands of small peasant holdings, initially mostly in Bolivia and Peru.4

Harvested coca leaves are dried by farmers and sold to entrepreneurs who make them into coca paste, a

simple chemical process that takes a few days. Paste has about one-hundredth the volume of coca leaves,

and the transition from leaf to paste is where most of the weight reduction in cocaine production occurs.

2
  A related literature contrasts opportunism and poverty as causes of terrorism; see, e.g., Krueger and Maleckova,
2003; Abadie, 2004.
3
  Diaz and Sanchez (2004) offer a recent exploration of the coca-conflict nexus in Colombia, arguing that conflict
causes coca and not vice versa, but their spatial-correlations research design does not exploit exogenous shifts.
4
  This section draws on Whynes (1992) and Thoumi (1995).

                                                        4
The next step in coca processing is to make coca base, a somewhat more complicated chemical process.

Finally, cocaine hydrochloride is refined from coca base, a chemical process that often occurs in towns or

cities. Street cocaine is made by diluting cocaine hydrochloride with sugar and baking soda, usually in

the consuming country.

        While Colombia has almost always been the principal exporter of refined cocaine, until fairly

recently little coca was grown there. Colombian middlemen and exporters operated by importing coca

paste (or coca base) from Bolivia and Peru, specializing in refining and distributing cocaine

hydrochloride (i.e., cocaine). In the early 1990s, the drug industry changed in response to a change in

emphasis in US and producer-country enforcement policies. In April 1992, after Peruvian president

Fujimori’s so-called self-coup, the Peruvian military began aggressively targeting jungle airstrips and

small planes suspected of carrying coca paste, as part of a general process of militarization of the drug

war (Zirnite, 1998). Colombia followed suit in 1994 with a similar shoot-down policy for planes ferrying

paste from both Peru and Bolivia. US policy moved in tandem with Presidential Decision Directive 14 in

November 1993, which shifted U.S. interdiction away from Caribbean transit zones like Bermuda

towards an attempt to stop cocaine production in the Andes. The disruption of the air bridge ferrying

coca paste into Colombia was a key part of this effort.5

        The militarization of the drug war and disruption of the air bridge does not appear to have

reduced the supply of cocaine (see, e.g., Rabasa and Chalk, 2001). It did, however, lead to a marked shift

in the organization of the industry among producer countries. This can be seen in Figure 1, which uses

data from a United Nations (2001) drug report to show the change in the locus of production of dry coca

leave from Peru and Bolivia to Colombia. While Bolivian production was flat in the early 1990s,

Peruvian production fell sharply from 1992 to 1993, followed by a sharp increase in Colombia of about

50 percent from 1993 to 1994. Part of this increase appears to have come from increased cultivation and

5
  The Peruvian and Colombian shoot-down policies can be seen as a response to U.S. pressure. Militarization of the
drug war began as part of first President Bush’s “Andean Strategy” in 1990, with a program of military, economic,
and law-enforcement assistance for Andean nations in FY1990-94. Initially, however, this effort met with little
sympathy in the region (Washington Office on Latin America, 1991). Late 1992 and 1993 marked the beginning of
a period of independent efforts and sharply increased cooperation by producer nations.

                                                        5
part from improved yields. Colombian production continued to grow thereafter, as did the Colombian

share of total production. Other figures in the United Nations (2001) report show that by 1997, potential

coca production in Colombia (i.e., before crop eradication following Plan Colombia in 2001) exceeded

that in Peru.



Economic framework

        We see the end of the air bridge as initiating an exogenous fall in the price of coca (leaf, paste, or

base) in the traditional producer nations of Bolivia and Peru, while causing a price increase in Colombia.

The price in traditional growing countries fell when coca could no longer be shipped to Colombian

refineries and distributors. Peruvian and Bolivian growers have no competitive export channels of their

own since they have no Caribbean ports and because their foreign distribution networks are not well-

developed. At the same time, the price of coca grown in Colombia increased when drug middlemen and

entrepreneurs tried to elicit new and more accessible supplies. Farmers and potential farmers responded

to the increase in the price of coca by growing more of it, a response that very likely accounts for the

pattern in Figure 1, though non-economic factors may have been at work as well.

        Did the end of the air bridge really change coca prices in the manner described above? Although

we do not have a reliable time series of coca prices by producer country, anecdotal evidence supports this

description of the coca market in the mid-1990s. For example, Zirnite (1998, p. 171) quotes the regional

US military commander testifying to Congress in 1996 that, “the so-called air bridge between Peru and

Colombia saw a greater than 50% temporary reduction of flights,” and that consequently, “. . . there was a

glut of coca base on the market and the price of the product being shipped fell 50 percent overall and by

as much as 80 percent in some areas.” On the Colombian side, data reported in Uribe (1997, p. 62) for

the department of Guaviare show the price of base more than doubled from 1992-94. Journalistic

accounts similarly point to an increase in prices in Colombia (e.g., Villalon, 2004).6


6
 A related question is why coca was not previously grown in large quantities in Colombia. The answer appears to
be that Colombian coca farms were less productive; see p. 71 in Uribe (1997). Consistent with the increase in coca

                                                        6
        This framework suggests a number of channels through which increased coca cultivation might

affect economic conditions and the level of rural violence in coca-growing regions. The increase in coca

prices presumably made coca farmers better off, with possible regional spillovers of the sort documented

by Black, McKinnish, and Sanders (2005) in the Appalachian coal-mining region and by Carrington

(1996) in Alaska. Spillovers may arise here because of linkages to other sectors or due to increased

demand as a result of income effects. At the same time, increased prices and production generated new

sources of revenue for taxation. Because the central government is weak in the Colombian countryside,

these opportunities most likely benefited guerillas and paramilitaries. Of course, if coca taxes are too

high, then there is no incentive to produce. Taxes were imposed not only at the point of sale, however,

but also through kidnapping, extortion, and based on the guerilla’s “economic census”, a sort of partisan’s

tax return (Rangel, 2002, p. 588).7 This tax and extortion system may transfer a large fraction of the

economic benefits of coca production to combatants, while still leaving coca production more attractive

than alternative activities.   In addition, to the extent that coca finances a disruptive civil conflict,

increased coca production may have reduced the overall level of economic activity in war-torn regions.



Cross-country Comparisons

        The purpose of this paper is to assess the social and economic consequences – for Colombians –

of the shift in coca cultivation and the production of coca leaf and paste to Colombia. A natural starting

point for this sort of analysis is a cross-country comparison. We begin with a picture of GDP growth in

the Andes and neighboring countries, shown in Figure 2a. In the early 1990s, Colombian growth rates

began falling, eventually becoming negative. Peruvian GDP growth fell even more steeply, after a sharp

up-tick in 1993. The figure also shows, however, that many Latin American countries were in recession


production, the production of Colombian coffee, which like coca is grown mainly in small plots, turned sharply
downwards in the mid-late 1990s, after increasing over most of the previous two decades (see
http://www.dane.gov.co/inf_est/ena.html).
7
  About 85% and 65% of the FARC’s and ELN’s revenues, respectively, are estimated to come from drugs and
extortion (Rangel, 2002, p. 585). While similar estimates of revenue sources do not exist, paramilitary groups are
also widely believed to benefit from the drug trade. Grossman and Mejia (2004) develop a theoretical model of
guerilla involvement in drug production.

                                                        7
to one degree or another for much of the 1990s. By contrast, Bolivia’s GDP was mainly constant

throughout the 1990s. The fact that GDP growth declined more steeply in Peru than in Colombia may be

due in part to the shift of coca production to Colombia. Nevertheless, the figure also suggests the

presence of strong country-specific trends that may dominate these effects.

        Paralleling our interest in violence and civil conflict, Figure 2b plots homicide rates by country in

Latin America for 1990-2001 or years where data are available. In contrast with a pattern of generally

increasing homicide in the 1980s, (see, e.g., Gaviria, 2000), the Colombian homicide picture was largely

improving in the 1990s. While rates also fell in Bolivia (over the brief period for which we have data)

and over a longer period in Peru, homicide in Colombia began to decline in 1992, and fell steeply after

1993, when coca production was skyrocketing.          At the same time, the homicide picture in other

comparison countries, such as Brazil, Ecuador, and Venezuela was stable or deteriorating. Again, the

cross-country differences in trend are difficult to interpret; the early 1990s saw extraordinary violence as

Colombian drug lords fought amongst each other and with the government, mainly in urban areas and

largely in reaction to US pressure for extradition. The death of Pablo Escobar in December 1993 marked

the end of what was an unusually violent period, even by Colombian standards. The strong country-

specific trends in violence suggest that here too a within-country analysis, distinguishing urban and rural

violence, is likely to be more fruitful.



III. Classification of Regions

        Our research design exploits the fact that the change in the drug industry in the early 1990s

probably had a disproportionate effect on Colombian departments which, by virtue of climate and soil

conditions, politics, or infrastructure were hospitable to the cultivation of coca plants and the production

of coca paste. This naturally raises the question of how to classify departments or regions as potential

coca-growers and paste-producers. The best candidates for future coca production seem likely to be

departments with a pre-existing coca presence. We identified baseline coca-growing departments using

estimates for 1994 reported in Uribe (1997, p. 67). This source collects a number of international


                                                     8
observers’ estimates of hectares of coca bush under cultivation in Colombian departments. The reports

summarized in the table are dated October 1994, so the data were presumably collected somewhat earlier.

The 9 departments that had at least 1,000 hectares under cultivation are Bolivar, Caqueta, Cauca, Meta,

Narino, Putumayo, Guaviare, Vaupes, and Vichada.8

        In a second coding scheme, we expanded the definition of the growing region to include the five

additional departments identified as growing on a satellite map in Perafan (1999, p. 11). This map is also

dated 1994. The Perafan map adds the three Northern departments of Cesar, Magdalena, and La Guajira,

and the departments of Norte de Santander and Guainia. These 5 are also listed as growing regions in

Uribe (1997), while all in the group of 9 appear as growing on Perafan’s (1999) map.          We refer to the

expanded coding scheme as defining a “14-department growing region” and the 5 additional departments

added to the 9 growing departments to construct this region as “medium producers”.

        Our color-coded map, reproduced in the Appendix, shows the 9 department growing region to be

concentrated in the Southern and Eastern part of the country. Note, however, that not all Southern or

Eastern departments grow large amounts of coca. For example, Amazonas, in the Southeast corner, and

Arauca, in the East, are not coded as a growing department in either scheme. The group of 9 growing

departments includes two, Meta and Caqueta, which were ceded to FARC control from 1998 to 2001 as

part of an abortive peace effort. We refer to these two as the demilitarized zone (DMZ) and allow for

separate DMZ effects in the empirical work. The five departments coded as medium producers are

mostly in the Northern part of the country, though one, Guainia, is in the far Eastern region.

        To establish a “first-stage” relation for our division of Colombian departments into growing and

non-growing regions, we regressed the growth in coca cultivation from 1994 to 1999 or 1994 to 2000 on

an indicator for growing status in 1994. Growth is measured from a 1994 base since this is the year used

to classify growing regions (as noted earlier, the 1994 data were probably collected earlier). The

endpoint years of 1999 and 2000 are used because these are the years for which departmental cultivation


8
 Black, McKinnish, and Sanders (2002) similarly identify counties affected by the coal boom and bust using pre-
existing production data.

                                                      9
figures are available. In any case, the change from 1994 to the end of the decade seems likely to provide a

good summary of coca penetration in the relevant period.9

         The first-stage results, summarized in Table 1, show a strong correlation between coca growth

and base-period growing status.10 The estimates in Column (1), Panel A indicate that cultivation grew by

about 8,000 more hectares in the 9-department growing region than elsewhere, while the omission of

medium producers leads to a slightly larger effect. Omission of the two DMZ departments leads to an

even larger effect of almost 9,000 hectares, shown in column 2 of Panel B. With or without DMZ

departments, the growth effect is significantly different from zero. The estimates in Columns (5)-(8) also

show mostly larger effects when growth is measured through 2000 instead of 1999, with growing regions
                                                                                                         11
gaining 8,961 (s.e.=4,358) hectares over the period in the sample without medium producers.                   None of

the intercept estimates are significantly different from zero, indicating essentially no growth in the

departments with no initial production in 1994. Finally, estimates with growing status defined using the

14-department scheme, i.e., moving the medium producers to the treated group, also show substantial

growth in cultivation, but less than in the 9-department subset omitting medium producers. The 14-

department scheme also generates a smaller intercept.

         An interesting finding in this context, relevant for our choice of estimation strategy, is that

dummies for the two growing regions do a better job of predicting coca growth than a linear predictor

using base-period levels. Results from the linear parameterization can be seen in the last two rows of

each panel of Table 1. A visual representation of alternate parameterizations is presented in Figure 3,


9
   The 1999-2000 data are from Colombia’s anti-drug agency, Direccion National de Estupefacientes (DNE, 2002),
collected through the Illicit Crop Monitoring System (SIMCI- Sistema Integrado de Monitoreo de Cultivos Ilicitos).
This system was implemented by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with the logistical support of the
Colombian anti-narcotics Police (DIRAN) and in coordination with the DNE. The data are from satellite images
and verification flights. Data for 2000 appear to be more complete than the 1999 data.
10
    Our use of the term “first-stage” in this context is motivated by the fact that, given consistent departmental time
series data on coca production, we could use interactions between initial growing conditions and a post-air-bridge
dummy as an instrumental variable for the effects of endogenous coca production on economic conditions and
violence. In the absence of reliable data on the relevant endogenous variable, we focus below on the reduced form
regressions of economic and mortality outcomes on initial conditions/time interactions.
11
    Mean growth is about 2,800 hectares through 1999 and 2,900 through 2000. The 1994 mean for hectares under
cultivation is about 2,100. In the 9-department growing region, the base mean was 7,155 and the in 14-department
growing region, the base mean was 4,732.

                                                          10
which plots coca growth against base period levels, using different symbols for the non-growing region,

the 9-department growing region, and the remaining growing region on a log scale. The two growing

regions have much higher coca growth, but the relationship between base period levels and growth rates

is not especially linear.    Although the best single predictor of coca growth is a dummy for the 9-

department region, the empirical work below focuses mainly on the 14-region scheme since this turns out

to balance pre-treatment homicide rates better than the 9-department scheme and because the rural

household survey is missing some growing departments.12



Descriptive Statistics by Region Type

        Not surprisingly, the growing departments are more rural than the rest of the country. This is

apparent in the descriptive statistics in Table 2, which compares growing and non-growing regions along

a number of dimensions. The comparison between growing and non-growing is affected by the fact that

the non-growing region includes the three departments with Colombia’s largest cities: the Bogota capital

district; Antioquia, which contains Medellin, an especially violent city; and Valle del Cauca, where Cali is

located. To improve comparability with growing regions when comparing homicide rates, we tabulated

statistics without these 3 departments. We also drop the Bogota capital district, Antioquia and Valle del

Cauca from the mortality analyses in order to avoid confounding the effects of coca production with the

secular decline in violence in big cities in the early nineties. Only the Bogota capital district is dropped

from the analysis of rural labor markets and rural income.

        Omitting the 3 big-city departments, the non-growing population is 65 percent urban, in

comparison to 50 percent urban in the 9 department region minus the DMZ, 58 percent in the DMZ, and

66 percent urban in the 5 additional growing departments (medium producers). Although growing and

non-growing departments differ along the urban/rural dimension, they had similar primary school



12
   We also attempted to define growing regions based on climate and soil conditions using geographic information
from Torres and Mendez (2000). In practice, this did not lead to as strong a first stage for coca growth as a
classification schemes based on 1994 levels, probably because coca appears to be a hardy plant that grows under a
fairly broad range of conditions (Thoumi, 2002, p.105).

                                                       11
enrollment rates. Secondary school enrollment was somewhat lower in the growing regions, consistent

with the fact that these regions are more rural.

        The early 1990s homicide rates shown in the table were unusually high, even by Colombian

standards. For example, the homicide rate reached a remarkable 719 per 100,000 in Antioquia, mostly

because of violence in Medellin, and was 272 overall in the non-growing region. These statistics are per

100,000, among men aged 15-59. Without the big-city departments, homicide rates in the non-growing

region averaged 141 per 100,000. This can be compared to the rates of 87 in the 9-department growing

region without the DMZ, 151 in the medium producers, and 205 in the DMZ. Thus, omission of big-city

departments makes homicide rates somewhat more comparable across regions.



Potential Confounding Factors

        A potential complication for our analysis is the fact that many growing departments became

centers of insurgent activity, perhaps for reasons unrelated to the expansion of the coca industry. At the

beginning of the decade, however, fewer growing departments were guerilla strongholds. This can be

seen in the 1990 distribution of homicides by department (Ministerio de Defensa Nacional, 2001, p. 24).

Although homicide is not synonymous with a guerrilla presence, a link is widely drawn (e.g., Cardenas,

2001; Rangel, 2000).13 In an attempt to separate coca-induced effects, including those related to insurgent

activity, from the direct effect of a strong guerilla presence, we estimate models with separate effects for

the DMZ, where the FARC presence is likely strongest, and for the rest of the growing region.

        Another relevant consideration in the Colombian context is the large number of economic

migrants who move to rural areas in search of work (e.g., in the coca fields) and especially the flow of

refugees out of the countryside as a consequence of the civil conflict (“poblacion desplazada”).          Both

types of migration may induce selection bias in an analysis of economic circumstances in rural areas with
13
   A study by the Federal Research Division (1988) of the Library of Congress identifies guerilla strongholds in
1988 as falling in the departments of Huila, Caqueta, Tolima, Cauca, Boyaca, Santander, Antioquia, Valle del
Cauca, Meta, Cundinamarca and Arauca. Of these, we classify Huila, Tolima, Boyaca, Santander, Antioquia, Valle
de Cauca, Cundinamarca, and Arauca as non-growing, Cauca as growing, and Caqueta and Meta as growing, DMZ.
See also Figure 4.2 in Rabas and Chalk (2001), which shows the strongest FARC presence in and around the DMZ
in 1986-87, though areas of FARC activity subsequently expanded to cover most of the country (Figure 4.3).

                                                      12
many in- and/or out-migrants. As a partial check on the first issue, we report results from samples with

and without migrants. It is also worth noting that much displacement occurs within departments, and that,

according to United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR, 2002), the largest senders and

receivers of displaced populations include both growing and non-growing departments under our

classification scheme, while the phenomenon of internal displacement long pre-dates the rise in coca

production. In fact, a specification check which looks for growing-region/year interactions of the sort that

might confound our analysis shows no growing/post-1995 effect on the probability of being a migrant.



IV. The Economic Consequences of a Coca Economy

Data and Descriptive Statistics

        This section uses differences-in-differences type regressions to assess the economic consequences

of the shift in coca production to Colombian growing regions. The data come from the rural component

of Colombia’s annual household survey and are described in the Appendix. The rural survey provides

large repeated cross-sections, with information on households and individual household members,

including children. We limit the analysis to data from 1992 (because of earlier changes in survey design)

through 2000 (after which the survey was replaced by a new panel data set). The survey was conducted

in 23 of Colombia’s 33 departments.14 Using the 14-department definition of the growing region, the rural

survey includes households from 7 growing departments plus the two DMZ departments. Because only 3

non-DMZ departments from the 9-department growing region were included in the rural survey, we focus

initially on the 14-department classification scheme.

        Our analysis looks separately at samples of adults, school-age children, and teenage boys who

might be in the labor market. The sample of adults includes men and women aged 21-59, and is

described in the first two columns of Table 3 using data for 1992 and 1997. Roughly 30% of respondents



14
  The included growing departments are Bolivar, Cauca, Narino in the 9-department region, plus Cesar, La Guajira,
Magdalena, and Norte de Santander, plus Caqueta and Meta in the DMZ. In contrast with the mortality analysis,
Antioquia and Valle de Cauca are included in the non-growing sample because the survey is limited to rural
households.

                                                       13
in this sample were migrants, where migrants are defined as individuals who do not currently live in the

county where they were born. Most were married and about half are male. The growing region

contributed from 24 percent of the sample in 1992 to 30 percent of the sample in 1997. The number of

respondents from the DMZ also increased, from 1.4 to 3.9 percent. Not surprisingly, few of the adults

were enrolled in school.

        About two-thirds of adults in the survey were employed in 1992 and 1997, though only about 36

percent had positive wage and salary earnings. Employment rates for men were 93-95 percent, as can be

seen in Columns (3) and (4), and 55 percent of men had positive wage and salary earnings. Between 25

and 26 percent of adult men and women had positive income from self-employment, while between 35

and 37 percent of adult men had positive income from self-employment. Self-employment income

includes income from individual short-term contracts, from the sale of domestically produced goods, and

from commercial or family-based agricultural production.          Wage and salary earnings and self-

employment income are reported in real terms and were constructed using the consumer price index

provided by the Department of National Statistics (DANE). These variables are given in 1998 pesos,

worth about 1,400 to the US dollar. Thus, mean wages range from 52 to 77 dollars per month, and mean

self-employment income from 241 to 398 dollars per year, in the sample of adults.

        Descriptive statistics for the sample of children, reported in Columns (5)-(8), show that most were

enrolled, and enrollment rates increased somewhat between 1992 and 1997. Fewer children than adults

were migrants, but the regional distribution of children was broadly similar to that for adults.

Employment statistics for children are only collected for those over 10 years of age. About a third of

boys aged 10-16 and 10 percent of girls aged 10-16 were working, indicating the importance of child

labor. The statistics in Columns (9) and (10) show that over half of boys aged 13-20 were working.

Hours per month for boys were substantial, though lower than for adults. Boys also had lower earnings.

The wage and salary income of boys ranges from 42-44 dollars per month, and boys’ self-employment

income ranges from 44-47 dollars per year. Less than half were still enrolled in school and few were

married.


                                                    14
Results for Adults

        The basic empirical framework looks for growing-region/post-air-bridge interactions while

controlling for department and year effects. In particular, we estimated year-region interaction terms

using the following model for respondent i in department j in year t:

                   yijt = Xi′µ + βj + δt + Gs α0sgjs + Gs α1sdjs + εijt,                                   (1)

where βj is a department effect, δt is a year effect, gjs indicates non-DMZ growing departments when t=s,

and djs indicates DMZ departments when t=s (s=1994, . . ., 2000). The parameters α0s and α1s are the

corresponding region-type/year interaction terms.              Some models also include linear trends for each

department type as a control for omitted variables and serial correlation. This amounts to replacing βj

with β0j + β1jt, where β1j takes on 3 values (non-growing, growing, and DMZ). The estimating equations

also control for a vector of individual covariates, Xi, which includes sex, age dummies, household size,

marital status and migrant status. For binary dependent variables, the linear model was replaced with the

analogous logit.

        The analysis of rural outcomes begins with estimates of effects on the probability of having self-

employment income and on the log of self-employment income for those who have some. Because coca

production is an agricultural activity, self-employment status (either as farmer, employer, landowner, or

contractor) is of special interest.         The interpretation of results for log self-employment income is

potentially complicated by selection bias from conditioning on having earnings in this sector. As in a

wage equation, however, we can make an educated guess as to the likely sign of any selection bias. Since

the presumptive effect of being in the growing region after 1994 is to increase the likelihood of self-

employment, the conditional-on-positive estimates of effects on log wages will typically be biased

downwards by the fact that, on the margin, those induced to enter self-employment have lower self-

employment earnings potential in the absence of treatment (see, e.g., Angrist, 2001).

        The first two columns of Table 4a report marginal effects from the logit version of equation (1),

with a dummy for self-employment status on the left-hand side. The sample includes women as well as

men because women have a reasonably high probability of having self-employment income.                    The


                                                             15
estimates in Column (1) are small, with positive but insignificant effects in 1996-97 and 1999-00. We

also report results without migrants as a partial control for potential selection biases from migration into

and out of growing regions. Results omitting migrants, reported in Column (2), are somewhat larger,

showing a marginally significant positive effect in 1996 (0.049, with an s.e. of 0.03) and a significant

effect of 0.052 in 2000 (s.e.=0.022).15

         In contrast with the small-to-zero estimates for self-employment probabilities, the estimates in

Columns (3) and (4) show a substantial increase in (log) self-employment income. In particular, there are

large, statistically significant effects on the order of 0.3-0.4 in 1996-98, a period when coca is likely to

have had a major impact. For example, the effect in 1996 in the sample including migrants is 0.362

(s.e.=0.131).   There are somewhat smaller positive effects in 1995 and 1999-2000, the former not

significantly different from zero and some of the latter marginally significant.

         In an effort to improve precision, we also estimated models with pooled region-year interaction

terms. These models can be written

                  yijt = Xi′µ + βj + δt

                           + α0,95-97gj,95-97 + α0,98-00gj,98-00 + α1,95-97dj,95-97 + α1,98-00dj,98-00 + εijt,   (2)

where Xi is the vector of individual characteristics referred to above, with coefficient vector µ. The

interaction dummies gj,95-97 and gj,98-00 indicate the non-DMZ growing region for t=1995-97 and t=1998-

2000, with corresponding interaction terms α0,95-97 and α0,98-00. Likewise, the interaction dummies dj,95-97

and dj,98-00 indicate the DMZ in 1995-97 and 1998-2000, with corresponding interaction terms α1,95-97 and

α1,98-00. As before, with binary dependent variables the reported results are logit marginal effects. Also,

as with equation (1), we estimated versions of (2) replacing βj with β0j + β1jt, where β0j is a department

fixed effect and β1j is a trend taking on 3 values, one for each department type.

         Self-employment results from models with pooled interaction terms and omitting trends are

reported in Columns (1) and (3) of Table 4b. These models generate statistically significant estimates of

15
  Standard errors were adjusted for random/group effects at the department-year level. Rural estimates with
department-only clustering are similar. Because there are relatively few clusters (departments) we prefer the
department-year clustering scheme.

                                                              16
effects on the probability of self-employment and on the log of self-employment income in the non-DMZ

growing region. The former effects are small, on the order of 3-4 percentage points, but the latter are

large (see, e.g., the Column (3) estimate of 0.25 in 1995-97 with a standard error of 0.1). Moreover, the

absence of substantial effects on the probability of having self-employment income suggests selection

bias from changes in labor force participation is not much of a concern in this context.

        Estimates of interactions for the DMZ show no effect on the probability of having self-

employment income, but even larger (though imprecisely estimated) effects on log self-employment

income than in the non-DMZ region. Again, these results may be subject to selection bias as a result of

migration, especially in the DMZ, though we include a migrant dummy as a partial control. At the same

time, as pointed out above, we found no evidence of selection bias due to migration in a regression of the

probability of being a migrant on a growing/post-1995 interaction.

        The evidence for an effect of the coca boom on the probability of self-employment is weakened

considerably by the inclusion of region-specific trends. For example, the estimates reported in Column

(2) of Table 4a are either zero or negative. On the other hand, the 1995-97 effect on the log of self-

employment income, estimated in a model with region-specific trends, is about the same as when

estimated without trends (compare 0.288 and 0.251) and close to significant at the 0.1 level (t=1.47).

Moreover, the trend itself is not significantly different from zero.

        The remaining estimates in Tables 4a and 4b are for effects on labor supply measures and the log

of monthly wages in a sample of men.            We focus on men because male participation rates are

considerably higher than female participation rates, especially in the wage sector.          The estimated

employment effects for men show little evidence of a change in participation in the growing region. Most

of the estimated interaction terms are small and none are significantly different from zero. There is some

evidence of an increase in log hours, though it is not very robust. For example, in the hours equation, the

1996 interaction without migrants is 0.048 (s.e.=0.033) and the 1998 interaction with migrants is 0.053

(s.e.=0.02). In models with pooled interactions, there is stronger evidence for a significant effect in 1998-

2000 than in 1995-97, though again the estimates are muddied by inclusion of region-specific trends.


                                                      17
        The estimates for the log wage outcome also show evidence of some effects in 1998-2000, though

not in 1995-97. In particular, the strongest effects on wages are in 1998 and 1999. For example, yearly

interactions in models with and without migrants are a significant 10-11 percent in 1998 and a significant

7 percent in 1999. The increase in relative wages in the growing region in 1998 and 1999 is noteworthy

given the high levels of violence in the same period. Effects in the later period but not the earlier may be

indicative of a delayed spillover from the coca boom, but they may also reflect the continuation of some

other regional trend.    The fact that the log wage effects for 1998-99 disappear in models with region-

specific trends (see Column (10) in Table 4b) points to the latter possibility.



Results for Children and Youth

        We might expect the increase in coca production to have reduced school enrollment and to have

generated an increase in child labor.16        Columns (1) and (2) in Table 5a indeed show statistically

significant reductions of 0.065 and 0.073 in boys’ school enrollment in 1997, but estimates for other years

are smaller, and none of the corresponding estimates in pooled models, with or without trends, are

significant (see Table 5b).      Moreover, while the estimated interaction terms without trends are all

negative, inclusion of trends causes the signs to flip for boys. Estimates for girls are mainly positive,

though not significant. An exception is the DMZ, where effects are negative and marginally significant

without trends.17

        While there appears to have been little impact on school enrollment, the pattern of estimates for

teen boys’ labor supply is more complex. For the non-DMZ growing region, the one-year employment

effect in 1997 and the pooled later-period employment effect are positive. On the other hand, the pooled

interaction term for the later period is negative and significant for the DMZ, a result that is also robust to

the inclusion of trends (though these negative effects become implausibly large). The pooled non-DMZ



16
   Edmunds and Pavcnik (2004) recently explore the link between trade flows and child labor. Following their
taxonomy, coca can be seen as an unskilled-labor intensive good that is a candidate for production with child labor.
17
   To adjust inference for within-household clustering, estimates for children and youth were averaged up to the
household level. For details, see the Appendix.

                                                        18
growing effects are also negative (though insignificant) when estimated in models with trends. Hence,

there is no robust evidence of an increase in boys’ employment rates.

        Results for log hours are more clear-cut. In models without trends, log hours appear to have

increased in both the non-DMZ growing region and the DMZ. For example, the pooled estimate for the

earlier period for the non-DMZ area is 0.112 (s.e.=0.048) and many of the yearly interactions in Table 5a

are significant. Inclusion of trends wipes out the DMZ effect but leaves the non-DMZ effects essentially

unchanged, though no longer significant. Again, however, the trend in the non-DMZ growing region is

zero (-0.0016, s.e.=0.022). On balance, therefore, Table 5b provides support for the notion that coca

production increased teen boys’ labor supply, at least in the growing departments outside of the DMZ.



Estimates Using Urban Controls and Without Medium Producers

        Although estimates of equations (1) and (2) point to effects on self-employment income for adults

and effects on hours worked by teenage boys, these results are made less precise by the inclusion of

region-specific trends. In an effort to increase precision and further check the robustness of these

findings, we tried a pooled analysis that stacks urban with rural data for the subset of departments

included in both surveys.18 The idea here is to check whether growing region/post-air-bridge interaction

effects are indeed larger in rural than urban parts of growing departments, since we expect income shocks

generated by coca to be larger in the countryside. An urban-rural stack also facilitates control for region-

specific trends, assuming these have similar effects in urban and rural areas. A second modification

explored in this context is to drop the 5 medium producer departments from the list of 14 growing

regions. In the spirit of Black, Daniel, and Sander’s (2002) analysis of coal-producing counties according

to the level of baseline production, this may sharpen the growing/non-growing contrast.

        The estimating equation for the stacked sample allows for urban main effects and urban

interactions with both region-type and period dummies in a pooled model similar to the one used to


18
  The urban household survey is distinct from the rural survey and has somewhat different geographic coverage and
variable definitions. For details, see the Appendix.

                                                       19
construct the estimates reported in Table 4b. The coefficients of interest are growing-region/post-

treatment interaction terms, which are allowed to differ by urban-rural status. Because one of the DMZ

departments is missing from the urban survey, we drop the other DMZ department as well and look at

interactions for the non-DMZ growing region only. Finally, these models control for region-specific

trends, which are assumed to be the same in both the rural and urban areas of a given department type.

The addition of urban data potentially allows us to estimate these trends more precisely. The stacked

analysis is limited to the subset of adult and children outcomes of primary interest and/or for which their

appeared to be some evidence of effects in Tables 4 and 5.

        Estimates from the urban/rural stack for adult self-employment outcomes, reported in Columns

(1)-(4) of Table 6, are similar to those generated using rural data. Again, there is no evidence of an

increased likelihood of self-employment in cities or the countryside (in fact there is a negative effect for

1998-2000 in urban areas). At the same time, however, the stacked results show a sharp increase in log

self-employment earnings for rural workers; in Column (3), for example, the effect is 0.29 (s.e.=0.16) in

1995-97. In contrast, the corresponding urban effect is an insignificant 0.16 (s.e.=0.13). The interaction

terms in Column (3) for the 1998-2000 period similarly show larger effects in rural than urban areas.

Estimates of effects on log self-employment income using a sample without medium producers are

slightly larger than in the full sample, but otherwise similar.

        In contrast with the self-employment results, the estimated effects on hours worked are more

mixed. Estimates with medium producers included, reported in Column (5), show no significant rural or

urban effects. On the other hand, dropping the medium producers leads to significant rural and urban

effects. The rural effect is larger but not significantly different from that in urban areas, so if the urban

effect is taken as a check for confounding factors this would point to an interpretation of no effect on

adult hours in rural areas. At the same time, Columns (7)-(8) show no effect on wage and salary earnings

in either urban or rural locations.

        A clearer picture emerges from the analysis of hours worked by teen boys. These results,

reported in Columns (9)-(10) of Table 6, show mostly significant effects with or without medium


                                                      20
producers. The results for teen boys also generate a significant contrast by urban-rural status.         In

particular, there are substantial increases in hours worked by rural teen boys, with no corresponding effect

on teen boys in urban areas. For example, the effect on hours worked in 1995-97 is 0.12 (s.e.=0.07) in

rural areas, but -0.01 (s.e.=0.02) in urban areas. Finally, we note that estimates for employment status

corresponding to those in Table 4b show no effects on either adult men or teen boys.



Discussion of Magnitudes

        The results in Table 6 provide consistent evidence of an increase in self-employment income and

hours worked by teen boys in the rural parts of coca-growing departments. To get a sense of whether the

magnitude of self-employment earnings effects in Columns (3)-(4) of Table 6 can plausibly be attributed

to a coca boom, we take 0.2 as a benchmark, a number between the rural effect of 0.29 from Column (3)

and the corresponding difference in urban and rural effects, 0.29−0.16=0.13. To calibrate, we use Uribe’s

(1997) description of a typical family coca farm, consisting of a half-hectare plot that generates about

110,000 pesos/month in revenues from the sale of coca leaf. Our estimates imply an increase in monthly

self-employment earnings of about 22,800 pesos at the mean positive self-employment income for self-

employed workers (roughly 114,000 pesos per month). We do not know how many self-employed

workers were actually growing coca. But assuming a quarter of self-employed adults in rural growing

regions had small coca plots, an aggregate increase of 20% in self-employment earnings could have been

generated by a 40% increase in output among existing producers jointly with a 40% increase in prices.

This is obviously just a rough guess. The point is that the magnitude of the price increase and the

earnings from coca at baseline are very likely large enough to sustain the kind of impact suggested by our

estimates.



V. Coca and Violence

        The estimates in the previous section suggest some localized benefits from the coca boom. The

benefits are largely those that might be expected to accrue to farmers or others involved in the coca


                                                    21
industry, including a marginal labor force of teenage boys. There is little evidence of wider spillovers. In

this section we turn to an analysis of coca effects on violence, as captured by changing homicide rates.



Graphical Analysis

         The evolution of violent death rates in the 1990s is described in Figure 4a, which plots death rates

per 100,000 for men aged 15-59 by region type, after removing group means. This figure pools the DMZ

with other growing departments defined using the 14-department scheme.19 The resulting plot shows a

remarkably parallel evolution of violent death rates in the growing and non-growing areas through 1993.

In particular, the growing and non-growing regions both exhibit a similar up-then-down pattern. But

death rates in the growing region flattened in 1994, while the decrease in the non-growing region

accelerated. Violent death rates increased in both regions after 1995, but the average rate of increase in

the growing region was much steeper. In contrast with this parallel-then-divergent pattern in violent

death rates, death rates from disease fell somewhat more steeply in the growing than in the non-growing

region from 1990 through 1998, when there was a sharp upturn in the growing region. The evolution of

death rates from disease can be seen in Figure 4b.20

         Figures 5a and 5b draw a similar picture in the context of a 3-region analysis that separates the

DMZ from other growing departments. Here too, violent death rates in the non-DMZ growing region

flatten in 1994 after an up-then-down pattern paralleling that in the non-growing region. The main

difference between this picture and that in Figure 4a is that violent death rates in the DMZ continued to


19
   The non-growing region omits Antioquia, Valle de Cauca and Bogota, the departments with Colombia’s three
largest cities. Deaths rates were coded from vital statistics micro data obtained from the Colombian statistical
agency, DANE. Violent deaths are defined here as homicides, suicides, deaths from military and insurgent activity
(not a distinct category in all years), and a small number of non-accident deaths by external causes not elsewhere
classified. Over 90% of violent deaths are homicides. For additional details see the data Appendix.
20
   Competing risks complicate the interpretation of the decline in disease death rates since some of those who die by
violence may have otherwise died of disease. Still, it seems likely that an environment of deteriorating public health
would turn up in higher disease death rates (a pattern observed in the DMZ after the government ceded control).
The competing risks problem is likely mitigated by the fact that those most likely to die from disease (the very old
and very young) are least likely to die by violence. As a check on this problem, we looked at infant and child
mortality by region type. These data also show relative improvement in the growing region until 1998. In a related
inquiry, Urdinola (2003) reports results of a regression of infant mortality rates on measures of violence. It should
be noted, however, that changes in definitions make the data on infant deaths in the later period hard to interpret.

                                                         22
fall through 1995, after which they increased sharply until a 1998 peak. In contrast with the acceleration

in violent death rates, death rates from disease improved steadily in the growing region relative to the

non-growing region beginning in 1992. Death rates from disease in the DMZ also tracked rates in the

non-growing region until 1998.

        A possible complication in the analysis of death rates is the quality of the population statistics

used for the denominator. We used census-based 5-year estimates and population projections published

by DANE (1998) for 1990, 1995, and 2000, linearly interpolating statistics for the in-between years. The

underlying census was conducted in 1993.              As noted above, however, the 1990s were marked by

considerable population movement so the population denominator may be inaccurate. An alternative

strategy which avoids this problem is to look at violent death rates relative to death rates from other

causes. After transformation to log odds, this approach can be motivated by a multinomial logit model

for the risk death by cause, where survival is the reference group.

        To describe the logit strategy more formally, let vjt denote the number of violent deaths in

department j and year t and let njt denote the number of deaths from all other causes. Let pjt denote the

corresponding population statistics. Write the probability of violent and non-violent death as

        vjt/pjt ≡exp(αjt(v)) / [1 + exp(αjt(v) + exp(αjt(n)],

        njt/pjt ≡exp(αjt(n)) / [1 + exp(αjt(v) + exp(αjt(n)].

These are identities that define αjt(v) and αjt(n). We assume further that αjt(v) can be modeled as an

additive function of region (%j) and year ()t) effects plus growing-region/year interaction terms induced

by the shift of coca production to Colombia, while αjt(n) has additive effects only. Then non-zero

estimates of the interaction terms B0s and B1s in the grouped-logit equation

        ln(vjt/njt) ≡ αjt(v) ─ αjt(n) = %j + )t + Σs B0sgjs + Σs B1sdjs + <jt

provide evidence of a region-specific shock that increased the risk of violent death.

        This strategy is illustrated in Figure 6, which plots the residual from a regression of ln(vjt/njt) on

region effects (i.e., deviations from group means) using the 14-department classification scheme,



                                                          23
separating the DMZ from other growing departments as in Figure 5. The logit plot shows the same initial

pattern of up-then-down log-odds of violent death in both growing and non-growing regions, with a more

stable then increasing pattern of log-odds of violent death in the growing region after 1993. This is

roughly similar to the pattern exhibited by log death rates in Figure 5a. The log-odds of violent death in

the DMZ also turned sharply upwards in 1995.

        On balance, the figures suggest that beginning sometime between 1994 and 1996, violent death

rates in the non-DMZ growing region became markedly higher than what should have been expected

based on pre-1994 trends. The pattern is broadly similar in the DMZ, where the FARC presence was

strongest. Moreover, the increase in violent death rates contrasts with a gradually improving disease

environment in this period, both nationwide, and in the growing relative to the non-growing region. The

contrast in trends for violence and disease mortality weighs against the notion of a secular deterioration in

infrastructure or social systems that caused the increase in violence.



Regression Estimates

        To quantify the relative increase in violent death rates in the growing region, we estimated

growing-region/year interaction terms using the following equation:

                 ln(vajt/pajt) = µa + βj + δt + Σs α0sgjs + Σs α1sdjs + εajt.                                   (3)

The dependent variable, ln(vajt/pajt), is the log death rate in cells defined by 10-year age groups (indexed

by a), department (indexed by j), and year (indexed by t). The term µa is an age effect, while other

parameters are defined as in equation (1). Also, as with the analysis in the previous section, some models

include trends for each department type.21

        Unweighted estimates of α0s and α1s are reported in Panel A of Table 7, while population-

weighted estimates are shown in Panel B.                Given the complete representation of departments in

21
  For purposes of estimation, the sample was expanded slightly to include ages 15-64 to accommodate the 10-year
age groups. Data are analyzed for age-specific cells to control for changes in the age distribution due to migration
and because mortality trends tend to be age-specific. Standard errors were adjusted for department/year clustering,
though as far asymptotic inference based on cell size goes, these are population regression coefficients.



                                                           24
population vital statistics, we report equally extensive sets of results with and without medium producers,

but omit the analysis with pooled interactions. The unweighted estimates of α0s in Column (1) show an

insignificant 12.3 percent increase in mortality in 1994 in the non-DMZ growing region, with no effect in

1993 (a specification check).       The unweighted growing-region effect increases and is significantly

different from zero by 1997, while the DMZ effect is significant from 1996-1999. Weighting tends to

increase precision, so that the weighted estimate of the growing-region effect is significant in 1995.

Omission of medium producers leads to larger and more significant effects. These results are reported in

Columns (5)-(8); for example, Column (5) shows significant 1995 growing region effects around 0.2 in

both weighted and unweighted specifications.22

        Inclusion of region-specific trends leads to less precise estimates, though the weighted estimates

are markedly larger when estimated with trends than without. None of the estimates using the 14-

department classification are significant when estimated with trends. On the other hand, weighted models

with trends generate significant effects as early as 1994 when estimated without medium producers.

These estimates are reported in Column (7).

        The link between coca production and increased death rates may arise through a number of

channels, some related to the fact that coca production is an illegal industry. In particular, those involved

in the production of coca require private protection, sometimes involving violence and intimidation.

Moreover, as we noted at the outset, coca is widely believed to provide sources of revenue for guerilla

and paramilitary groups in rural areas, either through taxation, protection rackets, or direct control of

production. In contrast, most of the violence associated with the cocaine trade occurred in large cities

(most dramatically, in Medellin).       Violence that arises through increased insurgent activity should

therefore be a bigger problem in the countryside than in cities. To substantiate this, we estimated growing

region effects on violent death rates separately for urban and rural victims.23


22
   DMZ effects are (by construction) identical with and without medium producers since the medium producers are a
subset of the non-DMZ growing region.
23
   DANE mortality files identify the type of area in which the deceased lived and the location of death. We defined
urban/rural status by type of residence since hospitals where victims may die are mostly found in cities. For the
purposes of our analysis, the deceased was identified as urban when residence was coded as “cabecera municipal.”

                                                        25
         For the most part, estimates by urban/rural status indeed point to a stronger link between coca

penetration and violent death rates in rural than urban areas. This is documented in Table 8, which

reports estimates of equation (3) for rural residents in Panel A and for urban residents in Panel B.24 For

example, the rural estimates of α0s in Column (1) are 0.31 (s.e.=0.17) for 1995, 0.36 (s.e.=0.16) for 1996,

and 0.4 (s.e.=0.17) for 1997. The corresponding estimates for urban deaths, reported in Column (5), are

0.05, 0.17, and 0.11 (s.e.=0.11), none of which are significant. Overall, the contrast between Columns

(1)-(2) in Panels A and B shows much larger effects in rural than urban areas. This pattern also persists in

models that include trends (results reported in Columns (3) and (4)), with some of the effects on rural

areas very large and significant (and the corresponding trends large and negative).

         The contrast in results by urban/rural status using a sample that omits medium producers,

reported in Columns (5)-(8) of Table 8, is less clear-cut than the contrast arising from estimates

constructed using all 14 growing departments. On one hand, some of the estimates of α0s without region-

specific trends are slightly larger in urban than rural areas. On the other, until 1999, after the DMZ was

ceded, the DMZ interaction terms are larger and more likely to be significant in rural than in urban areas.

Moreover, estimates of models with trends also show much larger effects in rural than in urban areas (see

Columns (7) and (8)). Again, all urban-area effects estimated in models with trends are insignificant. On

balance, therefore, we see Table 8 as generally supporting the notion of larger growing-region effects on

rural than urban violence.



VI. Summary and Conclusions

         The disruption of the Andean air bridge provides a unique opportunity to assess the impact of

increased coca production on Colombia’s rural population and to draw some wider lessons on the link

between economic conditions and violence. On the economic side, we find evidence of an increase in

The urban residence variable is available only from 1992.
24
   The urban/rural distinction is used for the numerator but ignored in the population denominator. Since the model
is in logs, this probably provides a reasonable approximation to an analysis of true death rates by urban/rural status.
Estimates in Table 8 are unweighted since we do not have departmental population estimates by urban/rural status
for intercensal years.


                                                          26
self-employment income, though not in the likelihood of having income from this source, in the

probability of working more generally, or in wage and salary earnings. The increase in self-employment

income is estimated to be on the order of 13-29 log points, a fairly substantial gain. There is also some

evidence for an effect on boys’ labor supply. Because the gains appear to be fairly concentrated, it seems

unlikely that increased coca production raised overall standards of living in growing areas. The absence

of wider gains may be due to the fact that coca has few links with other sectors or to extortion on the part

of insurgents and paramilitary forces and the fact that coca finances a conflict that reduces economic

activity outside of the coca sector.25 Consistent with this latter view, our results show sharply increased

violent death rates in growing areas.

           Although we cannot conclusively identify specific channels through which coca abets violence,

differences in effects by urban/rural status are also consistent with the notion that coca supports rural

insurgents and paramilitary forces, thereby sustaining Colombia’s civil conflict. Violence may also be

used to enforce contracts in this illegal industry, though here the case for an urban/rural differential is less

clear-cut. Remarkably, the increase in rural violence occurred against a backdrop of generally improving

public health as measured by death rates from disease.

           Our results provide an interesting case study of a situation where increases in income did not lead

to a reduction in civil conflict, but rather fueled the fires of unrest. This contrasts with the more

optimistic picture in Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004), but is in line with journalistic accounts of

the role played by blood diamonds in Africa’s civil wars and economic theories of insurrection as

extraction or extortion (e.g., Collier and Hoeffler, 2001; Grossman, 1991).                 Coca may indeed be

emblematic of a new resource curse. Finally, we note that the disruption of the Andean air bridge was not

the end of the aerial drug war. A recent account describes significant successes in the ongoing effort by

US and Colombian forces to eradicate Colombia’s coca crops by aerial spraying, and the continued

suppression of coca production in Peru (Marquis and Forero, 2004).                  At the same time, Bolivian

production is estimated to have increased 17 percent.

25
     Pshisva and Suarez (2004) suggest that the risk of kidnapping reduces investment by Colombian firms.

                                                          27
                                                 APPENDIX

Colombian Rural Household Surveys

The analysis here uses the “Encuesta Rural de Hogares”, the rural component of the “Encuesta Nacional
de Hogares,” which became “Encuesta Continua de Hogares” (a panel) in 2001. The rural household
survey was first conducted as a pilot in 1988. The survey was conducted again in December 1991 after
the sampling methodology was updated and then on a consistent basis every September starting in 1992
until 2000. The survey collects data on a representative sample from 23 departments in four rural regions:
Atlantic Region (which includes the departments Atlantico, Cordoba, Magdalena, Sucre, Cesar, La
Guajira, and Bolivar); Pacific Region (which includes the departments of Choco, Nariño, Cauca, and
Valle del Cauca); the Central Region (which includes the departments of Antioquia, Caldas, Huila,
Tolima, Quindío, Risaralda, and Caqueta); and the Eastern Region (which includes the departments of
Norte de Santander, Santander, Boyaca, Cundinamarca, and Meta).

Rural definition

The survey uses the following criteria to identify the rural population. The rural population includes:

1. The population of the city where the county's government is located if the city has less than 10,000
inhabitants.

2. The population of the city where the county's government is located if the city has more than 10,000
inhabitants and it meets one of the following characteristics:

    (a) the percentage of residents in the city does not exceed 50% of the population in the entire county,
    (b) the percentage of the active population engaged in agricultural activities exceeds 50%, or
    (c) the percentage of housing units without basic services (water, electricity, etc.) exceeds 20%.

3. All population living in towns with less than 10,000 inhabitants.

4. All population not living either in cities or towns.

Sampling methodology

The sample for the survey is taken from the universe of the Census population living in private
households. The sampling methodology consists of first generating strata according to geographical
location and socioeconomic level; then, randomly drawing ‘municipios’ (the equivalent of counties in the
U.S.) from these strata; next, randomly drawing neighborhoods from these ‘municipios’; and, finally,
randomly drawing blocks and then households from these neighborhoods. To facilitate the collection of
information, households are grouped into ‘segments’ of 10 households on average. The typical year
includes approximately 8,500 households, but the sample has increased over time. In particular, the
sample size increased in 1996. The survey collected data from 148 municipios in 1992-1995, but it
collected data from 197 municipios in 1996-2000.

In addition, the survey methodology changed as follows in 1996. First, between 1992 and 1995 the
sample was drawn from the 1985 Census, while starting in 1996 and until 2000 the sample was drawn
from the 1993 Census. Second, starting in 1996, interviewers were required to revisit households, which
generated an increase in response rates.

                                                      28
Sample weights

The survey weights include factors of adjustment to account for changes in subsampling and for non-
response. So, we use the weighted data in our analysis to take account of the 1996 changes. In
particular, the weights are estimated as:

                                        W = (1/P) × S × (IS/NS),

where P is the probability of an individual being sampled and S is a weight given to segments. S equals 1
unless the number of households within the segment exceeds 10. The last term is the ratio of the number
of households actually interviewed within a segment, IS, and the number of households selected for
interviewing within a segment, NS, so it captures the response rate within a segment.

Since the average number of children per household is around 3, we generate within household averages
for the children’s data in order to avoid multiple observations per household. Likewise, since the weights
are individual weights, we construct household weights by summing up the individual weights for all
children within the household.

Top-coding and imputation

Labor market information is collected from individuals aged 10 and up. We impute zeros for the
employment and hours of 8 and 9 year olds in the descriptive statistics in Table 5. Hours are collected
from all employed workers, including salaried and wage workers as well as self-employed workers.
Wage and salary earnings were collected for all jobs in 1992-1999. In 2000, wage and salary earnings
were collected separately for the main job and for secondary jobs, so we exclude 2000 from the wage and
salary regressions. Yearly self-employment income is collected separately as earnings from business and
commercial activities and family-based agricultural production. In the original data, earnings and self-
employed income were top coded only between 1992 and 1995. We impose uniform top-coding by
applying a cap at the 95th percentile (including zeros) for each year. In addition, we imputed the mean
earnings and self-employment income by department and year for all those individuals who reported
having earnings or self-employed income but did not report an amount.


Colombian Urban Household Surveys

We also use the urban component of the “Encuesta Nacional de Hogares,” from 1992-2000. Coverage for
the urban component of the survey is more limited than for the rural survey. In particular, the urban
survey excluded the departments of Magdalena, Caqueta and Choco in 1992-1995. For the urban/rural
analysis we used the 20 departments which are covered in both surveys in 1992-2000. Also, because
Caqueta, one of the two DMZ departments, is not in the urban survey during the initial years, the
urban/rural analysis omits Meta, the other DMZ department, and relies on specifications with non-DMZ
growing interaction terms only.

The sampling methodology and sample weights used in the urban component are similar to those used in
the rural component. The urban population includes all people not included under the rural definition.

As in the rural component of the survey, wage and salary earnings were collected for all jobs in 1992-
1999, but in 2000 wage and salary earnings were collected separately for the main job and for secondary

                                                   29
jobs, so the 2000 data are excluded from the wage and salary regressions. Yearly self-employment
income is collected separately as earnings from business and commercial activities and the sale of
domestically produced goods. In the urban component of the survey, earnings and self-employed income
were top coded only between 1992 and 1996, so we apply the same uniform top-coding as used in the
rural survey by applying a cap at the 95th percentile (including zeros) for each year. We also imputed
mean earnings and self-employment income by department and year for all those individuals who
reported having earnings or self-employed income but did not report an amount.


Mortality Detail Files

We obtained mortality detail files from the Colombian national statistical agency, DANE, for 1990-2001.
These files, the source of published vital statistics (e.g., http://www.dane.gov.co/inf_est/vitales.htm),
show individual death records, with basic demographic information on the deceased and cause of death.
The 1990 and 1991 files did not include reliable urban/rural codes and are therefore omitted from the
sample used to construct Table 8. The 2001 also had some inconsistencies (the file was provisional) and
was therefore dropped.

Cause of death

We aggregate detailed causes of death on a consistent basis from year to year into the following larger
groups: Homicide and suicide, accident and other non-violent trauma, disease, other causes, and other
violent deaths. The violent death rate used here is the sum of Homicide and suicide plus other violent
deaths. Data after 1997 show separate categories for general external causes not identified as accidents,
and deaths due to actions by state and guerilla forces. These two categories appear to correspond to the
“other violence category” from previous years.

Location information

Our construction of death rates by department and year is for department of death and not residence.
Urban/rural status, however is by area of residence. This is coded somewhat differently from year to
year. We established a consistent urban/rural by coding as urban those listed as living in “cabecera
municipal” and coding the institutionalized as non-urban. Those with missing urban/rural status (about
1/16 of deaths) are omitted from the analysis used to produce Table 8.

Match to population information

As noted in the text, population statistics for each department-year-age(5 year)-sex category were
obtained from DANE (1998) for 1990, 1995, and 2000. The Colombian census used for these data was
conducted in 1993, so data for other years are inter-censal estimates and projections. We interpolated
using 5-year growths for each cell.

Finally, we aggregated mortality counts to match 5-year age bands, and then matched to the relevant
population denominators.




                                                   30
                                            REFERENCES

Abadie, Alberto (2004), “Poverty, Political Freedom, and the Roots of Terrorism,” NBER Working Paper
10859, October.

Alvarez, Elena H. (1995), “Economic Development, Restructuring and the Illicit Drug Sector in Bolivia
and Peru: Current Policies,” Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 37 (3), 125-49,

Angrist, Joshua (2001), “Estimate of Limited-Dependent Variable Models with Dummy Endogenous
Regressors: Simple Strategies for Empirical Practice,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 19(1),
2-16.

Bagley, Bruce M. (1989), “Colombia and the War on Drugs,” Foreign Affairs 67 (Fall 1998), 70-92.

Black, Dan, Terra McKinnish, and Seth Sanders (2005), “The Economic Impact of the Coal Boom and
Bust,” Economic Journal, April.

Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel, and Seth Sanders (2002), “The Impact of Economic Conditions on Disability
Program Participation: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust,” American Economic Review 92
(March), 27-50.

Cardenas, Mauricio (2001), “Economic Growth in Colombia: A Reversal of Fortune?,” Harvard Center
for International development Working Paper 83, December.

Carrington, William J (1996), “The Alaskan Labor Market During the Pipeline Era,” Journal of Political
Economy 104 (February), 186-218.

Chauvin, Lucien (1999), “Drug Eradication Effort Worsens Poverty Among Bolivian Farmers,” The
Miami Herald, 25 January.

CODHES, Consultoria para los Derechos Humanos y el Desplazamiento (1996), Desplazamiento Rural:
Violencia y Pobres, <http://www.codhes.org.co/>.

Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler (2004), “Greed and Grievance in Civil War,” Oxford Economic Papers
56, 563-595.

Collier, Paul, Anke Hoeffler, and Mans Soderbom (2004), “On the Duration of Civil War,” Journal of
Peace Research 41, 253-273

Departmento Administrativo Nacional de Estadistica (1998), Colombia: Proyecciones Departamentales
de Poblacion por Sexo y Edad, 1990-2015, (in Serial Estudios Censales), Bogota, D.C.: DANE.

Departmento Administrativo Nacional de Estadistica (1999), Guia Metodología: Encuesta Nacional de
Hogares, Bogota, D.C.: DANE, Direccion Tecnica de Estadisticas Basicas.

Departmento Administrativo Nacional de Estadistica (2002), Metodología Encuesta Continua de
Hogares, Bogota, D.C.: DANE, Direccion de Metodologia y Produccion Estadistica.



                                                   31
Diaz, Ana Maria and Fabio Sanchez (2004), “Geography if Illicit Crops (Coca Leaf) and Armed Conflict
in Colombia,” The Development Research Centre, Development Studies Institute, London School of
Economics, February.

Edmunds, Eric V., and Nina Pavcnik (2004), “International Trade and Child Labor: Cross-Country
Evidence,” NBER Working Paper 10317, February.

Fearon, James D. and David D. Laitin (2003), “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War,” American Political
Science Review 97 (February), 75-90.

Gaviria, Alejandro (2000), “Increasing Returns and the Evolution of Violent Crime: The Case of
Colombia,” Journal of Development Economics 61(1), 1-25.

Government of Colombia, Dirección Nacional de Estupefacientes (DNE, 2002), “Cultivos Ilícitos y el
Programa de Erradicación,” Bogotá: 2002, <http//www.dnecolombia.gov.co/contenido.php?sid=18>.

Grossman, Herschel I. (1991), “A General Equilibrium Model of Insurrection,” American Economic
Review 81, 912-921.

Grossman, Herschel I. and Daniel Mejia (2005), “The War Against Drug Producers,” NBER Working
Paper 11141, February.

Fearon, James D. (2004), ‘Why Do Some Civil Wars Last So Much Longer than Others?,” Journal of
Peace Research 41, 275-301.

Federal Research Division (1988), Colombia, in Dennis M. Hanratty and Sandra W. Meditz, eds,,
Country Studies/Area Handbook Series, Washington, DC: The Library of Congress (material on the
FARC available at http://www.country-data.com/cgi-bin/query/r-3126.html).

Hausmann, Ricardo, and Roberto Rigobon (2003), “ An Alternative Interpretation of the ‘Resource
Curse’: Theory and Policy Implications,” NBER Working Paper 9424, January.

Kirk, Robin (2003), More Terrible than Death: Massacres, Drugs, and America’s War in Colombia,”
New York: Public Affairs.

Krueger, Alan and Jitka Maleckova (2002), “Education, Poverty, Political Violence and Terrorism: Is
There a Causal Connection?,” NBER Working Paper No. 9072.

Krueger, Alan and D.D. Laitin (2003), “Kto Kogo? A Cross-Country Study of the Origins and Targets of
Terrorism,” Princeton University Department of Economics, mimeo, November.

Leons, Madeline B. (1997), “After the Boom: Income Decline, Eradication, and Alternative Development
in the Yungas,” Chapter 6 in M.B. leons and H. Sanabria, eds., Coca, Cocaine, and the Bolivian Reality,
Albany; State University of New York Press.

Marquis, Christopher and Juan Forero (2004), “U.S. Announces Gains in Eradicating Andean Coca,” The
New York Times, March 23.



                                                  32
Miguel, Edward, S. Satyanath, and E. Sergenti (2004), “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An
Instrumental Variables Approach,” Journal of Political Economy 112(4), 725-753.

Ministerio de Defensa Nacional (2001), “Homicidio y Control de Armas en Colombia,” Bogota, July
(available as http://www.mindefensa.gov.co/publicaciones/ministerio/espanol/armas-documento.pdf).

Perafan, Carlos Cesar (1999), “Impacto de Cultivos Ilicitos en Pueblos Indigenas: El Caso de Colombia,”
No. IND-106, Bogota: Proyecto de Desarrollo Alternativo (PLANTE).

Pshisva, Rony and Gustavo A. Suarez (2004), “Crime and Finance: Evidence from Colombia,” Harvard
University Department of Economics, mimeo, November.

Rabasa, Angel, and Peter Chalk (2001), Colombian Labyrinth: The Synergy of Drugs and Insurgency and
Its Implications for Regional Stability, Los Angeles: The RAND Corporation.

Rangel, Alfredo (2000), “Parasites and predators: Guerillas and the Insurrection economy of Colombia,
Journal of International Affairs (Spring 2000), 577-601.

Ross, Michael (2003), “How Do Natural Resources Influence Civil War?,” International Organization 58
Winter.

Ross, Michael (2004), “What Do we Know About Natural Resources and Civil War?, Journal of Peace
Research 41, 337-356.

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier and Arvind Subramanian (2003), ‘Addressing the Resource Curse: An Illustration
from Nigeria,” NBER Working Paper 9804, June.

Sachs, J. and A.M. Warner (2000), “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth,” in G.M. Meier
and J.E. Rauch (eds), Leading Issues in Economic Development, 7th ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sanchez Torres, F., and J. Nunez Mendez (2000), “Geography and Economic Development in Colombia:
A Municipal Approach,” Latin American research network Working Paper R-408, The IADB.

Steiner, Roberto (1998), “Colombia’s Income from the Drug Trade,” World Development 26(6), 1013-
1031.

Thoumi, Francisco E. (1995), Political Economy and Illegal Drugs in Colombia, Boulder: Lynne Rienner
Publishers.

Thoumi, Francisco E. (2002), “Illegal drugs in Colombia: From Illegal Economic Boom to Social crisis,”
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 582 (July), 102-116.

United Nations (2001), Global Illicit Drug Trends 2001, New York; United Nations Office for Drug
Control and Crime Prevention.

United Nations (2002), Colombia: Internally Displaced Persons, Geneva: United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (maps available in http://www.unhcr.ch//).



                                                  33
United Nations (2003), Colombia: Coca Survey for 2002, New York: United Nations Office for Drug
Control and Crime Prevention.

Urdinola, Piedad (2004), “The Hidden Cost of Violence, Infant Mortality in Colombia,” paper presented
at the First Congress of the Latin American Population Association, Brazil.

Uribe, Sergio (1997), “Los Cultivos Ilicitos en Colombia,” Chapter 1 in F.E. Thoumi, et al., eds., Drogas
Ilicitas en Colombia: Su Impacto Economico, Politico y Social, Bogota: Ministerio de Justicia y del
Derecho, Direccion Nacional de Estupefacientes.

Villalon, Carlos (2004), “Cocaine Country,” National Geographic, July.

Washington Office on Latin America (1991), Clear and Present Dangers: The U.S. Military and the War
on Drugs in the Andes,” WOLA: Washington, DC.

Whynes, David K. (1992), ‘The Colombian Cocaine Trade and the War on Drugs,” Chapter 12 in A.
Cohen and R.Segovia, eds., The Colombian Economy: Issues of Trade and Development,” Boulder:
Westview Press.

Winn, Peter (1999), Americas: The Changing Face of Latin America and the Caribbean,” Berkeley and
Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Zirnite, Peter (1998), “The Militarization of the Drug War in Latin America,” Current History 97, 618
(April), 166-173.




                                                   34
                           TABLE 1. FIRST STAGE FOR COCA CULTIVATION GROWTH
                                                       1994 to 1999                                         1994 to 2000
Treatment group Parameter              (1)         (2)     (3)      (4)                    (5)          (6)     (7)      (8)

                                                    A. With DMZ departments

9 growing dept.       Intercept       735          207                                     506         292
                                    (1,749)      (2,112)                                 (2,024)     (2,458)
                      Growing        7,554        8,082                                   8,748       8,961
                                    (3,445)      (3,724)                                 (3,876)     (4,358)
14 growing dept. Intercept                                     207                                                  292
                                                             (2,053)                                              (2,348)
                      Growing                                 6,100                                                6,127
                                                             (3,152)                                              (3,604)
Linear                Intercept                                            1,658                                               2,147
                                                                          (1,708)                                             (1,989)
                      Hectares                                              .553                                                .362
                                                                           (.321)                                              (.373)

Includes medium                     control         no        treated       yes          control        no        treated        yes
producers?
R2                                   0.134        0.121       0.108        0.087          0.141       0.107        0.085       0.029

                                                  B. Without DMZ departments

9 growing dept.       Intercept      735          207                                      506         292
                                    (1,845)      (4,198)                                 (2074)      (4,911)
                      Growing        8,434        8,966                                   9,533       9,746
                                    (3,883)      (4,198)                                 (4,364)     (4,911)
14 growing dept. Intercept                                     207                                                  292
                                                             (2,115)                                              (2,414)
                      Growing                                 6,287                                                6,112
                                                             (3,400)                                              (3,879)
Linear                Intercept                                            1,699                                               2,201
                                                                          (1,759)                                             (2,057)
                      Hectares                                              .697                                                .328
                                                                           (.398)                                              (.466)

Includes medium                     control         no        treated       yes          control        no        treated        yes
producers?

R2                                   0.140        0.125       0.106        0.091          0.141       0.105        0.079       0.017

Notes: The table reports estimates of the change in cocaine cultivation on 1994 levels for the 33 Colombia Departments (states). The 1994
variable is the average of 4 measures from Thoumi et al. (1997). The 1999 and 2000 data are police estimates, reported in Government of
Colombia (2002).
                                             TABLE 2. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS BY REGION TYPE
                                                                                                                   Enrollment
Region type          Department                                  Population             % Urban             % Primary     % Secondary                Homicide Rate
                                                                   1993                  1993                 1995            1995                    1990-1993
                                                                      (1)                  (2)                   (3)                   (4)                  (5)
Non-growing          Santafe de Bogota, DC                       4,945,448                 99.7                 60.8                  75.2                 178.8
                     Amazonas                                      37,764                  50.4                 56.3                  33.2                 35.3
                     Antioquia                                   4,342,347                 72.0                 75.1                  59.1                 718.7
                     Arauca                                        137,193                 63.6                 90.0                  38.8                 226.3
                     Atlantico                                   1,667,500                 93.7                 68.2                  67.9                 65.2
                     Boyaca                                      1,174,031                 42.5                 65.8                  47.4                 124.1
                     Caldas                                        925,358                 64.7                 66.2                  56.3                 251.6
                     Casanare                                      158,149                 54.7                 77.9                  34.5                 153.1
                     Choco                                         338,160                 38.5                 66.6                  32.0                 65.6
                     Cordoba                                     1,088,087                 48.2                 89.5                  50.5                 66.7
                     Cundinamarca                                1,658,698                 54.7                 71.7                  55.3                 126.4
                     Huila                                         758,013                 60.0                 73.9                  47.7                 132.6
                     Quindio                                       435,018                 83.8                 64.7                  65.0                 173.0
                     Risaralda                                     744,974                 81.3                 66.1                  59.1                 303.4
                     San Andres y Providencia                      50,094                  70.4                 69.7                  84.2                 44.1
                     Santander                                   1,598,688                 68.9                 68.9                  53.3                 192.7
                     Sucre                                         624,463                 67.1                 96.6                  51.3                 38.5
                     Tolima                                      1,150,080                 60.7                 71.9                  55.5                 140.9
                     Valle del Cauca                             3,333,150                 85.3                 71.9                  62.6                 311.5
                     All 19 non-growing                          25,167,215                75.5                 70.9                  59.8                 271.6
                     Non-growing                                 12,546,270                64.5                 72.7                  54.0                 140.7
                     (w/o Bogota, Antioquia, and Valle de Cauca)
9-Dept               Bolivar                                     1,439,291                 68.6                 75.4                  50.4                 41.1
growing              Cauca                                         979,231                 36.7                 73.8                  36.3                 170.0
                     Guaviare                                      57,884                  36.9                 59.3                  17.4                 130.5
                     Narino                                      1,274,708                 42.9                 62.4                  33.7                 58.7
                     Putumayo                                      204,309                 34.6                 75.4                  28.0                 170.7
                     Vaupes                                        18,235                  24.8                 74.9                  21.4                  2.8
                     Vichada                                       36,336                  24.1                 54.2                  16.6                 39.3
                     All 9-dept w/o DMZ                          4,009,994                 49.8                 70.6                  39.4                 86.5
9-Dept, DMZ          Caqueta                                       311,464                 46.0                 76.4                  31.7                 205.2
                     Meta                                          561,121                 64.0                 72.9                  52.2                 204.7
                     All DMZ                                       872,585                 57.5                 74.3                  44.3                 204.9


Medium               Cesar                                         729,634                 62.9                 82.1                  50.7                 146.2
producers            Guainia                                       13,491                  30.4                 43.3                  17.1                 45.3
                     La Guajira                                    387,773                 64.3                 72.5                  58.5                 135.8
                     Magdalena                                     882,571                 64.0                 67.7                  41.0                 70.8
                     Norte de Santander                          1,046,577                 70.8                 67.8                  42.4                 241.2
                     All medium producers                        3,060,046                 66.0                 71.7                  45.6                 150.6


                     All Departments                             33,109,840                71.0                 71.1                  55.2                 235.8

Source: Colombia Estadistica, 1993-1997 and tabulations of vital statistics. Columns (2), (3) - from table 2.1.2. Column (3): % of pop. living in cabecera . Columns (4),
(5) - from tables 10.2.1 and 10.3.1. Column (4): primary enrollment divided by pop. aged 5-9 plus 60% of the pop. aged 10-14. Column (5): secondary enrollment
divided by 40% of the pop. aged 10-14 plus pop. aged 15-19. Homicide rates are for men aged 15-59, per 100,000.
                                                                     TABLE 3. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR RURAL SURVEY
                                                 Adult workers                       Adult Workers                                                                                             Teenage Workers
                                               (men and women)                           (men)                                  Boys                                Girls                           (boys)
                                               1992        1997                    1992        1997                    1992             1997               1992              1997              1992        1997
Variable                                        (1)         (2)                     (3)         (4)                     (5)              (6)                (7)               (8)               (9)        (10)
Employed                                       0.658           0.647               0.950           0.931               0.360            0.283              0.095             0.077             0.600          0.506
                                              (0.474)         (0.478)             (0.219)         (0.253)             (0.436)          (0.413)            (0.264)           (0.250)           (0.450)        (0.458)
Hours Worked per month                         142.3           131.8               219.3          200.3                 65.6            44.9                15.4             11.2              121.2           94.1
                                              (117.3)         (115.0)              (76.8)         (85.2)               (86.9)          (74.3)              (47.8)           (39.7)            (103.0)         (96.6)
Monthly Wages                                 74,098          81,461             115,439         123,636                                                                                      61,038          58,921
                                            (115,512)       (127,287)           (126,002)       (137,069)                                                                                    (78,522)        (84,989)
Positive Wages                                0.362           0.369                0.551           0.555                                                                                       0.418          0.350
SE Income (5% top code)                      337,712         352,969             557,381     551,260                                                                                          61,196          65,253
                                            (815,718)       (865,459)          (1,026,941) (1,048,327)                                                                                      (311,898)       (291,899)
Positive SE Income                            0.247           0.259                0.348           0.371                                                                                       0.066          0.080
Enrolled                                      0.017           0.028                0.014           0.024              0.694            0.779              0.757             0.815             0.397           0.486
Age                                            36.43           37.02               36.60           37.12              11.91            11.94              11.87             11.90             16.16           16.22
                                              (10.65)         (10.62)             (10.68)         (10.63)             (2.10)           (2.18)             (2.15)            (2.19)            (1.95)          (1.90)
HH Size                                         5.60           5.32                 5.56           5.31                 6.60            6.35                6.66             6.41              6.57            6.35
                                               (2.56)         (2.49)               (2.60)         (2.51)               (2.36)          (2.41)              (2.36)           (2.43)            (2.48)          (2.57)
Migrant                                        0.282           0.316              0.280           0.312               0.133            0.161              0.163             0.160             0.161           0.182
Single                                         0.229           0.221              0.284           0.277                1.00            0.999              0.990             0.981             0.981           0.970
Male                                           0.496           0.597
Growing (14-dept)                              0.235           0.303              0.234           0.309               0.262            0.332              0.250             0.336             0.238           0.332
Growing (9-depts)                              0.137           0.181              0.133           0.180               0.147            0.191              0.138             0.198             0.138           0.197
DMZ                                            0.014           0.039               0.014           0.039               0.013           0.040               0.014            0.044              0.011          0.034
Max N                                         13,550          19,184               6,641           9,801               2,602           3,513               2,477            3,253              2,040          2,881

Notes: Adult workers include men aged 21-59. Boys and girls are aged 8-16. Labor market outcomes for boys and girls are only reported for those over 10 years of age. Teenage workers are boys aged 13-20. Wages and self-
employment income include zeros and are in real (1998) pesos, about 1,400 to the US dollar.
                               TABLE 4a. ADULT LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES - YEARLY INTERACTIONS, POOLED GROWING & DMZ
                                     Male and Female Workers                                        Men Only
                                                                                                                     Log Monthly Wage and
                         Positive SE Income             Log SE Income          Employed        Log Hours (All Jobs)      Salary Earnings
 Interaction             All       w/o Migrants       All     w/o Migrants All    w/o Migrants  All     w/o Migrants   All       w/o Migrants
   Terms                 (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)     (5)         (6)      (7)           (8)      (9)           (10)

     1994               -0.035            -0.046                -0.025            0.080                -0.014            -0.019               -0.026             -0.031               0.014        0.027
                       (0.023)           (0.024)               (0.175)           (0.161)              (0.013)           (0.016)              (0.023)            (0.025)              (0.036)      (0.038)

     1995               0.009             0.002                 0.159             0.190                -0.002            -0.008               0.004              0.006                -0.011       -0.008
                       (0.024)           (0.023)               (0.153)           (0.155)              (0.012)           (0.012)              (0.024)            (0.029)              (0.037)      (0.038)

     1996               0.042             0.049                 0.362             0.414                0.003             -0.010               0.034              0.048                -0.008       0.002
                       (0.030)           (0.030)               (0.131)           (0.141)              (0.014)           (0.015)              (0.028)            (0.033)              (0.041)      (0.049)

     1997               0.025             0.035                 0.270             0.292                -0.005            -0.013               -0.001             0.002                0.010        0.028
                       (0.020)           (0.019)               (0.122)           (0.116)              (0.014)           (0.018)              (0.030)            (0.036)              (0.041)      (0.046)

     1998               -0.020            -0.009                0.302             0.291               0.0004             -0.012               0.053              0.035                0.103        0.107
                       (0.025)           (0.023)               (0.162)           (0.183)              (0.012)           (0.014)              (0.020)            (0.021)              (0.056)      (0.058)

     1999               0.007             0.016                 0.205             0.150                0.015             0.007                0.006              0.005                0.069        0.067
                       (0.022)           (0.021)               (0.133)           (0.136)              (0.010)           (0.012)              (0.021)            (0.023)              (0.038)      (0.039)

     2000               0.044             0.052                 0.255             0.230                -0.003            -0.012               0.065              0.085
                       (0.023)           (0.022)               (0.145)           (0.155)              (0.011)           (0.013)              (0.020)            (0.022)

       N               147,833           100,284               40,338            28,912               74,781             50,914               69,144            46,770               34,451       22,257

Notes: The table reports growing region/year interactions. Estimates for monthly wages omit data for 2000. Standard errors adjusted for department-year clustering are reported in parentheses.
                                        TABLE 4b. ADULT LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES WITH POOLED INTERACTION TERMS
                                        Male and Female Workers                                 Men Only
                                                                                                                                                                             Log Monthly Wage and
                        Positive SE Income                     Log SE Income                             Employed                        Log Hours (All Jobs)                   Salary Earnings
 Interaction           No Trends w/Trends                   No Trends w/Trends                    No Trends w/Trends                    No Trends w/Trends                   No Trends w/Trends
   Terms                  (1)          (2)                     (3)        (4)                        (5)         (6)                       (7)          (8)                     (9)         (10)

                                                                              Panel A: Growing Effects (non-DMZ)

 1995-1997                0.039           0.006                0.251            0.288               0.0045           0.0079                0.020           0.013               -0.0051           -0.035
                         (0.017)         (0.031)              (0.100)          (0.196)              (0.009)          (0.015)              (0.019)         (0.028)              (0.028)          (0.052)

 1998-2000                0.031           -0.036               0.260            0.333                0.013            0.020                0.044           0.030                0.079            0.026
                         (0.017)         (0.049)              (0.106)          (0.340)              (0.008)          (0.029)              (0.015)         (0.051)              (0.034)          (0.099)

   Trends                                 0.011                                 -0.012                              -0.0011                               0.0024                                0.0098
                                         (0.008)                               (0.053)                              (0.004)                               (0.008)                               (0.016)

                                                                                         Panel B: DMZ Effects

 1995-1997                0.002           -0.028               0.625            0.383                -0.020           0.058                0.050           0.057                -0.047           -0.067
                         (0.035)         (0.071)              (0.299)          (0.359)              (0.031)          (0.052)              (0.034)         (0.075)              (0.050)          (0.116)

 1998-2000                -0.098          -0.155               0.349            -0.129               -0.039           0.108                0.126           0.138                0.058            0.024
                         (0.037)         (0.133)              (0.296)          (0.634)              (0.030)          (0.079)              (0.036)         (0.127)              (0.063)          (0.191)

   Trends                                 0.009                                 0.077                                 -0.025                               -0.002                                0.006
                                         (0.021)                               (0.107)                               (0.012)                              (0.020)                               (0.029)

       N                                           147,833                                                   74,781                               69,144                                34,451

Notes: The table reports pooled growing region/year interactions terms estimated using equation (2) in the text. Estimates for monthly wages omit data for 2000. Standard errors adjusted for department-year
clustering are reported in parentheses.
      TABLE 5a. OUTCOMES FOR CHILDREN - YEARLY INTERACTIONS, POOLED GROWING & DMZ
                              Enrollment                      Labor Market (Teenage Boys)
                     Boys                    Girls         Employment         Log Hours (All Jobs)
                          w/o                      w/o             w/o                     w/o
Interaction      All    Migrants         All     Migrants All    Migrants        All     Migrants
  Terms          (1)      (2)            (3)       (4)    (5)      (6)           (7)       (8)

    1994              -0.0039        -0.042              0.054          0.044              0.021          0.025             -0.028         -0.040
                      (0.039)        (0.044)            (0.028)        (0.032)            (0.055)        (0.063)            (0.071)        (0.089)

    1995              -0.011         -0.012              0.061          0.049             -0.037         -0.048              0.069          0.074
                      (0.037)        (0.040)            (0.048)        (0.046)            (0.040)        (0.039)            (0.078)        (0.083)

    1996              -0.0055        0.0010              0.025          0.023              0.033          0.034              0.187          0.173
                      (0.032)        (0.031)            (0.026)        (0.028)            (0.043)        (0.049)            (0.071)        (0.072)

    1997              -0.065         -0.073              0.031          0.025              0.078          0.092              0.081          0.041
                      (0.033)        (0.032)            (0.036)        (0.040)            (0.033)        (0.035)            (0.059)        (0.065)

    1998              -0.020         -0.042              0.036          0.042              0.011         0.0009              0.228          0.243
                      (0.034)        (0.036)            (0.048)        (0.056)            (0.043)        (0.051)            (0.059)        (0.062)

    1999              -0.055         -0.052              0.017         0.0094              0.099          0.123              0.180          0.160
                      (0.031)        (0.034)            (0.034)        (0.040)            (0.038)        (0.042)            (0.054)        (0.061)

    2000              -0.054         -0.059              0.034          0.017              0.078          0.072              0.272          0.253
                      (0.036)        (0.040)            (0.034)        (0.036)            (0.050)        (0.053)            (0.047)        (0.053)

      N               27,382         22,695             25,771         21,259             22,365         18,319             12,528         10,104

Notes: The table reports growing region/year interactions. Standard errors adjusted for department-year clustering are reported in parentheses.
                  TABLE 5b. OUTCOMES FOR CHILDREN WITH POOLED INTERACTION TERMS
                                  Enrollment                        Labor Market (Teenage Boys)
                         Boys                    Girls          Employment          Log Hours (All Jobs)
Interaction       No Trends w/Trends     No Trends w/Trends No Trends w/Trends      No Trends w/Trends
  Terms              (1)      (2)            (3)       (4)     (5)       (6)           (7)       (8)

                                                 Panel A: Growing Effects (non-DMZ)

1995-1997            -0.0099        0.040              0.035         0.024              0.016        -0.087             0.112         0.117
                     (0.024)       (0.046)            (0.024)       (0.051)            (0.030)       (0.060)           (0.048)       (0.089)

1998-2000            -0.028         0.069              0.027        0.0059              0.073        -0.132             0.236         0.246
                     (0.025)       (0.077)            (0.027)       (0.095)            (0.032)       (0.096)           (0.040)       (0.143)

  Trends                           -0.016                           0.0035                            0.034                          -0.0016
                                   (0.012)                          (0.014)                          (0.015)                         (0.022)

      N              27,382         27,382            25,771        25,771             22,365        22,365            12,528         12,528

                                                          Panel B: DMZ Effects

1995-1997            -0.103         0.174             -0.115        -0.197             -0.032        -0.248             0.238        -0.0041
                     (0.083)       (0.097)            (0.069)       (0.145)            (0.074)       (0.196)           (0.095)       (0.183)

1998-2000            -0.079         0.436             -0.138        -0.293             -0.213        -0.612             0.232        -0.216
                     (0.085)       (0.142)            (0.072)       (0.223)            (0.088)       (0.377)           (0.093)       (0.332)

  Trends                           -0.087                            0.025                            0.066                           0.071
                                   (0.021)                          (0.030)                          (0.053)                         (0.048)

      N                     27,382                           25,771                           22,365                          12,528

Notes: The table reports pooled growing region/year interactions terms estimated using equation (2) in the text. Estimates for monthly wages omit
data for 2000. Standard errors adjusted for department-year clustering are reported in parentheses.
                                     TABLE 6. ADULT AND TEENAGE LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES - RURAL AND URBAN EFFECTS
                                     Male and Female Workers                                       Men Only                                                                                   Teenage Boys
                                                                                    Log Hours              Log Monthly Wage and                                                                 Log Hours
                        Positive SE Income              Log SE Income               (All Jobs)                Salary Earnings                                                                   (All Jobs)
Interaction          14 growing no med. prod.      14 growing no med. prod. 14 growing no med. prod.     14 growing no med. prod.                                                       14 growing no med. prod.
  Terms                  (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)                                                              (9)           (10)

                                                                                               Panel A: Rural Effects

1995-1997                0.006             0.017                 0.286             0.328                  0.037             0.061                  -0.019            -0.024               0.119*            0.122*
                        (0.032)           (0.032)               (0.162)           (0.175)                (0.025)           (0.029)                (0.058)           (0.071)               (0.082)           (0.078)

1998-2000                -0.031            -0.029                0.295             0.316                  0.079             0.127                 0.045*             0.022                0.216*            0.210*
                        (0.047)           (0.044)               (0.253)           (0.304)                (0.039)           (0.043)                (0.095)           (0.110)               (0.128)           (0.129)

                                                                                              Panel B: Urban Effects

1995-1997                0.013             -0.015                0.155             0.186                  0.025             0.042                  -0.038            -0.060                -0.004            -0.006
                        (0.027)           (0.024)               (0.128)           (0.146)                (0.020)           (0.023)                (0.057)           (0.059)               (0.072)           (0.181)

1998-2000                -0.019            -0.053                0.174             0.190                  0.040             0.079                  -0.087            -0.137                -0.047            -0.010
                        (0.050)           (0.042)               (0.207)           (0.247)                (0.033)           (0.037)                (0.088)           (0.094)               (0.127)           (0.134)

   Trend                  0.01             0.014                 -0.004            -0.021                 -0.005            -0.014                 0.011             0.016                 0.001             -0.006
                        (0.007)           (0.007)               (0.033)           (0.039)                (0.006)           (0.006)                (0.014)           (0.016)               (0.019)           (0.020)

      N                482,053           477,346                116,896           113,831               192,840           189,003                101,779           100,338                22,141             21,084

Notes: The table reports results from a stacked urban and rural sample. Estimates for monthly wages omit data for 2000. Standard errors adjusted for department-year clustering are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes a
significant rural-urban difference. Columns labelled "14 growing" use the same growing region as in Tables 4 and 5. Columns labelled "no medium producers," drop the 5 medium producing departments from the analysis.
                                          TABLE 7. MORTALITY ESTIMATES
                              14 Growing Departments                      No Medium Producers
                        No trends               With trends        No trends              With trends

                Growing            DMZ            Growing            DMZ             Growing            DMZ            Growing            DMZ
                  (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)             (7)               (8)

                                                                A. Unweighted

1993              0.026            -0.059                                             0.012             -0.059
                 (0.118)          (0.149)                                            (0.170)           (0.149)
1994              0.123            -0.078           0.133            -0.145           0.209             -0.077           0.255            -0.145
                 (0.120)          (0.123)          (0.161)          (0.192)          (0.162)           (0.122)          (0.222)          (0.192)
1995              0.102            0.198            0.118            0.098            0.236             0.198            0.302            0.097
                 (0.096)          (0.165)          (0.188)          (0.286)          (0.131)           (0.164)          (0.261)          (0.285)
1996              0.154            0.266            0.176            0.134            0.289             0.266            0.374            0.132
                 (0.114)          (0.132)          (0.241)          (0.342)          (0.142)           (0.132)          (0.331)          (0.340)
1997              0.230            0.402            0.259            0.237            0.346             0.403            0.451            0.236
                 (0.132)          (0.178)          (0.296)          (0.434)          (0.154)           (0.178)          (0.402)          (0.431)
1998              0.200            0.514            0.235            0.315            0.506             0.514            0.631            0.314
                 (0.152)          (0.170)          (0.346)          (0.505)          (0.197)           (0.170)          (0.482)          (0.501)
1999              0.197            0.340            0.238            0.109            0.259             0.340            0.403            0.107
                 (0.102)          (0.140)          (0.383)          (0.572)          (0.142)           (0.140)          (0.534)          (0.568)
2000              0.289            0.142            0.337            -0.122           0.358             0.142            0.522            -0.124
                 (0.100)          (0.148)          (0.432)          (0.651)          (0.120)           (0.147)          (0.601)          (0.646)
Dept. trend                                         -0.006           0.033                                               -0.020           0.033
                                                   (0.052)          (0.079)                                             (0.072)          (0.078)

                                                                  B. Weighted

1993              -0.080           -0.100                                             -0.202            -0.101
                 (0.109)          (0.144)                                            (0.113)           (0.145)
1994              0.045            -0.137           0.097            -0.105           0.062             -0.137           0.283            -0.105
                 (0.095)          (0.099)          (0.140)          (0.167)          (0.093)           (0.100)          (0.137)          (0.168)
1995              0.141            0.126            0.205            0.159            0.183             0.125            0.473            0.159
                 (0.081)          (0.135)          (0.171)          (0.240)          (0.103)           (0.136)          (0.187)          (0.241)
1996              0.163            0.178            0.241            0.214            0.180             0.178            0.538            0.214
                 (0.134)          (0.139)          (0.239)          (0.296)          (0.158)           (0.140)          (0.262)          (0.297)
1997              0.179            0.260            0.269            0.298            0.220             0.259            0.647            0.298
                 (0.115)          (0.140)          (0.270)          (0.353)          (0.130)           (0.141)          (0.293)          (0.354)
1998              0.120            0.434            0.222            0.474            0.169             0.434            0.665            0.475
                 (0.100)          (0.146)          (0.308)          (0.412)          (0.110)           (0.147)          (0.334)          (0.414)
1999              0.313            0.296            0.428            0.339            0.369             0.296            0.934            0.339
                 (0.092)          (0.112)          (0.350)          (0.461)          (0.110)           (0.113)          (0.384)          (0.463)
2000              0.388            0.119            0.516            0.163            0.401             0.118            1.034            0.164
                 (0.097)          (0.122)          (0.397)          (0.524)          (0.106)           (0.123)          (0.433)          (0.526)
Dept. trend                                         -0.013           -0.002                                              -0.069           -0.002
                                                   (0.046)          (0.062)                                             (0.052)          (0.062)

Notes: The table reports results of regressions with log violent death rates on left hand side, controlling for department, year and age effects and
estimated using statistics aggregated by department, year, and 10-year age groups, for men aged 15-64. Standard errors adjusted for department-year
clustering are in parentheses.
                         TABLE 8. MORTALITY ESTIMATES BY URBAN/RURAL RESIDENCE
                              14 Growing Departments                Without Medium Producers
                        No trends               With trends    No trends               With trends

                Growing             DMZ            Growing             DMZ            Growing             DMZ            Growing             DMZ
                  (1)                (2)             (3)                (4)             (5)                (6)             (7)                (8)

                                                                      A. Rural

1994              0.038             -0.087           0.644             0.322            0.155             -0.086           0.645             0.321
                 (0.212)           (0.133)          (0.462)           (0.298)          (0.207)           (0.137)          (0.471)           (0.300)
1995              0.310             0.378            1.305             1.057            0.301             0.378            1.111             1.055
                 (0.170)           (0.140)          (0.686)           (0.498)          (0.202)           (0.143)          (0.705)           (0.500)
1996              0.356             0.580            1.740             1.529            0.317             0.580            1.446             1.527
                 (0.161)           (0.202)          (0.930)           (0.718)          (0.186)           (0.205)          (0.946)           (0.721)
1997              0.397             0.283            2.170             1.503            0.301             0.284            1.751             1.501
                 (0.172)           (0.198)           (1.18)           (0.922)          (0.182)           (0.200)           (1.19)           (0.925)
1998              0.266             0.491            2.427             1.981            0.324             0.491            2.094             1.978
                 (0.176)           (0.230)           (1.43)            (1.13)          (0.171)           (0.232)           (1.44)            (1.14)
1999              0.415             0.055            2.965             1.816            0.329             0.056            2.420             1.813
                 (0.184)           (0.186)           (1.68)            (1.33)          (0.221)           (0.189)           (1.69)             (1.34
2000              0.506             -0.019           3.444             2.011            0.299             -0.019           2.709             2.008
                 (0.205)           (0.159)           (1.93)            (1.54)          (0.207)           (0.162)           (1.94)            (1.54)
Dept. trend                                          -0.388            -0.270                                              -0.320            -0.270
                                                    (0.251)           (0.210)                                             (0.250)           (0.211)

                                                                     B. Urban

1994              0.196             -0.048           0.147             0.183            0.279             -0.048           0.246             0.183
                 (0.150)           (0.257)          (0.295)           (0.462)          (0.150)           (0.257)          (0.364)           (0.463)
1995              0.052             0.100            -0.030            0.484            0.200             0.099            0.146             0.483
                 (0.115)           (0.158)          (0.439)           (0.700)          (0.138)           (0.158)          (0.565)           (0.672)
1996              0.165             -0.040           0.051             0.498            0.345             -0.041           0.269             0.496
                 (0.118)           (0.209)          (0.604)           (0.941)          (0.147)           (0.209)          (0.779)           (0.944)
1997              0.109             0.146            -0.038            -0.838           0.356             0.146            0.258             0.837
                 (0.144)           (0.189)          (0.775)            (1.20)          (0.166)           (0.189)          (0.993)            (1.20)
1998              0.034             0.332            -0.145            1.177            0.333             0.331            0.213             1.176
                 (0.145)           (0.167)          (0.941)            (1.46)          (0.186)           (0.167)           (1.21)            (1.46)
1999              0.053             0.329            -0.158            1.328            0.217             0.328            0.076             1.326
                 (0.128)           (0.168)           (1.11)            (1.73)          (0.156)           (0.168)           (1.42)            (1.73)
2000              0.080             0.115            -0.164            1.268            0.246             0.115            0.083             1.266
                 (0.120)           (0.189)           (1.28)            (1.99)          (0.153)           (0.189)           (1.63)            (2.00)
Dept. trend                                          0.033             -0.154                                              0.022             -0.154
                                                    (0.169)           (0.266)                                             (0.216)           (0.267)

Notes: The table reports unweighted estimates from regressions with log violent death rates on left hand side, controlling for department, year and age
effects. The model is estimated using statistics aggregated by department, year, and 10-year age groups, for men aged 15-64. Standard errors adjusted
for department-year clustering are in parentheses.
                                        Fig. 1. Production of Coca Leaf in Colombia, Peru and Bolivia
                                                                  1990-2000


              250,000

              225,000

              200,000

              175,000
Metric Tons




              150,000
                                                                                                                         Bolivia
              125,000                                                                                                    Colombia
                                                                                                                         Peru
              100,000

               75,000

               50,000

               25,000

                   0
                   1990   1991   1992         1993      1994       1995       1996       1997       1998   1999   2000

Source: United Nations (2001).
                                                                   Year
                                                                            Fig. 2a. Per-Capita GDP Growth Rate for Selected South American Countries
                                                                                                           1990-2000

                                                                                                                                                           Bolivia
                                                                                                                                                           Colombia
                                                   10%                                                                                                     Peru
                                                                                                                                                           Brazil
                                                                                                                                                           Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                           Panama
                                                               6%
                                                                                                                                                           Venezuela
GDP per capita growth




                                                               2%



                                                               -2%



                                                               -6%



                                   -10%
                                       1990                                 1991     1992     1993     1994      1995      1996     1997         1998   1999            2000
                                                                                                                 Year
Source: World Economic Outlook (WEO) - IMF 2003


                                                                                   Fig. 2b. Homicide Rate in Selected South American Countries
                                                                                                            1990-2000
                                                               100                                                                                             Bolivia
                                                                                                                                                               Colombia
                                                                                                                                                               Peru
                                                                                                                                                               Brazil
                 Number of homicides per 100 000 inhabitants




                                                                80                                                                                             Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                               Panama
                                                                                                                                                               Venezuela



                                                                60




                                                                40




                                                                20




                                                                 0
                                                                     1990   1991     1992      1993     1994      1995     1996      1997        1998   1999             2000
                                                                                                                  Year
Sources given in data appendix.
                            Fig. 3. Coca Cultivation: 1994-99 growth as a function of 1994 levels


                 90,000
                 100,000
1994-99 Growth




                      0
                 10,000

                      100                       1,000                              10,000                           100,000

                                                        1994 Average Level (hectares)



                                        Major growing             Other growing             Non-growing

                                  Notes: Scales are logarithmic. The 100 hectare base group includes 100 or less.




                  1,000
                                             Figure 4. Death Rates for Men Aged 15 - 59.


                              (a) Violence                                                 (b) Disease
    .4



    .2



    0



   -.2



   -.4

         1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000       1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
                                  Year                                                         Year

                             Department Type                                              Department Type
                         Growing                        Non-growing                   Growing               Non-growing


Notes:
1. Log rates, relative to average by department type.
2. Non-growing omits Antioquia, Valle, and Bogota DC.
                                               Fig. 5. Death Rates for Men Aged 15 - 59



                            (a) Violence                                                  (b) Disease
  .4



  .2



   0



 -.2



 -.4
       1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000         1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
                                Year                                                           Year

                             Department Type                                              Department Type
                  DMZ              Growing              Non-growing               DMZ           Growing          Non-growing


Notes:
1. Log rates, relative to average by department type.
2. Non-growing omits Antioquia, Valle, and Bogota DC.
               Fig. 6. Death Rates – Logit(Violence/Total) -- for Men Aged 15 - 59



 .4



 .2



 0



-.2



-.4

      1990    1991     1992      1993     1994      1995       1996   1997   1998   1999   2000
                                                    Year

                                            Department Type
                         DMZ                         Growing                    Non-growing

       Notes:
       1. Logits, relative to average by department type.
       2. Non-growing omits Antioquia, Valle, and Bogota DC.
