                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE STRUCTURE OF FACTOR CONTENT PREDICTIONS

                                              Daniel Trefler
                                             Susan Chun Zhu

                                          Working Paper 11221
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11221


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




Trefler: Rotman School of Management and Department of Economics, University of Toronto, as well as
the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIAR) and the NBER. Address: 105 St. George Street,
Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3E6, Canada. Zhu: Department of Economics, Michigan State University. Address:
101 Marshall Hall, East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA. We are indebted to Gene Grossman for help with the
pivotal `consumption similarity' condition. Don Davis and David Weinstein identified a major error which
led us to dramatically restructure the paper. Mike Peters showed us how to derive results that are independent
of how product market equilibrium is specified. Financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Daniel Trefler and Susan Chun Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Structure of Factor Content Predictions
Daniel Trefler and Susan Chun Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 11221
March 2005
JEL No. F1

                                             ABSTRACT

The last decade witnessed an explosion of research into the impact of international technology

differences on the factor content of trade. Yet the literature has failed to confront two pivotal issues.

First, with international technology differences and traded intermediate inputs there does not exist

a Vanek-consistent definition of the factor content of trade. Restated, we do not know what we are

trying to explain! We fill this gap by providing the correct definition. Second, as Helpman and

Krugman (1985) showed, many models beyond Heckscher-Ohlin imply the Vanek prediction. So

what model is being tested? We completely characterize the class of models being tested by

providing a familiar `consumption similarity' condition that is necessary and sufficient for the Vanek

prediction. We illustrate with a unique dataset containing input-output tables for 41 rich and poor

countries. We find modest support for the strong version of the Vanek prediction and impressive

support for weaker versions of the prediction.

Daniel Trefler
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6 CANADA
and NBER
dtrefler@rotman.utoronto.ca

Susan Chun Zhu
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
101 Marshall Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824
zhuc@msu.edu
1. Introduction

There was a time when the factor content of trade prediction was the exclusive domain

of the Heckscher-Ohlin model. However, the prediction is now known to be consistent

with a larger class of models. For example, in 1979 Deardorff opened up the possibility

of a factor content prediction without factor price equalization, in 1982 Ethier implicitly

derived a factor content prediction with international returns to scale, and by 1985 Help-

man and Krugman were able to derive the Vanek (1968) factor content prediction under

a variety of assumptions about increasing returns and imperfect competition. Having

opened Pandora’s box, just how general is the Vanek factor content prediction? We know

that many models imply the Vanek prediction and that probably many more so imply it

than have yet been explored. But how many? This paper completely characterizes the

relevant class of models by providing a familiar ‘consumption similarity’ condition that is

necessary and sufficient for a ‘robust’ Vanek prediction.

       To understand robustness and why it is needed, consider the example of a standard

monopolistic competition model (e.g., Helpman and Krugman, 1985, chapter 6) that is

augmented by asymmetric trade barriers and international technology differences. Such

a model will not in general yield a Vanek prediction, but it is possible that the Vanek

prediction just happens to obtain for very particular values of the international technology

difference parameters. Robustness is a weak condition that identifies such values and

treats them for what they are, namely, uninteresting special cases.1

       We have discussed the first goal of this paper, namely, a complete characterization

of the class of models that imply a robust Vanek prediction. As should be clear from

the definition of robustness, we are particularly interested in the role of international

   1
    On a somewhat more technical level, we say that a model has a robust Vanek prediction if the
prediction survives an almost irrelevant local perturbation of the underlying technology i.e., a perturbation
that infinitesimally alters industry-level demands for primary factors without affecting (i) economy-wide
factor prices or (ii) any equilibrium outcome in the markets for final goods and intermediate inputs.


                                                     1
technology differences for empirical studies of the Vanek prediction. We argue that this

large literature is fundamentally flawed because it has failed to correctly provide a Vanek-

consistent definition of the factor content of trade. That is, the empirical literature is

using the wrong dependent variable. Our second goal is to provide the correct Vanek-

consistent definition of the factor content of trade. Before being more specific, we first

review the relevant literature.

   International differences in technology and choice of techniques have finally emerged

as the central issue in assessing the validity of the Vanek prediction. Trefler (1993, 1995)

showed that international productivity differences explain at least some of the observed

departures from the Vanek prediction. Using novel methodology, Davis et al. (1997)

demonstrated that the failure of the Vanek prediction is in part due to international

choice-of-technique differences. In a crucial contribution, Davis and Weinstein (2001)

carefully estimated choice-of-technique matrices using data from ten OECD countries

and provided strong evidence that allowing for Hicks-neutral technology differences and

factor price differences greatly improves the fit of the model. Hakura (2001) echoed this

result. Antweiler and Trefler (2002) incorporated increasing returns to scale, one source of

international productivity differences, into the Vanek prediction and found scale returns

to be very important. Debaere (2003) showed that the successes and failures of the Vanek

prediction are intimately related to issues of economic development. Other papers that

allow for international technology differences include Davis and Weinstein (2000, 2003),

Trefler and Zhu (2000), Conway (2002), Trefler (2002) and Reimer (2003). International

technology and choice-of-technique differences have thus emerged as the central issue in

empirical studies of the Vanek prediction.

   Yet factor content theory with international differences in technology and choice of

techniques lags far behind empirical research. Thus Harrigan (1997, page 492) laments

the problems created by the fact that “the effective factor content of trade is not well


                                             2
defined when there are nonneutral technology differences across sectors.” Feenstra (2004,

page 55) argues that current definitions of the factor content of trade are so problematic

that great caution must be exercised in using them to test the Vanek prediction. And

Davis and Weinstein (2003, page 129) complain that “understanding how to incorporate

traded intermediates into factor content studies remains an important area for future

research.” The problem is that with intermediate inputs and international technology

differences, no one knows how to define the factor content of trade in a way that is

consistent with the Vanek prediction.

   In light of this black hole it is not surprising to see healthy mud-slinging between

Trefler and Zhu (2000) and Davis and Weinstein (2003). Each correctly finds error in

what the other had done − a case of the kettle calling the stove black. Unfortunately,

neither side was able to offer a correct Vanek-consistent definition of the factor content

of trade. Our paper is the first to get the definition right. Remarkably, the correct

definition bears no resemblance to the definitions used by either Trefler and Zhu or Davis

and Weinstein.

   The correct definition requires data that are not typically collected. Implementation

of the definition thus requires data imputations that are closely related to the imputations

of intermediate trade made by Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1999), Hummels et al. (2001)

and Yi (2003). Thus, our paper is unexpectedly related to the growing literature on

outsourcing and vertical production networks.

   We round out the paper with an empirical assessment of the Vanek prediction. We use

a new data set that has input-output tables for 41 developed and developing countries.

Previous research has been confined to at most 10 developed countries, thus missing

North-South endowments-based trade. As compared to using just the U.S. input-output

table, using 41 input-output tables significantly improves the fit of the Vanek prediction

for labour and human capital, but not for physical capital. We also consider a Debaere-


                                             3
inspired (2003) ‘ratio’ version of the Vanek prediction and find that it does very well for

all three factors. Finally, we find dramatic support for an informal hypothesis relating

endowments to the factors embodied in world trade. This relationship appears in figure

1. Each point is a country. The horizontal axis is the ratio of a country’s endowments

(the ratio of human capital to labour in the top panel and physical capital to labour in

the bottom panel). The vertical axis is the ratio of a country’s factor content of world

exports (correctly defined). Figure 1 reveals that the factor content of world exports is

strongly correlated with endowments across countries. We will have more to say about

this in section 8.3.

   The paper is organized as follows. Sections 2-3 provide the correct definition of the

factor content of trade. Sections 4-5 completely characterize the class of models implying

a robust Vanek prediction. Sections 6-7 review previous empirical work in light of our

findings and section 8 presents new empirical work.



2. Setup

Let g = 1, ..., G index goods, let i and j = 1, ..., N index countries, and let f = 1, ..., K

index factors. Let Vi be the K × 1 vector of country i endowments, let Vw ≡ Σi Vi be

the world endowment vector, and let Fi be the K × 1 vector giving the factor content of

trade for country i. Let si be the consumption share of country i, where si > 0 for all

i and Σi si = 1. The object of analysis is the Vanek factor content of trade prediction,

Fi = Vi − si Vw . By implication, if country i is abundant in factor f (element f of Vi − si Vw

is positive) then the country is a net exporter of the services of factor f (element f of Fi

is positive).

   Every good is consumed as a final product and/or used as an intermediate input. Let

Cij be a G × 1 vector denoting country i consumption of goods produced in country j.

Let Yij be a G × 1 vector denoting i’s usage of intermediate inputs produced in country

                                              4
j. Country j’s output Qj is split between consumption and intermediate inputs:


                                    Qj ≡ Σi (Cij + Yij ) .                             (1)


World consumption of goods produced in country j is


                                        Cwj ≡ Σi Cij .                                 (2)


   Let Bij (g, h) be the amount of intermediate input g used to produce one unit of

good h, where g is made in country i and h is made in country j. Let Qj (h) be a

typical element of Qj . Then Bij (g, h) Qj (h) is the amount of input g used to produce

Qj (h) and Σh Bij (g, h) Qj (h) is the amount of input g used by country j. Restated,

Σh Bij (g, h) Qj (h) is the gth element of Yji . In matrix notation,


                                        Yji = Bij Qj                                   (3)


where Bij is the G × G matrix with typical element Bij (g, h).

   Let Di be the matrix whose (f, g) element gives the average amount of factor f used

directly to produce one unit of good g in country i. To ensure that factors are fully

employed, we assume that Di satisfies


                                         D i Qi = V i .                                (4)


Equations (3) and (4) are best viewed as data identities that (partly) define Bij and Di ,

respectively.

   Country i ’s vector of imports from country j is Mij ≡ Yij + Cij for j 6= i. From




                                               5
equation (3), Mij may alternatively be defined as


                                          Mij ≡ Bji Qi + Cij          j 6= i.                                       (5)


Country i’s vector of exports to the world is Xi ≡ Σj6=i Mji = Σj6=i (Yji +Cji ) = Σj (Yji + Cji )−

Yii − Cii . Hence, from equations (1) and (3), Xi may alternatively be defined as


                                              Xi ≡ Qi − Bii Qi − Cii .                                              (6)


This completes the definition of the variables that we will use.


3. The Factor Content of Trade

To pave the way for a Vanek-consistent definition of the factor content of trade, define

                                                                                                      
                  Q1    0     ···         0                      C                  C21   ···     CN 1
                                                             11                                       
                                                                                                      
                 0     Q2    ··· 0                           C12                 C22   ···     CN 2   
                                                                                                      
      Q ≡                                ,                C≡                                           ,
                 ..     ..    ..    .. 
                                                              ..                   ..   ..       ..    
                  .      .       .   .                       .                     .      .      .    
                                                                                                      
                  0     0     · · · QN                          C1N                 C2N · · ·     CN N
                                                                                                            
                  B11    B12        ···       B1N                X1                  −M21        · · · −MN 1
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
           B21 B22 · · · B2N                                −M12                    X2        · · · −MN 2   
                                                                                                            
      B ≡                                           ,   T ≡                                                 ,
           ..    ..   ..
                          .
                             ..                                  ..                   ..        ..
                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                        ..     
           .      .          .                                   .                    .               .     
                                                                                                            
            BN 1 BN 2 · · · BN N                                −M1N                 −M2N · · ·          XN


and
                                                ·                          ¸
                                      D≡            D1 D2 · · ·   DN            .

Let Ti be the ith column of T so that T = [T1 T2 · · · TN ]. Let I be the N G × N G identity

matrix. These definitions are motivated by the following non-trivial theorem.

                                                          6
Theorem 1. Assume that (I − B) is invertible and define A ≡ D(I − B)−1 . Then


                                          Fi ≡ ATi                                         (7)


is the factor content of country i’s trade. Specifically, Fi is the amount of factors employed

worldwide to produce Ti .

   No researcher, empirical or theoretical, has ever defined the factor content of trade as

in theorem 1. We will show in the next section that Fi is the Vanek-consistent definition of

the factor content of trade i.e., Fi = Vi − si Vw . It follows that no empirical researcher who

is interested in the Vanek prediction with unrestricted international technology differences

has ever used the right definition of the factor content of trade. This includes empirical

work by Trefler (1993, 1995), Davis and Weinstein (2001), Hakura (2001), Conway (2002),

Trefler (2002), Debaere (2003) and others. We will develop this point in sections 6-7 below.

   There is a simple and elegant proof of theorem 1 that appears in appendix A.1. How-

ever, we start with a lengthier, but constructive proof.

Proof of Theorem 1:

Let Z be an arbitrary G × 1 output vector. By the definition of Di , production of Z in

country i directly requires (in an input-output sense) Di Z units of primary factors. We

will use this fact repeatedly.

   Stacking equations (5) and (6) yields


                                    T = (I − B) Q − C.                                     (8)


To fix ideas, consider momentarily the case of only 2 countries. The direct requirements

of primary factors needed to produce country 1’s exports to country 2 (i.e., to produce

X1 ) are D1 X1 . The direct requirements of primary factors needed to produce country 1’s

imports from country 2 (i.e., to produce M12 ) are D2 M12 . Recalling that Ti is the ith
                                              7
column of T , the direct requirements of primary factors needed to produce T1 are thus

D1 X1 − D2 M12 = [D1 D2 ]T1 = DT1 . Generalizing to many countries, DTi is the direct

factor requirements needed to produce Ti .

       Production of Ti also requires intermediate inputs. These inputs themselves require

primary factors. Returning to the 2-country case, production of X1 uses domestic in-

termediate inputs B11 X1 and imported intermediate inputs B21 X1 .2 Production of M12

requires B12 M12 units of intermediate inputs produced in country 1 and B22 M12 units of

intermediate inputs produced in country 2. These intermediate input requirements may

be summarized as
                                                                    
                   B11 X1 − B12 M12   B11 B12   X1 
                                    =                = BT1 .
                    B21 X1 − B22 M12     B21 B22    −M12


Generalizing to many countries, BTi is the intermediate inputs needed to produce Ti . But

these BTi intermediate inputs must themselves be produced. Repeating the same logic

with BTi replacing Ti , the intermediate inputs needed to produce BTi are B(BTi ) = B 2 Ti .

Either by repeating the argument ad infinitum or by applying induction, the total amount

of intermediate inputs needed to produce Ti must be (Σ∞    n
                                                      n=1 B )Ti . Further, the primary

factors needed to produce these intermediates are D(Σ∞    n
                                                     n=1 B )Ti .

       The sum of these indirect factor requirements plus the direct requirements DTi is

D(Σ∞    n              ∞    n           −1         −1
   n=0 B )Ti . Since (Σn=0 B ) = (I − B) , D(I − B) Ti is the total (direct plus

indirect) factor requirements needed to produce Ti .             ¥

   2
   These expressions are just the right-hand side of equation (3) with j = 1, i = 1, 2 and Qj replaced
by X1 .




                                                  8
4. Sufficiency

We next turn to the question of which models imply the Vanek prediction Fi = Vi − si Vw .

In this section we show that models which imply a familiar ‘consumption similarity’

condition imply the Vanek prediction. This is a generalization of a key result in Helpman

and Krugman (1985).3

      Lemma 1 establishes the relationship between the Vanek prediction and consumption

patterns. It is useful to partition A as A = [A1 A2 · · · AN ].


Lemma 1. Fi = (Vi − si Vw ) − Σj Aj (Cij − si Cwj ) ∀i.


All remaining proofs appear in appendices. Lemma 1 states that the definitions in equa-

tions (1)-(6) are all that is needed to show that the Vanek prediction is always wrong by an

amount Σj Aj (Cij − si Cwj ). This is an assumption-free result. An immediate consequence

of lemma 1 is the following.


Theorem 2. (Sufficiency): Cij = si Cwj ∀ i and j =⇒ Fi = Vi − si Vw ∀ i.


In the next section we will show the converse, but this is much harder to show.

      Cij = si Cwj for all i and j defines ‘consumption similarity’ in a way that makes the

Vanek prediction hold even though choice of techniques vary across countries. Introduc-

ing g subscripts to denote elements of Cij and Cwj , consumption similarity states that

Cgij /Cgwj = si for all g, i, and j. This means that country i consumes a fixed proportion

si of the final goods produced by all other countries. This appears in models with taste

for variety or ideal varieties (e.g., Helpman and Krugman, 1985).

      If there is production specialization so that only one country produces the good then

consumption similarity reduces to the usual Heckscher-Ohlin consumption similarity con-

  3
   In the Trefler (1999) interview of Helpman, Helpman states that a key finding of Helpman and
Krugman (1985) is that the Vanek prediction appears in many of the models considered in that book.


                                                9
dition, namely, Σj Cij = si Σj Cwj .4 Production specialization is associated with scale

returns (Helpman and Krugman, 1985), failure of factor price equalization (Deardorff,

1979) or both (Markusen and Venables, 1998).

       In North-South models, choice of techniques differ across regions N and S, but are the

same within regions. In this case, Ai = AS for all Southern countries and Ai = AN for all

Northern countries. Then Σj Aj (Cij − si Cwj ) = AS Σj∈S (Cij − si Cwj )+AN Σj∈N (Cij − si Cwj ).

Thus, theorem 2 (and its converse below) hold with Cij = si Cwj for all j replaced by

Σj∈R Cij = si Σj∈R Cwj for R = N, S. In the extreme where all countries share a common

choice of technique, theorem 2 and its converse hold with Cij = si Cwj for all j replaced by

the usual Heckscher-Ohlin condition Σj Cij = si Σj Cwj ∀ i. That is, location of production

plays no role.

       Note that Cij = si Cwj looks like the gravity equation. In the absence of intermediate

inputs, Cij = si Cwj becomes Mij = si Qj . This is exactly the equation estimated by

Harrigan (1996). Specifically, he estimated ln Mij = α + β ln si Qj for 28 ISIC industries
                               b = 1.20 and R2 = 0.66. The equation has since been
in 22 OECD countries and found β

estimated by many other researchers.

       Finally, what models do not imply Cij = si Cwj ? There are three possibilities. The

first is models with international differences in preferences. The second is models with

income effects associated with non-homotheticities e.g., Hunter and Markusen (1988).

This occurs when richer countries spend disproportionately more on certain types of

goods such as health or better-quality goods. The third possibility is that consumers

in different countries face different product prices. If consumers face different prices,

they will not make choices consistent with Cij = si Cwj . Tariffs and transportation costs

are one source of international differences in product prices. Product price differences

also appear in Balassa-Samuelson models where non-traded consumption goods such as

   4
     If j ∗ is the only country that produces g, then Σj Cgij = Cgij ∗ and Σj Cgwj = Cgwj ∗ so that Cgij ∗ =
si Cgwj ∗ becomes Σj Cgij = si Σj Cgwj .

                                                    10
haircuts are cheaper in poor countries. Thus, non-tradeable final goods pose a serious

challenge to the Vanek prediction. Summarizing, preference differences, income effects

and price differences all lead to models with Cij 6= si Cwj .



5. Necessity

We have shown that consumption similarity implies the Vanek prediction. Does the Vanek

prediction imply consumption similarity? The answer is ‘almost’ in the following sense:

if a model does not imply consumption similarity, then it does not imply the Vanek

prediction except for very special and empirically uninteresting forms of international

technology differences. Proving this without any assumptions about the form of product

market competition and with few assumptions on technology is difficult so we break the

problem down into three pieces. The reader who is not interested in the details should

jump straight to section 5.3 or even to theorem 3.


5.1. Technology Primitives π and Factor Market Equilibrium

We assume the following.


Assumption 1. (i) Factor markets are perfectly competitive: factors are mobile across

firms within a country and firms are price takers in factor markets. (ii) There is no

joint production. (iii) Cost functions are differentiable. (iv) All factor prices are strictly

positive.


Part (iv) is for notational convenience.

   Let qk be the amount of good g that firm k produces in country i. The cost of producing

qk is ck (ωi , qk ) where ωi is a vector of factor prices. Let π be the underlying technology

that generates the cost functions {ck }∀k . We will write ck (ωi , qk |π) as a function of π



                                              11
in order to indicate that ck is generated by π.5 Under assumption 1, a firm’s vector of

cost-minimizing average factor inputs is given by

                                             µ        ¶
                                                 1        ∂ck (ωi , qk |π)
                                      dk ≡                                                             (9)
                                                 qk            ∂ωi


for qk > 0 and dk ≡ 0 for qk = 0.

       The dk are the firm-level factor demands that aggregate up to the national-level factor

demands Di . (For a formal statement of this, see appendix equation 25.) Assumption 1

together with equations (4) and (9) describe competitive factor markets with exogenous

factor supplies Vi .6


5.2. Product Market Equilibrium Outcomes

We next turn to the problem of characterizing product market equilibrium outcomes

without fully specifying the equilibrium concept. To this end, consider an economy with

the following features. (i) Consumers maximize utilities. (ii) Producers maximize profits

in a way that is consistent with equation (9). (iii) Factor markets clear according to

equation (4).

       The exogenous parameters of the economy are technology π, preferences, and en-

dowments Vi . The endogenous variables include d ≡ {dk }∀k , D ≡ (D1 , . . . , DN ) , ω ≡

(ω1 , . . . , ωN ) , and E ≡ {pk , qk , si , Cij , Cwj , Yij , Qi , B}∀i,j,k (where pk is the price of firm

k’s product). E collects all the endogenous variables explicitly referred to below that

relate to the markets for final goods and intermediate inputs. These endogenous variables

are all functions of π.

   5
     If this is too abstract, think about a world with Cobb-Douglas production functions in which αf gi is
the exponent on factor input f in the production of good g in country i. Then π collects all the αf gi .
   6
     It turns out that the competitive factor markets assumption is not necessary. All we need is an
equation like equation (9) that makes dk a function of π. It does not actually matter much what the
function looks like. For expositional clarity we stick with the competitive factor markets assumption.




                                                      12
5.3. Economically Insignificant Perturbations of Technology

We turn last to defining what a robust Vanek prediction means. Pick an arbitrary tech-

nology primitive π and let Π (π, ε) be a set of technology primitives that are ‘close’ to

π in a sense yet to be described. Suppose that the Vanek prediction holds at π i.e.,

Fi (π) = Vi − si (π) Vw . If Fi (π 0 ) = Vi − si (π 0 ) Vw for all π 0 ∈ Π (π, ε), we say that the

Vanek prediction is robust. Our aim is to show that if the Vanek prediction is robust

then consumption similarity holds. We are only interested in robust Vanek predictions.

We are not interested in a Vanek prediction that pops up only for very special values of

π.

         The smaller is the set Π (π, ε), the weaker is the requirement of robustness and hence

the stronger is our theorem. We thus define Π (π, ε) narrowly.7

Definition 1. Π (π, ε) is the set of perturbations π 0 satisfying the following: (1) ||D (π 0 )−

D (π) || < ε where || · || is the Euclidean norm. That is, the perturbation alters industry-

level factor demands by an infinitesimal amount.                       (2) The perturbation does not alter

any equilibrium outcomes in the markets for final goods and intermediate inputs. (3) The

perturbation does not alter the economy-wide demand for factors. (4) The perturbation

does not alter factor prices. (5) The perturbation does not alter industry-level factor

payments.

Clearly, perturbations of technology that are confined to Π (π, ε) affect almost nothing in

the economy. In this sense Π is small and robustness is a weak requirement.8

         Theorem 3 is roughly the converse of theorem 2 and is a key result of this paper.

Theorem 3. (Necessity): Under Assumption 1,

     7
      For those readers in need of a more formal statement of definition 1, Π (π, ε) is the set of π 0 satisfying
the following: (1 ) ||D (π 0 ) − D (π) || < ε. (2 ) E (π 0 ) = E (π). (3 ) Di (π 0 ) Qi (π 0 ) = Vi ∀i. (4 ) ωi (π 0 ) =
ωi (π) ∀i. (5 ) ωi (π 0 ) Di (π 0 ) = ωi (π) Di (π) ∀i.
    8
      Of course, we do not want Π (π, ε) to be so small that it contains only a single point i.e., π. Appendix
lemma 3 shows that this is not a concern. The lemma also characterizes Π (π, ε) in terms of the set of
D (π 0 ) it generates.

                                                          13
       {Fi (π 0 ) = Vi − si (π 0 ) Vw }N            0
                                       i=1 for all π in Π (π, ε) =⇒ Cij (π) = si (π) Cwj (π) ∀ i

and j.


Theorem 3 states that if the Vanek prediction is robust to inconsequential perturbations

of the underlying technology, then consumption must be similar across countries.

       Π (π, ε) plays a central role so that the reader should ask whether it captures the

‘right’ set of perturbations. Π (π, ε) only includes perturbations that have no impact on

(i) economy-wide factor prices or (ii) any equilibrium outcome in the markets for final

goods or intermediate inputs. It is thus safe to say that Π (π, ε) is not too large. Further,

it is logically impossible for Π (π, ε) to be too small: For suppose we expand Π by replacing

it with a set Π∗ that contains Π. If theorem 3 holds on Π, then it must also hold on Π∗ .9

That is, Π (π, ε) cannot be too small.

       This concludes our discussion of the necessary and sufficient conditions for a robust

Vanek prediction. Deardorff (1979), Ethier (1982) and Helpman and Krugman (1985)

showed us that many models imply the Vanek prediction. Our paper shows that the

consumption similarity condition completely characterizes the set of models implying a

robust Vanek prediction.



6. Empirical Counterpart of Fi

The factor content of trade Fi is a function of B. Unfortunately, data for B do not exist.

To see this, recall that Bji (g, h) Qi (h) is the amount of input g used to produce h where

g is made in country j and h is made in country i. For j 6= i, Bji (g, h) Qi (h) is an

import of intermediate inputs. A firm that produces h will know how much g it needs.

However, it will often not know which country produced g because g was bought from a

   9                                             N                                               N
    Since Π∗ ⊃ Π, {Fi (π 0 ) = Vi − si (π 0 ) Vw }i=1 on Π∗ implies {Fi (π 0 ) = Vi − si (π 0 ) Vw }i=1 on Π which,
by theorem 3, implies Ci (π) = si (π) Cw (π) ∀i. Hence, theorem 3 with Π implies a modified theorem 3
with Π∗ replacing Π.


                                                        14
local distributor (Hummels and Hillberry, 2003). For example, an Atlanta construction

firm will not know if the pine 2 × 4s it bought were produced in the state of Washington

or the province of British Columbia. Of course, some firms like General Motors will know

exactly where each part is sourced. However, statistical agencies do not ask sourcing

questions even of these firms because the reporting requirements are too onerous. There

are exceptions − for example, Brazil reports data on imported machinery (Muendler,

2004) − but these exceptions prove the rule. To summarize using matrix notation (and

working with inputs per unit of output), national statistical agencies report



                                             B i ≡ Σj Bji .

They do not report the Bji .10

       What may puzzle the reader is that secondary disseminators of input-output tables,

such as the OECD and GTAP, claim to know whether intermediate inputs are imported or

produced locally. Correspondingly, they report input-output tables separately for locally

produced intermediates (Bii ) and for imported intermediates (Σj6=i Bji ). How can this be?

The answer is that they impute the data using the ‘proportionality’ assumption. To quote

from the OECD:



         “This technique assumes that an industry uses an import of a particular prod-
         uct in proportion to its total use of that product. For example if an industry
         such as motor vehicles uses steel in its production processes and 10 per cent
         of all steel is imported, it is assumed that 10 per cent of the steel used by the
         motor vehicle industry is imported.” (Organisation for Economic Co-operation
         and Development, 2002, page 12)

       To formalize this, let Qi (g), Xi (g), Mij (g), and Mi (g) be the gth elements of the vectors

Qi , Xi , Mij , and Σj6=i Mij , respectively. For good g, Qi (g) + Mi (g) − Xi (g) is domestic

  10
    Note that the Bji cannot be recovered from import data on intermediate inputs. Bji identifies not
only which input is imported, but also which domestic industry purchases the input. Restated, the G × G
matrix Bji cannot be backed out of the G × 1 vector Mij of country i’s imports from country j.

                                                  15
absorption i.e., the amount of g used by country i for both intermediate use and final

consumption. Define


                                                 Mij (g)
                             θij (g) ≡                                   for j 6= i.                (10)
                                         Qi (g) + Mi (g) − Xi (g)


θij (g) is the share of domestic absorption that is sourced from country j. Also define


                                           θii (g) ≡ 1 − Σj6=i θij (g)                              (11)


which is the share of domestic absorption that is sourced locally. Finally, let Bji (g, h)

and B i (g, h) be elements of Bji and B i ≡ Σj Bji , respectively. Then the proportionality

assumption is


                 Σj6=i Bji (g, h) = B i (g, h)Σj6=i θij (g)       (imported intermediates)

                      Bii (g, h) = B i (g, h)θii (g)              (local intermediates)             (12)


          This is how the OECD and GTAP break out domestic and foreign purchases. It is

one of the assumptions that allows Hummels et al. (2001) and Yi (2003) to estimate the

growth in world trade in intermediate inputs and in inputs used in vertical production

networks. (See equations 2-3 in Hummels et al..) It is also the assumption used by

Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1999) to develop their broad measure of outsourcing.11

          An obvious and simple extension of the proportionality assumption in equation (12)

is

                              Bji (g, h) = B i (g, h)θij (g)     for all i and j.                   (13)

Equation (13) allows one to recover the B matrix from available data in a way that is

     11
     Feenstra and Hanson care about outsourcing, but not about which intermediates g are outsourced.
They thus sum equation (12) over intermediates g to obtain Σg B i (g, h)Σj6=i θij (g). This multiplied by
Qi (h) is their measure of outsourcing.

                                                       16
consistent with the efforts of Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1999), Hummels et al. (2001)

and Yi (2003). In the empirical section below, we will use equation (13) to calculate B.



7. Previous Definitions of the Factor Content of Trade

In the literature on the Vanek prediction with international technology differences and

traded intermediates we count at least five different and mutually incompatible definitions

of the factor content of trade. Here we reconsider this literature in light of our new

definition of the factor content of trade. In reviewing the literature, it is best to have

a narrative or story line. In our view, this narrative has been the on-going challenge

to come up with a definition of the factor content of trade that satisfies three criteria:

(1 ) the definition holds without undue restrictions on the form of international choice-of-

technique differences, (2 ) the definition makes sense independently of whether the Vanek

prediction holds, and (3 ) the definition is correct.

   We begin by defining

                                     Ai ≡ Di (I − B i )−1

where, as before, B i ≡ Σj Bji is the standard national input-output table i.e., the input

requirements summed over both national and international sources of supply. All previous

work on the Vanek prediction has used Ai rather than our A.

   Trefler (1993) assumes that choice-of-technique differences take the form B i = B U S

and Di = Λ−1
          i DU S where Λi is a diagonal matrix whose typical diagonal element gives the

productivity of factor f in country i relative to the United States. Under Trefler’s assump-

tion, the full employment condition Di Qi = Vi can be re-written as DU S Qi = Vi∗ where

Vi∗ ≡ Λi Vi is country i’s endowments measured in productivity-equivalent units. This

transforms the model into the standard Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek model with internation-

ally identical choice of techniques, but with factors measured in productivity-equivalent

units. In particular, the Vanek prediction becomes AU S (Xi − Mi ) = Vi∗ − si Σj Vj∗ where
                                             17
AU S (Xi − Mi ) is the factor content of trade measured in productivity-equivalent units.

Variants of this approach are used by Trefler (1995, hypothesis T1), Davis and Weinstein

(2001, hypothesis T3), Conway (2002), and Debaere (2003). This approach satisfies our

second and third criteria above, but not our first.

       When choice of techniques are allowed to differ internationally in more general ways,

coming up with a sensible definition of the factor content of trade has proved far more

difficult. For example, Davis et al. (1997) is a major contribution that improves on Trefler

(1993) by relaxing all restrictions on the form of the international choice-of-technique

differences. Absent such restrictions however, it is clear that their dependent variable

AJAP AN (Xi −Mi ) is not the factor content of trade. After all, it evaluates goods produced

in country i using Japan’s choice of techniques.12 Likewise for Hakura (2001) who moves

from using a single country’s input-output table to using the input-output tables of 4

OECD countries. Contrary to what Hakura claims, her dependent variable Ai (Xi −

Mi ) is not the factor content of trade: Ai (Xi − Mi ) evaluates the factor content of i’s

imports using i’s choice of techniques rather than using the producing country’s choice of

techniques.

       For the case of general international choice-of-technique differences, only two serious

definitions of the factor content of trade have been proposed. The Davis and Weinstein

(2000, 2001, hypotheses T4-T7) definition makes sense independently of whether the

Vanek prediction holds (criterion 2). Unfortunately, the definition is wrong (criterion

3). In contrast, Antweiler and Trefler (2002), Trefler and Zhu (2000) and a much earlier

version of this paper proposed a definition that is correct. Unfortunately, the definition

has no meaning when the Vanek prediction fails. This will require some explanation.

       Davis and Weinstein (2001), in their core hypothesis T4, define the factor content of

  12
    This statement should not be misunderstood to mean that the equations estimated by Davis et al.
(1997) contain mathematical errors. The equations are correct. It is the interpretation of the dependent
variable that we are questioning. This caveat applies to all the papers reviewed below.


                                                  18
trade as13

                                      FiDW ≡ Ai Xi − Σj6=i Aj Mij .

This definition first appeared in Helpman and Krugman (1985, equation 1.11) and is very

intuitive in the sense that it appears to evaluate the output of country j using country

j’s choice of techniques. That is, it evaluates Mij using Aj . Further, the definition looks

a lot like our Fi . To see this, partition our A as [A1 A2 · · · AN ]. Then Fi can be written

as

                                       Fi = Ai Xi − Σj6=i Aj Mij .

It follows that FiDW = Fi when Ai = Ai . Restated, FiDW is the factor content of trade

when Ai = Ai . When is Ai = Ai ? Without additional restrictions on B, a necessary and

sufficient condition for Ai = Ai is Bji = 0 for all j 6= i.14

     Bji = 0 means that country i does not import any intermediate inputs from country j.

Thus, without additional restrictions on B, FiDW is the factor content of trade only when

there is no trade in intermediate inputs. Clearly, this is an uncomfortable assumption in

   13
      Their definition is actually more complicated, but these complications only obscure our main point
without altering it. In particular, see Davis and Weinstein (2001, page 1425–26) and their hypotheses
T5, T6, and T7.
   14
      To see this, first consider the case of 2 countries. To keep the expression for F1 manageable we assume
that intermediate inputs flow only in one direction, from country 2 to country 1, so that B21 = 0. Then
it is straightforward to show that our equation (7) definition of the factor content of trade reduces to
                                                                                           −1
           F1 = D1 (I − B11 )−1 X1 − D2 (I − B22 )−1 M12 − D1 (I − B11 )−1 B12 (I − B22 )       M12

while Davis and Weinstein’s definition reduces to

                FiDW = A1 X1 − A2 M12 = D1 (I − B11 )−1 X1 − D2 (I − B22 − B12 )−1 M12 .

Clearly, these definitions are equivalent only in the special case where there is no intermediate trade i.e.,
where B12 = 0.
   More generally, consider the definitions of Ai and A as well as the definition of B at the start of section
3. Then Ai = Ai when (I − B)−1 is a block diagonal matrix with typical diagonal matrix (I − B i )−1 .
Without further restrictions on B , a necessary and sufficient condition for this block-diagonality is that
the off-diagonal elements of B equal 0 i.e., Bji = 0 for all j 6= i. To see this, note that Bji = 0 for all
j 6= i implies two things. First, (I − B)−1 is block diagonal with typical diagonal element (I − Bii )−1 .
Second, B i ≡ Σj Bji = Bii . Hence, (I − B)−1 is block diagonal with typical diagonal element (I − B i )−1 ,
as required.



                                                     19
light of the enormous interest in global vertical production networks e.g., Feenstra and

Hanson (1996, 1999), Hummels et al. (2001) and Yi (2003).

   What is wrong with the Davis and Weinstein definition? The problem is that Ai shares

with B i a failure to distinguish intermediate inputs that are produced domestically from

intermediate inputs that are produced abroad. Ai can therefore not be used in any simple

way to evaluate the factor content of trade.

   Antweiler and Trefler (2002), Trefler and Zhu (2000) and a much earlier version of this

paper get around this problem, but at a cost. They define the factor content of trade as


             FiT ≡ Ai Xic − Σj6=i Aj Mijc + Ai (Xiy − Miy ) − si Σj Aj (Xjy − Mjy )


where Xic is i’s exports of consumption goods, Mijc is i’s imports of consumption goods

produced in country j, Xiy is i’s exports of intermediate inputs, and Miy is i’s imports

of intermediate inputs. These authors show that under consumption similarity, FiT =

Vi − si Vw . But under consumption similarity, Fi = Vi − si Vw . Hence, FiT = Fi . That is,

under consumption similarity, FiT is the factor content of trade.

   This places the literature at an impasse. FiDW is a factor content definition that

makes sense independently of whether the Vanek prediction holds (criterion 2), but it

is wrong (criterion 3). In contrast, FiT is a definition that is correct, but only when the

Vanek prediction holds. One contribution of this paper is that it provides a factor content

definition Fi that moves the discipline beyond this impasse. Fi is both correct and makes

sense independently of whether the Vanek prediction holds. Fi thus satisfies all 3 criteria.

   We are heavily indebted to Davis and Weinstein for discussing (and arguing!) these

points with us. Indeed, we are doubly grateful to them. We had implicitly adopted an

approach that placed our criterion 3 above their criterion 2. We now understand that both

criteria are important. Without their input we would have continued to self-righteously

use FiT rather than Fi and this paper would only have contributed further to the confusion

                                              20
in this literature.15   16


       This completes our review of what has proven to be a very confused literature. This

should both clarify past research and point the way to improved future research.



8. New Empirical Work

8.1. Testing the Vanek Prediction

In this section we assess the Vanek prediction Fi = Vi − si Vw . Let Ff i , Vf i , and Vf w

be elements of the vectors Fi , Vi , and Vw , respectively. The Vanek prediction is then

Ff i = Vf i − si Vf w . We exploit the GTAP (version 5) dataset that contains 1997 input-

output tables for 41 developed and developing countries.17 The data set is documented

in Dimaranan and McDougall (2002). We use these data together with equation (13) to

compute the world B matrix. We construct D ourselves as described in appendix B. The

dataset includes 3 factors: physical capital, labour, and human capital (measured as the

number of grade-12 equivalent workers). Data are for 1997 whenever possible. Appendix

B provides more details about the data.

       In order to express factors in comparable units, we follow Antweiler and Trefler (2002)

in scaling observation (f, i) of Ff i = Vf i − si Vf w by a scalar σf i in order to ensure that

  15
     In addition, we owe an apology to Feenstra (2004, page 55) who takes the Davis and Weinstein logic
an extra step by arguing that one cannot test the model using FiT and therefore one must follow Davis
and Weinstein in estimating the Ai before plugging them into FiT . This argument is not relevant when
one uses Fi because it is the factor content of trade both under the Vanek null and under the alternative
that the Vanek prediction is wrong.
  16
     Davis and Weinstein (2003) claim that FiT is wrong (‘tautological’) and make a number of other
misrepresentations about FiT . We take these licks as just desserts for having misrepresented their work
in Trefler and Zhu (2000). However, it is important for the reader to understand that the Antweiler and
Trefler (2002) results based on FiT are correct. The fact that FiT is not the factor content of trade when
the maintained assumption of consumption similarity is relaxed is irrelevant to Antweiler and Trefler:
they never relax the assumption. Their null hypothesis is consumption similarity plus constant returns
to scale and their alternative hypothesis is consumption similarity plus increasing returns to scale.
  17
     The 41 countries (ranked by per capita GDP in 1996) are the United States, Hong Kong, Singapore,
Switzerland, Denmark, Japan, Canada, Austria, the Netherlands, Australia, Germany, Belgium, Sweden,
Italy, France, the United Kingdom, Finland, Ireland, New Zealand, Taiwan, Spain, South Korea, Portugal,
Greece, Argentina, Uruguay, Malaysia, Chile, Hungary, Poland, Mexico, Thailand, Venezuela, Brazil,
Turkey, Colombia, Peru, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, the Philippines, and China.

                                                   21
                                                    Full Sample                                   Trimmed
                                                                                                   Sample
                           Fi ≡ ATi          AU S (Xi − Mi )         ACHIN A (Xi − Mi )           Fi ≡ ATi
                              (1)                  (2)                      (3)                      (4)

   1. Spearman                 .63                  .15                       .19                     .62
       Correlation            (.00)                (.09)                      (.03)                  (.00)

   2. Sign Statistic           .80                  .50                       .54                     .80
                              (.00)                (.50)                      (.24)                  (.00)

   3. Missing Trade            .13                  .01                       .42                     .19
       Statistic
   4. Slope (β)                .21                  .02                       .21                     .23
                              (.00)                (.00)                      (.00)                  (.00)

   5. R2                       .34                  .07                       .11                     .28

   Observations                123                 123                        123                     109
  Notes: Row 1 is the Spearman correlation between Ff i and Vf i − si Vf w . Row 2 is the percentage
  of observations for which Ff i and Vf i − si Vf w have the same sign. Row 3 is the variance of Ff i
  divided by the variance of Vf i − si Vf w . Rows 4-5 are the slope and R2 from the regression Ff i =
  α + β(Vf i − si Vf w ) + εf i . In columns 1 and 4, the correct (equation 7) definition of the factor content
  of trade is used. In column 2 (3), factor contents are calculated assuming that all countries use U.S.
  (Chinese) choice of techniques. The full sample contains 41 countries and 3 factors. The trimmed
  sample excludes the 14 observations with |Vf i − si Vf w | > 0.25. p-values are in parentheses. Low
  p-values indicate statistical significance. In row 4, the p-value is for the hypothesis β = 1.


                            Table 1: The Vanek Prediction, All Factors

the residual (Ff i − Vf i + si Vf w )/σf i has a unit variance.18

       Table 1 reports some standard statistics about the performance of the Vanek predic-

tion. Columns 1, 2 and 3 each uses a different definition of the factor content of trade.

Column 1 uses the correct definition of equation (7) i.e., Fi = ATi . Columns 2-3 assume

that choice of techniques are internationally identical. In column 2, all countries use U.S.

techniques and the factor content of trade for country i is defined as in the older literature

  18
    We use σf i ≡ sµi σf where σf2 is the cross-country variance of (Ff i − Vf i + si Vf w )/sµi and µ = 0.9 is
the Antweiler and Trefler maximum likelihood estimate of µ. Almost identical results obtain with the
more usual µ = 0.5. To the extent that most of our results are reported by factor, σf is a constant that
plays no role.


                                                       22
as AU S (Xi − Mi ). In column 3, ACHIN A (Xi − Mi ) is used.

       Row 1 shows the Spearman (or rank) correlation between Ff i and Vf i − si Vf w . There

are 123 observations (41 countries × 3 factors). The 0.63 correlation that holds when the

factor content of trade is defined correctly is a dramatic improvement over the correlations

of 0.15 and 0.19 that obtain using the incorrect U.S.- and China-based definitions of the

factor content of trade.

       Row 2 is the percentage of observations for which Ff i has the same sign as Vf i − si Vf w .

Using incorrect definitions of the factor content of trade (columns 2-3), the sign statistics

are about 0.50, just as in Trefler (1995). Trefler concluded from this that the model

performs about as well as a coin toss. Using the correct definition of the factor content of

trade, 80% of the observations have the correct sign. In addition, the p-value of the sign

test is less than 0.01 which means that the probability of Ff i and Vf i − si Vf w randomly

having the same sign more than 80% of the time is less than 1%.

       Row 3 reports Trefler’s (1995) ‘missing trade’ statistic i.e., the variance of Ff i divided

by the variance of Vf i − si Vf w . Previous research has always calculated the missing trade

statistic using the AU S (Xi − Mi ) definition of the factor content of trade that appears in

column 2. The result is a 0.01 missing trade statistic i.e., a huge amount of trade is missing

relative to its Vanek prediction. Using our definition of the factor content of trade, the

missing trade statistic rises more than tenfold to 0.13. This is still low, but represents an

order of magnitude improvement.19 The fact that the missing trade problem is alleviated

by using the correct factor content of trade definition is exactly what Helpman (1998,

1999) establishes theoretically.

       One way to partly resolve the ‘missing trade’ problem is to use Trefler’s (1993)

productivity-equivalent transformation so that Vi − si Vw is replaced by Vi∗ − si Σj Vj∗ . This

  19
     There is even less missing trade when using ACHIN A (Xi − Mi ) (column 3). This is because China
is so unproductive that using ACHIN A dramatically inflates the amount of factors needed to produce
Xi − Mi .


                                                 23
is partly why Trefler (1995) and Davis and Weinstein (2001) do not have as pronounced

problems with missing trade. However, their use of the productivity-equivalent trans-

formation disguises the impressive amount by which our missing-trade statistic improves

upon those reported in Trefler (1995) and Davis and Weinstein (2001).

   Another way of thinking about missing trade and the fit of the Vanek prediction is to

report the slope and R2 from the regression Ff i = α + β(Vf i − si Vf w ) + εf i . See Davis and

Weinstein (2001). This is reported in rows 4 and 5 and gives the same impression as rows

1 and 3.

   As we shall see shortly, there are a few outliers. In order to investigate whether the

good fit of the Vanek prediction is driven by outliers, we trimmed the sample by excluding

the 14 observations with |Vf i − si Vf w | > 0.25. Column 4 shows that trimming does not

alter the conclusions.

   We next examine the performance of the Vanek prediction by factor. Figure 2 plots

Ff i against Vf i − si Vf w by factor. The top panels are labour, the middle panels are human

capital and the bottom panels are physical capital. Further, the left-hand panels are the

full sample while the right-hand panels are the trimmed sample. Figure 2 clearly shows

that the Vanek prediction fits very well for labour and human capital, but fits very poorly

for physical capital.

   Table 2 provides additional results by factor. From row 1, the Spearman correlation

is a statistically significant 0.89 for labour and 0.85 for human capital, but a statistically

insignificant 0.18 for physical capital. From row 2, Ff i and Vf i − si Vf w have the same

sign a statistically significant 98% of the time for labour and 85% for human capital, but

a statistically insignificant 59% of the time for physical capital. Similar results obtain for

the trimmed sample.

   When we aggregate across factors, as we did in table 1, our conclusions echo those of

Davis and Weinstein (2001). However, our results differ from theirs in three important


                                              24
                                                                          Human           Physical
                                          Human          Physical         Capital          Capital
                           Labour         Capital        Capital         − Labour         − Labour
                             (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)              (5)
       1. Spearman           .89            .85            .18              .84              .80
           Correlation       (.00)          (.00)          (.27)            (.00)             (.00)

       2. Sign Statistic      .98            .85            .59              .90              .80
                             (.00)          (.00)          (.17)            (.00)             (.00)

       3. Missing Trade       .07            .09            .30             N/A              N/A
           Statistic
       4. Slope (β)           .24            .27            .08              .15              .15
                             (.00)          (.00)          (.00)            (.00)             (.00)

       5. R2                  .82            .79            .02              .56              .66

       Observations           41             41             41               41                41
   Notes: See the notes to table 1. The correct (equation 7) definition of the factor content of trade
   is used in this table. Columns 1, 2, and 3 deal with Ff i = Vf i − si Vf w . Column 4 and 5 deal with
   equations (14) and (15), respectively. p-values are in parentheses. Low p-values indicate statistical
   significance. In row 4, the p-value is for the null of β = 1.


                  Table 2: By Factors and the Differenced Vanek Prediction

ways. First, we are using data on 41 developed and developing countries whereas they used

10 OECD countries. When it comes to examining endowments-based theories of trade, the

contrast between developed and developing countries provides a crucial source of sample

variation. After all, it is precisely this developed-developing country contrast that these

theories are intended to exploit. Second, when we examine the Vanek prediction by factor

we obtain very different results than Davis and Weinstein. Their results for labour and

physical capital are similar while we obtain horrible results for physical capital.20 Third,

they use the wrong definition of the factor content of trade for their core hypotheses

T4-T7.

  20
    Note that our results barely change when we follow Davis and Weinstein in estimating choice of
techniques rather than using the actual choice of techniques. This is not an explanation of why our
conclusions differ.


                                                    25
8.2. A Different View of the Vanek Prediction

So far we have worked with a strong version of the Vanek prediction, that is, a version

that examines each factor separately. Following Debaere (2003), one can also look at the

difference across factors. Dividing Ff i = Vf i − si Vf w by si Vf w to obtain Ff i /(si Vf w ) =

Vf i /(si Vf w ) − 1 and differencing across factors yields


                                FHi    FLi      VHi    VLi
                                     −       =       −                                      (14)
                               si VHw si VLw   si VHw si VLw


and
                               FKi    FLi      VKi    VLi
                                    −       =       −       .                               (15)
                              si VKw si VLw   si VKw si VLw

   The top panel of figure 3 plots equation (14) and the bottom panel plots equation

(15). Since the Vanek prediction performs well for both labour and human capital, it is

no surprise that equation (14) fits well. The surprise is that equation (15) in the bottom

panel fits so well: although the Vanek prediction performs horribly for physical capital,

equation (15) performs wonderfully.

   Table 2 (columns 4 and 5) provide additional statistics about equations (14) and (15).

In particular, compare the fit of FKi = VKi − si VKw in column 3 to physical capital less

labour (equation 15) in column 5. Column 5 shows that the Spearman correlation is

0.80, much higher than 0.18 in column 3. Likewise, the sign statistic has risen to 0.80,

up from its column 3 value of 0.59. Note that this improved fit for physical capital has

nothing to do with scaling by si VKw . The Spearman correlation between FKi /(si VKw )

and VKi /(si VKw ) − 1 is 0.22 for physical capital. Summarizing, the Vanek prediction in

differenced form performs remarkably well.




                                                26
8.3. A Less Structured Relationship Between Trade and Endowments

Inferences such as equations (14) and (15) that are based strictly on the Vanek equation

can place blinkers on a researcher who wants to explore the data. It is of interest to

see other, less theoretically motivated data displays of the factor content of trade. One

particularly striking display involves the factor content of world exports. This is given by

                                                                      
                           X
                         FLi                                      X1 
                                                                      
                       FX       ≡ (0 · · · Di · · · 0) (I − B)−1  ...  .            (16)
                       Hi                                             
                                                                      
                         X
                        FKi                                          XN

                                                     X    X
The top panel of figure 1 in the introduction plots FHi /FLi against VHi /VLi . The Spearman

correlation is 0.84, the slope is 1.14 and the R2 statistic is 0.85. These results are very
                                              X    X
striking. The bottom panel of figure 1 plots FKi /FLi against VKi /VLi . Again the results

are very striking, with a Spearman correlation of 0.90, a slope of 1.02 and an R2 of 0.80.

   Figure 1 makes it clear that the Vanek prediction is not the only approach to think-

ing about the relationship between endowments and the factor content of trade. Less

structured approaches also offer insights.



9. Conclusions

Consumption similarity is both necessary and sufficient for a robust Vanek prediction. It

thus highlights the central assumption of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek model: excess factor

supplies must be absorbed only through trade, not domestic consumption. Integral to the

proof of necessity and sufficiency is the first appearance of a Vanek-consistent expression

for the factor content of trade in settings with intermediate inputs and international

differences in choice of techniques. Our new factor content expression is very different from

what has been implemented empirically. Indeed, we showed that a number of prominent


                                                27
empirical papers have used incorrect definitions of the factor content of trade.

   The theoretical results of this paper have both strengths and weaknesses. The con-

sumption condition allows for international differences in factor prices and technology,

imperfect competition, scale returns, and externalities. It is thus quite general. On

the other hand, the interpretation of the consumption similarity condition is couched in

terms of equilibrium quantities (Cij , si and Cwj ) rather than in terms of restrictions on

technology, preferences and endowments. This tension reflects how our necessary and suf-

ficient condition complements rather than displaces previous research such as Helpman

and Krugman (1985). Previous research starts with assumptions about unobservables

(technology and preferences) and ends with predictions about observables (the Vanek

prediction). Such research provides clearly interpretable assumptions, but an empirical

prediction that is consistent with a large class of models whose limit has until now been

unknown. In contrast, the present paper starts with the Vanek prediction, but ends with

restrictions on observables rather than technology and preferences. Thus, our theoretical

results complement previous work.

   We empirically assessed the Vanek prediction using a unique dataset that contains

input-output tables for 41 developed and developing countries. The factor content of

trade was calculated using our Vanek-consistent definition. In figure 2, we showed that

the Vanek prediction performs superbly for labour and human capital, but horribly for

physical capital. We then looked at the Vanek prediction in differenced form i.e., human

capital less labour and physical capital less labour. As shown in figure 3, this prediction

did very well for both differences. Finally, we found evidence strongly supporting a less-

structured relationship between endowments and the factor content of world exports. This

was shown in figure 1. Overall, these empirical results leave us much more impressed than

before with the role of endowments as a source of comparative advantage.




                                            28
A. Appendix: Proofs
A.1. Alternative Proof of Theorem 1
Proof. There is a more elegant proof of theorem 1 which does not rely on the computa-
tional device of treating equation (3) as a derived demand for inputs. From the perspective
of the world as a whole, Q is either used as intermediates (BQ) or final goods (C). The
difference between Q and BQ + C is interregional shipments T = (I − B) Q − C. See
equation (8). Further, by standard input-output logic, delivery of an N G × 1 vector Z of
final demand requires (I − B)−1 Z units of gross output and thus D (I − B)−1 Z units of
primary factors.21 Thus, D (I − B)−1 T is the factor content of interregional shipments.
This concludes our discussion of what Fi means.

A.2. Proof of Lemma 1
Proof. Recall that Ti is the ith column of T . Let Qi be the ith column of Q. Let
Ci be the ith column of C. From equation (8), Ti = (I − B) Qi − Ci . Using this and
A ≡ D(I − B)−1 , the definition of Fi in equation (7) implies Fi = DQi − ACi . Since
DQi = Di Qi = Vi (the second equality follows from equation 4) and A is partitioned as
[A1 A2 · · · AN ],
                                 Fi = Vi − Σj Aj Cij .                            (17)
In the next we show that Vw = Σj Aj Cwj .
    Combining equations (1)-(3) yields Qj = Cwj       + Σi Bji Qi . Stacking this result gives
                                                                     
                   Q1         Cw1          B11        · · · B1N         Q1
                  ..   ..   ..                    ..     ..   ..  .
                  . = . + .                          .    .  . 
                   QN         CwN          BN 1       · · · BN N       QN

Hence,                                              
                                 Q1                Cw1
                                ..          −1   . 
                                .  = (I − B)  ..  .                                       (18)
                                QN                 CwN
Pre-multiplying equation (18) by D ≡ [D1 D2 · · · DN ], then using equation (4) and
A = [A1 A2 · · · AN ] yields Σj Vj = Σj Aj Cwj . Since Vw ≡ Σj Vj ,

                                         Vw = Σj Aj Cwj .                                     (19)

Multiplying equation (19) by si and subtracting the result from equation (17) yields

                           Fi = (Vi − si Vw ) − Σj Aj (Cij − si Cwj ) .



  21
    How much gross output Z G is needed to deliver final output Z? Since Z G = BZ G + Z, the answer
       G      −1
is Z = (I − B) Z.

                                                29
A.3. Preliminaries to the Proof of Theorem 3
             ©                                          ª
Define R ≡ (ωi , qk ) : ωi ≥ 0, ||ωi || = 1, q ≤ qk ≤ q̄ for finite constants q > 0 and q̄. Let
K(g, i) be the set of firms producing good g in country i.

Lemma 2. Assume Assumption 1. Fix δ > 0 and k ∈ K (g, i). For each K × 1 vector
of constants d0k satisfying ωi (π) d0k = ωi (π) dk (π) , d0k > 0, and ||d0k − dk (π) || < δ, there
exists a π 0 (i.e., a ck (· |π 0 ) on R) such that

                       d0k = (1/qk (π)) ∂ck (ωi , qk (π) |π 0 ) /∂ωi        evaluated at ωi = ωi (π) (20)
       ck (ωi (π) , · |π 0 ) = ck (ωi (π) , · |π) .                                                  (21)

Proof. Define

              ck (ωi , qk |π 0 ) ≡ ck (ωi , qk |π) + ωi (d0k − dk (π)) qk (π)   ∀ (ωi , qk ) ∈ R.         (22)

We first show that since ck (· |π) is a cost function on R, so is ck (· |π 0 ). ck (· |π) and
hence ck (· |π 0 ) are differentiable (Assumption 1 (iii)), increasing in qk , concave in ωi , and
linearly homogeneous in ωi . Differentiating equation (22),

                       ∂ck (ωi , qk |π 0 )   ∂ck (ωi , qk |π)
                                           =                  + (d0k − dk (π)) qk (π) .                   (23)
                            ∂ωi                   ∂ωi
Since ck (· |π) is increasing in ωi , ∂ck (· |π) /∂ωi is bounded away from zero on the compact
set R. Since ||d0k − dk (π) || < δ one can choose δ such that the right-hand side of equation
(23) is positive. Thus, ck (· |π 0 ) is increasing in ωi . From Diewert (1982, theorem 2 and
corollary 1.1), this establishes that ck (·|π 0 ) is a cost function on R.22 Equation (20)
follows from equations (9) and (23) evaluated at (ωi (π) , qk (π)). Further, by hypothesis,
ωi (π) (d0k − dk (π)) = 0. Hence, equation (21) follows from equation (22) with ωi = ωi (π).


       We define the set of factor demand perturbations implied by Π:

             P (π, ε) ≡ {D0 : Di0 Qi (π) = Vi ∀ i, D0 > 0,
                               ωi (π) Di0 = ωi (π) Di (π) ∀ i, ||D0 − D (π) || < ε}                       (24)
                           0
where D0 ≡ (D10 , . . . , DN ) and D0 > 0 means that D0 is non-negative with at least one
positive element.
    Let Ki be the number of factors available in country i (i.e., non-zero elements of Vi )
and let Gi be the number of goods produced in country i. Lemma 3 (ii ) implies that
P (π, ε) is non-empty whenever there is at least one country positively endowed with at
least two factors (Ki > 1) and producing at least two goods (Gi > 1).

  22
    Diewert lists four other regularity conditions on ck that are easily verified. One can allow for ck (·|π 0 )
to be non-decreasing and also deal with qk = 0 (Diewert’s II(ii)) by allowing d0k to be a function on R
rather than a constant.


                                                      30
Lemma 3. Assume Assumption 1. (i) P (π, ε) = D (Π (π, ε)). (ii) P (π, ε) is a convex
set with dim (P) ≥ ΣN
                    i=1 (Ki − 1) (Gi − 1).


Proof. Recall that K(g, i) is the set of firms that produce good g in country i. Let Qgi
be the gth element of Qi and let Dgi beP  the gth column of Di . Industry g output Qgi is
the sum of firm-level outputs qk : Qgi = k∈K(g,i) qk . Industry factor demands Dgi Qgi are
the sum of firm-level factor demands dk qk :
                                           X
                                 Dgi Qgi =            dk qk .                         (25)
                                                      k∈K(g,i)

    For part (i) consider a D0 ∈ P. For each column Dgi    0
                                                             of D0 it is tedious but straight-
forward to verify the following. There exists a d0 ≡ {d0k }k∈K(g,i) satisfying the conditions
of lemma 2 and         X
                                 d0k qk (π) = Dgi
                                               0
                                                  Qgi (π) ∀ k, g and i.                   (26)
                              k∈K(g,i)
                                                  0
This equation states that the industry-level Dgi     are derivable from the firm-level d0k .23
     An outcome is a list O of all the endogenous variables. We next show that outcome
O ≡ (d0 , D0 , ω (π) , E (π)) satisfies equations (4), (9) and (25) when the equations are
   0

evaluated at (π 0 , E (π)) i.e., O0 is consistent with competitive factor market clearing.
Recall that E is a list that includes pk , qk as well as Qi and its gth element Qgi . Equation
(4) follows from D0 ∈ P and the definition of P i.e., competitive factor demand Di0 Qi (π)
equals exogenous supply Vi . Equation (9) follows from equation (20) evaluated at E (π)
i.e., d0k is cost minimizing. Equation (25) follows from equation (26).
     This result together with equation (21) imply that D0 = D (π 0 ). From the definitions of
P and Π, this establishes that if D0 ∈ P then there is a π 0 ∈ Π (π, ε) such that D0 = D (π 0 ).
Restated, P ⊆ D (π). The definitions of Π and P imply that if π 0 ∈ Π then D (π 0 ) ∈ P
i.e., D (Π) ⊆ P. This establishes P = D (Π) and part (i̇) of lemma 3.
     For part (ii) consider the equation system Di0 Qi = Vi and ωi Di0 = ωi Di ∀ i. The
unknowns {Di0 }N   i=1 have Σi Ki Gi elements that need not be zero. As shown in the proof
of lemma 5 below, this equation system has at least one linearly dependent equation per
country or at most Σi (Ki + Gi − 1) linearly independent equations. Since the solution set
is non-empty (Di0 = Di ∀i is a solution), the solution set dimension is at least Σi Ki Gi −
Σi (Ki + Gi − 1) = Σi (Ki − 1) (Gi − 1). To guarantee that P and Π are not degenerate,
we assume that there is a country that has at least two factors and produces at least two
goods.

  23
    The case where K(g, i) has only one firm and the case where every firm in K(g, i) has a dk (π) with only
one positive element must be treated separately from the general case because of P the degeneracy of one or
more of the conditions ωi (π) d0k = ωi (π) dk (π), ωi (π) Dgi
                                                           0
                                                              = ωi (π) Dgi (π), and k∈K(g,i) dk (π) qk (π) =
Dgi (π) Qgi (π).




                                                    31
A.4. Proof of Theorem 3
Define                                          
                                Ci1            Cw1
                                                
                         Ci ≡  ...  , Cw ≡  ...  = Σi Ci .
                                CiN            CwN
Then Σj Aj (Cij − si Cwj ) of lemma 1 can be written more compactly as A (Ci − si Cw ).
By lemma 1 and A ≡ D (I − B)−1 , if the Vanek prediction holds for D0 then

                             D0 (I − B)−1 (Ci − si Cw ) = 0 ∀i.                          (27)

In the next we show that if the Vanek prediction holds for all D0 in P (π, ε), then equation
(27) implies Cij = si Cwj for all i and j.
    The definitions of Π (π, ε) and E imply that ωi , Qi , Di , B, si , and Cij − si Cwj are
constant on Π. We therefore treat them as fixed parameters. D0 = (D10 , ..., DN 0
                                                                                  ) ∈ P (π, ε)
implies

                                     Di0 Qi = Vi ∀i                                      (28)
                                     ωi Di0 = ωi Di ∀i.                                  (29)

Let Lij be a G × G matrix that satisfies
                                                           
                                            L11 · · · L1N
                                                       ..  .
                            (I − B)−1   =  ...   ..
                                                     .   .                              (30)
                                            LN 1 · · · LN N

From equation (27),          £                                  ¤
                           Σj Dj0 Σj 0 Ljj 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 ) = 0 ∀i.                 (31)
Equations (28), (29) and (31) are all linear in the K × G matrices Di0 . Let x0 ≡ vec (D0 )
be an KGN × 1 vector formed from the elements of D0 . Then equations (28), (29) and
(31) can be represented in terms of x0 :

               Ψx0 = ψ   where Ψ is KN × KGN and ψ is KN × 1,                            (32)
                 0
               Φx = φ   where Φ is GN × KGN and φ is GN × 1,                             (33)
                 0
               Γx = 0KN where Γ is KN × KGN ,                                            (34)

and 0KN is an KN × 1 vector of zeros. Define
                                     
                    Ψ                ψ         ·   ¸           ·   ¸
                                             Ψ               ψ
            M Γ ≡ Φ , mΓ ≡           φ     ,M≡       , and m ≡
                                                 Φ               φ
                    Γ              0KN

so that equations (32)-(33) become Mx0 = m and equations (32)-(34) become MΓ x0 =
mΓ .


                                                32
Lemma 4. {Fi (π 0 ) = Vi − si Vw }N            0
                                  i=1 for all π in Π (π, ε) =⇒ rank (MΓ ) ≤ KN +GN −N.

Proof. By lemma 3 (i), {Fi (π 0 ) = Vi − si Vw }N                    0
                                                      i=1 for all π in Π (π, ε) if and only if
                        N
{Fi (D0 ) = Vi − si Vw }i=1 for all D0 in P (π, ε) where Fi (·) indicates how Fi depends on D0
via equation (7) and A ≡ D (I − B)−1 . If D0 is in P then D0 solves equations (28)-(29) or
equivalently, x0 ≡ vec (D0 ) solves Mx0 = m. If in addition {Fi (D0 ) = Vi −si Vw }Ni=1 then by
lemma 1, D solves equation (31) and x solves Γx = 0KN . Thus {Fi (D ) = Vi − si Vw }N
             0                              0         0                      0
                                                                                            i=1
for all D0 in P implies that all solutions x0 of Mx0 = m also solve MΓ x0 = mΓ . It follows
that rank (MΓ ) = rank (M).
    Consider the equations underlying M. Equation (29) implies ωi Di0 Qi = ωi Di Qi ∀i.
From equation (4), ωi Di0 Qi = ωi Vi for i = 1, ..., N . But this is also implied by pre-
multiplying equation (28) by ωi . Hence there are at least N linearly dependent rows
in M. Since M is (KN + GN ) × KGN , rank (M) ≤ min (KN + GN − N, KGN ) ≤
KN + GN − N . Hence rank (MΓ ) ≤ KN + GN − N .

   Let Qgi , ωf i , and Df0 gi be typical elements of Qi , ωi , and Di0 , respectively. Let Lgij be
the gth row of the G × G matrix Lij . Define

                                   γgij ≡ Σj 0 Lgjj 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 ) .                              (35)

Then equation (31) can be rewritten as Σj Σg Df0 gj γgij = 0 ∀f and i. Equivalently,
Σi Σg Df0 gi γgji = 0 ∀f and j. Since each country j produces at least one good, for each j
there is a good h(j) such that Qh(j),j > 0.
Lemma 5. rank (MΓ ) ≤ KN           £ + GN − N =⇒                        ¤
  Σj 0 Lgjj 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 ) − Σj 0 Lh(j),j,j 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 ) Qgj /Qh(j),j = 0 ∀g, i and j.
Proof. Since rank (MΓ ) ≤ KN +GN −N, every KN +GN −N +1 square sub-matrix of
MΓ has a zero determinant. Figure 4 illustrates one such sub-matrix that is particularly
useful. It is partitioned into 9 blocks. The three top blocks correspond to the KN
equations grouped in equation (28) or (32) which in non-matrix form is Σg Df0 gi Qgi = Vf i
∀f and i. Thus, the element in row (f 0 , i0 ) and column (f, g, i) is the coefficient on Df0 gi
in the (f 0 , i0 )-th equation. If (f 0 , i0 ) 6= (f, i) the coefficient is zero. The three blocks
in the middle row correspond to a (G − 1) N subset of the GN equations grouped in
equation (29) or (33) which in non-matrix form is Σf ωf i Df0 gi = Σf ωf i Df gi ∀g and i.
Thus, the element in row (g 0 , i0 ) and column (f, g, i) is the coefficient on Df0 gi in the
(g 0 , i0 )-th equation. If (g 0 , i0 ) 6= (g, i) the coefficient is zero. The three blocks in the
bottom row correspond to one of the KN equations grouped in equation (31) or (34)
which in non-matrix form is Σi Σg Df0 gi γgji = 0 ∀f and j. In the figure, f > 1.
      Using obvious notation, the partitioned matrix in figure 4 can be rewritten as
                                                                  
                                                   Ψ1 Ψ2 Ψf gi
                         H (f, j; f, g, i) ≡  01 Φ2 Φf gi  for f > 1.
                                                   Γf j 02 γgji

Note from figure 4 that g only appears in conjunction with country indices, that is, in (g, i)
pairs. Thus without loss of generality, let each country have its own goods index. Choose
                                                     33
these so that h(j) = 1 ∀j. (h(j) was defined prior to lemma 5.) Then Q1j > 0 ∀j and Ψ1
is invertible. By Assumption 1 (iv), Φ2 is invertible. Since H is an KN + GN − N + 1
sub-matrix of MΓ , H has a zero determinant. Applying partitioned matrix rules for
determinants and inverses (Hendry, 1995, equations A1.9-A1.10), for f > 1
                                   Ã                     ·            ¸ ·         ¸!
                                            £          ¤ Ψ1 Ψ2 −1 Ψf gi
  |H (f, j; f, g, i) | = |Ψ1 ||Φ2 | γgji − Γf j 02
                                                           01 Φ2            Φf gi
                                   µ                     ·                         ¸·       ¸¶
                                           £           ¤    Ψ−11      −Ψ−1
                                                                        1  Ψ 2 Φ−1
                                                                                2     Ψf gi
                       = |Ψ1 ||Φ2 | γgji − Γf j 02
                                                           01 Ψ−11       Φ−1
                                                                           2          Φf gi
                                   ¡                                            ¢
                       = |Ψ1 ||Φ2 | γgji − Γf j Ψ−1                −1   −1
                                                 1 Ψf gi + Γf j Ψ1 Ψ2 Φ2 Φf gi
                       = 0.                                                                  (36)

From figure 4, |Ψ1 | > 0, |Φ2 | > 0, Γf j Ψ−1                                              −1      −1
                                                      1 Ψf gi = γ1ji Qgi /Q1i , and Γf j Ψ1 Ψ2 Φ2 Φf gi = 0
for f > 1. Hence equation (36) implies γgji − γ1ji Qgi /Q1i = 0 ∀g, i, j. Switching i and j
indices and recalling that h(j) = 1 ∀j, γgij − γh(j),i,j Qgj /Qh(j),j = 0. From equation (35),
it follows that
                                    £                                    ¤
   Σj 0 Lgjj 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 ) − Σj 0 Lh(j),j,j 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 ) Qgj /Qh(j),j = 0 ∀g, i and j. (37)



Lemma 6. If equation (37) holds then Cij = si Cwj ∀i and j.

Proof. We prove the lemma separately for each (i, j). Fix i and j. Then h (j) is fixed so
that without loss of generality let h (j) = 1.
   Let
                                                 P                                 
                     0       0 ··· 0                       L1jj 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 )

                                                   P 0 L2jj 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 ) 
                                                      j  0
              −Q2j /Q1j 1 · · · 0 
                                                   j                               
        Υ≡          ..       .. . . ..  and z ≡                  ..                .
                     .        .    . .                            .                
                                                    P
                −QGj /Q1j 0 · · · 1                   j 0 LGjj 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 )

Stacking equation (37) yields Υz = 0G , where 0G is a G × 1 vector of zeros.
     The solution set of Υz = 0G is {z : z = αQj , α ∈ R}. Hence from the definition of
z, Σj 0 Lgjj 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 ) = αQgj ∀g, i and j. Equivalently, Σj 0 Ljj 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 ) = αQj
∀i and j. Summing this over i yields Σj 0 [Ljj 0 Σi (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 )] = αN Qj ∀j. Because
Σi (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 ) = 0 and Q1j > 0 ∀j, it follows that α = 0. Thus, for all i and j,
Σj 0 [Ljj 0 (Cij 0 − si Cwj 0 )] = 0 . Stacking this and using equation (30) yield
                                                                           
                                       C11 − s1 Cw1 · · · CN 1 − sN Cw1
                                            ..       ...         ..        
                       (I − B)−1             .                    .         = 0.
                                       C1N − s1 CwN · · · CN N − sN CwN

Since (I − B)−1 exists, it follows that Cij = si Cwj ∀i and j.

                                                    34
B. Appendix: Data
Data on endowments Vi and direct factor usage by industry Di are from various sources.
Capital stock is constructed as follows. We use the latest capital stock data from the Penn
World Table 5.6 (PWT 5.6) and update the data to 1997 by applying Leamer’s (1984)
double declining balance method to investment. The real gross domestic investment series
come from the Penn World Table 6.1 (PWT 6.1). Let VKi (t0 ) be capital stock in country
i in year t0 (the latest year available) from PWT 5.6 (in 1985 international prices).24 Let
Ii (t) be the investment series for year t from PWT 6.1 (in 1996 international prices).25
Let P I P W T 5.6 (t0 ) and P I P W T 6.1 (t0 ) be the price level of investment for year t0 from PWT
5.6 and PWT 6.1, respectively. Assuming a typical asset life of 15 years, the depreciation
rate is δ = 13.3%. Then country i’s capital stock VKi at the beginning of 1997 (in 1996
international prices) is defined as

  VKi ≡ (1 − δ)1996−t0 VKi (t0 ) P I P W T 6.1 (t0 ) /P I P W T 5.6 (t0 ) + Σ1996
                                                                             t=t0 +1 (1 − δ)
                                                                                             1996−t
                                                                                                    Ii (t) .

    Direct usage of capital by industry is generated by assuming that industry capital
stocks are proportional to industry payments to capital. This will be the case in steady
state under the assumption of constant depreciation rates. Data on capital payments are
from the GTAP (version 5) input-output accounts.
    Turning next to labour, let Lgi and Pgi be labour employment and payroll of industry
g in country i. Data are from the OECD STAN database for OECD countries, the
UNIDO data base for manufacturing in non-OECD countries and from the ILO for non-
manufacturing in non-OECD countries. The endowment of labour, VLi ≡ Σg Lgi , is scaled
so that it sums to the PWT 6.1 workforce totals in 1997. Direct usage of labour by
industry (Df gi ) is calculated as Lgi /Qgi where Qgi is output of industry g in country i.
Qgi is from GTAP.
    The endowment of human capital is defined as the number of grade-12 equivalent
workers in the economy. It was generated as follows. Let ωi (e) and Li (e) be the annual
earnings and national employment of country i workers with e years of schooling. Li (e)
is from Barro and Lee (2000). The Barro-Lee dataset provides educational attainment
at 7 levels: no education (e = 0), primary entered (e = 3), primary completed (e = 6),
secondary entered (e = 9), secondary completed (e = 12), post-secondary entered (e =
13.5), and post-secondary completed (e = 16). Let ρi be the returns to schooling in
country i from Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2002, table A2, the most recent year). We
assume that (1 ) national payroll Pi = Σg Pgi is the sum of the earnings of each education
class: Pi = Σe ωi (e)Li (e); and that (2 ) wages are generated by a Mincerian equation
ωi (e) ≡ (1 + ρi )e ωi (0) where ωi (0) is the wage rate of unskilled workers. The employment
of human capital is defined as the number of high-school graduates that could be hired

  24
     VKi (t0 ) ≡ KAP Wi (t0 ) × RGDP CHi (t0 ) × P OPi (t0 ) /RGDP Wi (t0 ) where KAP Wi is country i’s
capital per worker, RGDP Wi is i’s real GDP per worker using the chain index, RGDP CHi is i’s real
GDP per capita using the chain index, and P OP is i’s population.
  25
     Ii (t) ≡ RGDP Li (t) × KIi (t) × P OPi (t) where RGDP Li is country i’s real GDP per capita using
the Laspeyres index, KIi is i’s share of real gross domestic investment in RGDP Li , and P OP is i’s
population.

                                                     35
for an amount Pgi : Hgi ≡ Pgi /ωi (12). It follows that the employment of human capital
can be calculated as26
                          Hgi = (Pgi /Pi ) Σe (1 + ρi )e−12 Li (e)
where Li (e) is scaled so that Σe Li (e) is equal to the PWT 6.1 workforce totals for country
i in 1997.
    Finally, the endowment of human capital is simply VHi ≡ Σg Hgi . Direct usage of
human capital by industry is calculated as Hgi /Qgi .
    Data on input-output tables B i and trade flows Xi and Mij are from GTAP (version
5). The B matrix is imputed using equation (13) combined with equations (10) and (11).
    Consumption shares si are defined as (GDPi − T Bi ) /Σj GDPj where GDPi is country
i’s real GDP in 1997 and T Bi is i’s trade balance. Data on GDPi come from the PWT
6.1.27
    In order to match the classification of industries in D with those in B we aggregated in-
dustries up to 24 ISIC (rev. 2) industries. The industries are: 110-130 (Agriculture, hunt-
ing, forestry and fishing); 200 (Mining and quarrying); 311+312 (Food); 313+314 (Bev-
erages, Tobacco); 321 (Textiles); 322 (Apparel); 323+324 (Leather products, Footwear);
331+332 (Wood products, Furniture); 341+342 (Paper products, Printing and publish-
ing); 353+354 (Petroleum refineries, Misc. petro and coal products); 351+352+355+356
(Industrial chemicals, Other chemicals, Rubber products, Plastic products); 361+362+369
(Pottery, Glass, Other non-metallic mineral products); 371 (Iron and steel); 372 (Non-
ferrous metals); 381 (Fabricated metal products); 384 (Transport equipment); 382+383+
385 (Non-electrical machinery, Electric machinery, Instruments); 390 (Misc. manufac-
turing); 400 (Electricity, gas, and water); 500 (Construction); 600 (Wholesale and retail
trade and restaurants and hotels); 700 (Transport, storage and communication); 800 (Fi-
nancing, insurance, real estate and business services); and 900 (Community , social and
personal services). Davis and Weinstein (2001) have 35 ISIC (rev. 2) industries. Our use
of data for developing countries has prevented us from being quite as disaggregated as
them.




  26
      Plugging wi (e) ≡ (1 + ρi )e wi (0) into Pi = Σe wi (e)Li (e) yields wi (0) = Pi /Σe (1 + ρi )e Li (e). Thus,
wi (12) = Pi /[Σe (1 + ρi )e−12 Li (e)].
   27
      GDPi ≡ RGDP Ci × P OPi where RGDP Ci is country i’s real GDP per capita using the chain index
(in 1996 international price) and P OPi is i’s population.

                                                        36
References
Antweiler, Werner and Daniel Trefler, “Increasing Returns and All That: A View
 From Trade,” American Economic Review, March 2002, 92, 93–119.

Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee, “International Data on Educational Attain-
 ment: Updates and Implications,” 2000. CID Working Paper No. 42.

Conway, Patrick J., “The Case of the Missing Trade and other Mysteries: Comment,”
 American Economic Review, March 2002, 92 (1), 394–404.

Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein, “International Trade as an “Integrated
 Equilibrium”: New Perspectives,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
 May 2000, 90 (2), 150–154.

   and , “An Account of Global Factor Trade,” American Economic Review, December
  2001, 91 (5), 1423–1453.

   and , “The Factor Content of Trade,” in E. Kwan Choi and James Harrigan, eds.,
  Handbook of International Trade, Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub., 2003.

  ,   , Scott C. Bradford, and Kazushige Shimpo, “Using International and
  Japanese Regional Data to Determine When the Factor Abundance Theory of Trade
  Works,” American Economic Review, June 1997, 87 (3), 421–446.

Deardorff, Alan V., “Weak Links in the Chain of Comparative Advantage,” Journal of
 International Economics, May 1979, 9 (2), 197–209.

Debaere, Peter, “Relative Factor Abundance and Trade,” Journal of Political Economy,
 June 2003, 111 (3), 589–610.

Diewert, W. Erwin, “Duality Approaches to Microeconomic Theory,” in Kenneth J.
 Arrow and Michael D. Intriligator, eds., Handbook of Mathematical Economics, Ams-
 terdam: North-Holland, 1982.

Dimaranan, Betina V. and Robert A. McDougall, Global Trade, Assistance, and
 Production: The GTAP 5 Data Base, Purdue University: Center for Global Trade
 Analysis, 2002.

Ethier, Wilfred J., “National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern Theory
  of International Trade,” American Economic Review, June 1982, 72 (3), 389–405.

Feenstra, Robert C., Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence, Princeton
  and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2004.

   and Gordon H. Hanson, “Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage Inequality,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 1996, 86 (2), 240–245.



                                         37
   and , “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology Capital on Wages: Es-
  timates for the United States, 1979-1990,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August
  1999, 114 (3), 907–940.

Hakura, Dalia, “Why Does HOV Fail? The Role of Technological Differences within
 the EC,” Journal of International Economics, August 2001, 54 (2), 361–382.

Harrigan, James, “Openness to Trade in Manufactures in the OECD,” Journal of
 International Economics, February 1996, 40 (1–2), 23–39.

  , “Technology, Factor Supplies, and International Specialization: Estimating the Neo-
  classical Model,” American Economic Review, September 1997, 87 (4), 475–94.

Helpman, Elhanan, “The Structure of Foreign Trade,” Working Paper No. 6752, Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research, 1998.

  , “The Structure of Foreign Trade,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 1999, 13
  (2), 121–144.

   and Paul R. Krugman, Market Structure and Foreign Trade: Increasing Returns,
  Imperfect Competition, and the International Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
  1985.

Hendry, David F., Dynamic Econometrics, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.

Hummels, David and Russell Hillberry, “Intranational Home Bias: Some Explana-
 tions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, November 2003, 85 (4), 1089–1092.

  , Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi, “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in
  World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, June 2001, 54 (1), 75–96.

Hunter, Linda C. and James R. Markusen, “Per-Capita Income as a Determinant
 of Trade,” in Robert C. Feenstra, ed., Empirical Methods for International Trade, Cam-
 bridge: MIT Press, 1988, pp. 89–109.

Leamer, Edward E., Sources of International Comparative Advantage: Theory and
  Evidence, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984.

Markusen, James R. and Anthony J. Venables, “Multinational Firms and the New
 Trade Theory,” Journal of International Economics, December 1998, 46 (2), 183–203.

Muendler, Marc-Andreas, “Trade, Technology, and Productivity: A Study of Brazil-
 ian Manufacturers, 1986-1998,” February 2004. Mimeo, University of California, San
 Diego.

Organisation    for     Economic      Co-operation            and      Development,
 “The OECD Input-Output Database,”            2002.             18    February 2005
 (http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/48/43/2673344.pdf).


                                          38
Psacharopoulos, George and Harry Anthony Patrinos, “Returns to Investment in
 Education: A Further Update,” 2002. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
 2881.

Reimer, Jeffrey J., “Global Production Sharing and Trade in the Services of Factors,”
 2003. Mimeo, University of Wisconsin.

Trefler, Daniel, “International Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right!,” Journal
  of Political Economy, December 1993, 101 (6), 961–987.

  , “The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries,” American Economic Review,
  December 1995, 85 (5), 1029–1046.

  , “An Interview with Elhanan Helpman,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, December 1999,
  3 (4), 571–601.

  , “The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries: Reply,” American Economic
  Review, March 2002, 92 (1), 405–410.

  and Susan Chun Zhu, “Beyond the Algebra of Explanation: HOV for the Technology
  Age,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2000, 90 (2), 145–149.

Vanek, Jaroslav, “The Factor Proportions Theory: The N-Factor Case,” Kyklos, Octo-
 ber 1968, 21, 749–56.

Yi, Kei-Mu, “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?,” Journal
 of Political Economy, February 2003, 111 (1), 52–102.




                                          39
                                           1.2


                                                                β = 1.14
                                   X
  Ratio of Human Capital to Labour
Embodied in World Exports: FHi /FLi

                                                                R = 0.85
                                                                  2
                              X




                                           0.9




                                           0.6




                                           0.3
                                                 0.3                                0.6                           0.9              1.2
                                                                      Endowment Ratio of Human Capital to Labour: V Hi / V Li


                                           1.2
                                       X
     Ratio of Physical Capital to Labour




                                                                β = 1.02
   Embodied in World Exports: FKi /FLi




                                           0.9                 R 2 = 0.80
                                   X




                                           0.6




                                           0.3




                                            0
                                                 0                          0.3                    0.6                    0.9      1.2
                                                                      Endowment Ratio of Physical Capital to Labour: V Ki / V Li



                                                       Notes : See section 8.3 and equation (16) for details.


                                                 Figure 1. Factor Content of World Exports and Factor Abundance
                                Full Sample                                          Trimmed Sample ( |V i − s i V w | < 0.25 )

                                     Labour                                                                  Labour
            .20                                                                      .15
                         β = 0.24                                                                 β = 0.26
                          2                                                                            2
                         R = 0.82                                                                 R = 0.56
 Fi = ATi




                                                                          Fi = ATi
            .00                                                                      .00




            -.20                                                                     -.15
                  -.50              .00           .50              1.00                    -.25                    .00                   .25
                                     Vi − si Vw                                                                Vi − si Vw


                               Human Capital                                                               Human Capital
            .40                                                                      .15
                         β = 0.27                                                                 β = 0.28
                                                                                                   2
                          2
                         R = 0.79                                                                 R = 0.52
            .20
                                                                          Fi = ATi
 Fi = ATi




                                                                                     .00

            .00



           -.20                                                                  -.15
                  -.50              .00           .50              1.00                 -.25                       .00                   .25
                                    Vi − si Vw                                                                 Vi − si Vw


                               Physical Capital                                                            Physical Capital
            .40                                                                      .15
                                                        β = 0.08                                                              β = 0.12
                                                                                                                               2
                                                         2
                                                        R = 0.02                                                              R = 0.04
            .20
                                                                          Fi = ATi
Fi = ATi




            .00                                                                      .00


       -.20


       -.40                                                                          -.15
              -.50                  .00           .50              1.00                    -.25                    .00                   .25
                                    Vi − si Vw                                                                 Vi − si Vw


             Figure 2. The Vanek Prediction for Labour, Human Capital, and Physical Capital
                           .15
                                             β = 0.15
                                             R = 0.56
                                               2
FHi /siVHw − FLi /siVLw




                           .00




                          -.15
                              -.60                         -.30                            .00              .30

                                                              V Hi /s i V Hw − V Li /s i V Lw




                          .50

                                            β = 0.15
                                            R 2 = 0.66
FKi /siVKw − FLi /siVLw




                          .00




                          -.50
                             -2.80                                -1.40                               .00

                                                                    V Ki /s i V Kw − V Li /s i V Lw


                                 Notes : See section 8.2 and equations (14) and (15) for details.


                             Figure 3. Relative Factor Content of Trade and Relative Factor Abundance
                                                                                                                              Figure 4. The H Matrix

                        (f , g , i ) indices for coefficients on D' fgi

                        (1,1,1) ··· (1,1,i ) ··· (1,1,N )         (f ,1,1) ··· (f ,1,i ) ··· (f ,1,N )         (K ,1,1) ··· (K ,1,i ) ··· (K ,1,N )       (1,2,1) ··· (1,2,i ) ··· (1,2,N )         (1,g ,1) ··· (1,g ,i ) ··· (1,g ,N )         (1,G ,1) ··· (1,G ,i ) ··· (1,G ,N )       (f ,g ,i )


Eqn. (28) (1, 1)         Q 11 ··· 0         ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···     0    ···     0        | Q 21 ···         0    ···    0               Q g 1 ···      0     ···     0               Q G 1 ···      0     ···     0        |      0
(f , i ) =   (1, i )       0 ··· Q 1i ···          0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        ···      0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ··· Q 2i ···       0        ···      0     ··· Q gi ···         0        ···      0     ··· Q Gi ···         0        |      0
             (1, N )       0 ··· 0          ··· Q 1N                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ··· Q 2N                 0     ···    0     ··· Q gN                  0     ···    0     ··· Q GN |              0
                                       M                                           M                                            M                     |                  M                                          M                                            M                      |       M


             (f , 1)       0 ··· 0          ···    0               Q 11 ···       0     ···     0                 0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···    0     ···     0        |      0
             (f , i )      0 ··· 0          ···    0        ···      0     ··· Q 1i ···         0        ···      0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        | Q gi
             (f , N )      0 ··· 0          ···    0                 0     ···    0     ··· Q 1N                  0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···    0     ···     0        |      0
                                       M                                          M                                             M                     |                  M                                           M                                            M                     |       M


             (K , 1)       0 ··· 0          ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0               Q 11 ···        0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···    0     ···     0        |      0
             (K , i )      0 ··· 0          ···    0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        ···      0     ··· Q 1i ···         0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        |      0
             (K , N )      0 ··· 0          ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···     0    ··· Q 1N         |      0    ···    0    ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···    0     ···     0        |      0
                           –     –     –     –     –        –        –      –     –      –      –        –        –      –      –     –      –        |      –     –     –     –     –        –        –      –     –      –      –        –        –      –     –      –      –        |      –

Eqn. (29) (2, 1)           0 ··· 0          ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···     0    ···     0        | ω 11 ··· 0            ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···    0     ···     0        |      0
(g , i ) =   (2, i )       0 ··· 0          ···    0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        ···      0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ··· ω 1i ···       0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        |      0
             (2, N )       0 ··· 0          ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ··· ω 1N                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···    0     ···     0        |      0
                                       M                                          M                                             M                     |                  M                                          M                                             M                     |       M


             (g , 1)       0 ··· 0          ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0               ω 11 ···       0     ···     0                 0     ···    0     ···     0        |      0
             (g , i )      0 ··· 0          ···    0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        ···      0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0        ···      0     ··· ω 1i ···         0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        | ω fi
             (g , N )      0 ··· 0          ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0                 0     ···    0     ··· ω 1N                  0     ···    0     ···     0        |      0
                                       M                                          M                                             M                     |                  M                                           M                                           M                      |       M


             (G , 1)       0 ··· 0          ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0               ω 11 ···       0     ···     0        |      0
             (G , i )      0 ··· 0          ···    0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        ···      0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0        ···      0     ···    0     ···     0        ···      0     ··· ω 1i ···         0        |      0
             (G , N )      0 ··· 0          ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···    0     ··· ω 1N         |      0
                           –     –     –     –     –        –        –      –     –      –      –        –        –      –      –     –      –        |      –     –     –     –     –        –        –      –     –      –      –        –        –      –     –      –      –        |      –

Eqn. (31) (f , j )         0 ··· 0          ···    0               γ1j 1 ··· γ1ji ··· γ1jN                        0     ···     0    ···     0        |      0    ···    0    ···    0                 0     ···    0     ···     0                 0     ···    0     ···     0        | γgji
