                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE COMPETITIVE EFFECTS OF DRUG WITHDRAWALS:
                              THE CASE OF FEN-PHEN

                                               John Cawley
                                              John A. Rizzo

                                          Working Paper 11223
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11223


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




This research was supported with an unrestricted educational grant from the Merck Company Foundation,
the philanthropic arm of Merck & Co., Inc. We thank Dhaval Dave, Henry Grabowski, Margaret Kyle, Sara
Markowitz, Sean Nicholson, David Ridley, Judy Shinogle, and seminar participants at Duke University and
the 2005 Eastern Economic Association meetings for helpful comments. Rebecca Friedkin provided excellent
programming assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by John Cawley and John A Rizzo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Competitive Effects of Drug Withdrawals
John Cawley and John A Rizzo
NBER Working Paper No. 11223
March 2005, Revised February 2006
JEL No. I1

                                           ABSTRACT

In September 1997, the anti-obesity drugs Pondimin and Redux, ingredients in the popular drug
combination fen-phen, were withdrawn from the market for causing potentially fatal side effects.

That event provides an opportunity for studying how consumers respond to drug withdrawals. In
theory, remaining drugs in the therapeutic class could enjoy competitive benefits, or suffer negative

spillovers, from the withdrawal of a competing drug. Our findings suggest that, while the withdrawal

of a rival drug may impose negative spillovers in the form of higher patient quit rates, on the whole

non-withdrawn drugs in the same therapeutic class enjoy competitive benefits in the form of higher

utilization.

John Cawley
134 MVR Hall
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
jhc38@cornell.edu

John A Rizzo
Department of Economics and
Department of Preventative Medicine
N-637 Social and Behavioral Sciences Building
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794
john.rizzo@stonybrook.edu
                                            Introduction

        The withdrawal of prescription drugs from the U.S. market is a relatively frequent

phenomenon; more than 75 drugs have been withdrawn since 1969 (Wysowski and

Swartz, 2005).2 Some of the more recent withdrawals have been of prominent drugs that

represented a large share of the market in their respective therapeutic classes. For

example, in 1997 the Food and Drug Administration requested that Wyeth remove from

the market its anti-obesity drugs Pondimin and Redux that had been used by six million

Americans because the drugs caused potentially fatal valvular heart disease (Connolly et

al., 1997; Agovino, 2004).3 In 2004, Merck withdrew the pain medication Vioxx, used

by an estimated 20 million Americans, for increasing the risk of heart attack and stroke

(Agovino, 2004).

        This paper studies the withdrawals of seven drugs from six therapeutic classes

between 1997 and 2001 and answers the following questions: Do remaining drugs in the

same therapeutic class enjoy competitive benefits or suffer negative spillovers? Do those

taking drugs in the class that were not withdrawn reduce compliance or quit? Do people

who previously took the withdrawn drugs quit taking that class of drugs altogether? Are

people less likely to initiate use of non-withdrawn drugs following the withdrawal of a

therapeutically equivalent drug? On net, how does utilization of the non-withdrawn drugs

change? The answers to these questions have important implications for understanding


2
  The roughly 75 drugs withdrawn between 1969 and 2002 represent about 1 percent of all marketed drugs
(Wysowski and Swartz, 2005).
3
  Although the Food and Drug Administration requests that a manufacturer withdraw a drug from a market,
the FDA can mandate the withdrawal if necessary. When asked by the FDA to withdraw a drug because of
safety concerns, manufacturers have agreed in all cases except one: Ceiba-Geigy refused to voluntarily
withdraw the antidiabetic drug phenformin in 1976. If a company refuses the FDA’s request, the FDA can
begin procedures to compel withdrawal, and it was through this process that phenformin was taken off the
market (Meadows, 2002). All of the drug withdrawals that we study were removed from the market
voluntarily by the manufacturer.


                                                   2
the nature of competition in the pharmaceutical industry and for assessing the economic

effects of drug withdrawals. Moreover, the existence of spillover effects can provide

important insight into how drugs compete and how product markets should be defined.

         The present study is timely, given recent withdrawals of “blockbuster” drugs such

as Vioxx in 2004 and Bextra in 2005, and the potential for additional withdrawals in the

near future. In November 2004, the U.S. Food & Drug Administration’s David Graham

questioned whether additional drugs (Meridia, Crestor, Accutane, and Serevent) should

be withdrawn from the market (Harris, 2004). These developments highlight a pressing

need to understand how consumers respond, and the use of remaining drugs changes, in

the wake of drug withdrawals.

         To our knowledge, this is the first direct study of consumer response to drug

withdrawals. Moreover, the related literature implies divergent predictions. Studies of

short-run changes in the stock prices of rival firms following drug withdrawals have

found evidence of both positive and negative effects (Jarrell and Peltzman 1985; Dowdell

et al. 1992; Ahmed et al. 2002).

         This paper extends the literature by offering a direct, longer-term test of the

impacts of drug withdrawals on spillovers. In addition, the study documents how

consumers respond to the withdrawal of a prescription drug by measuring spillover

effects on new initiations of drug therapy, quit rates, and the utilization of non-withdrawn

drugs.

         We study a nationally representative patient-level database from the Medical

Expenditure Panel Study for 1996 through 2002. We find that results vary across drug

class, with the largest number of classes exhibiting some evidence of negative spillovers.




                                               3
We then discuss which factors may affect whether remaining drugs enjoy competitive

benefits or suffer negative spillovers.

                                          Conceptual Framework

           Our conceptual framework is straightforward. The withdrawal of a drug from the

market could result in either competitive benefits or negative spillovers to the remaining

drugs in the same therapeutic class. One might expect competitive benefits to the extent

that the drugs in a given therapeutic class represent an oligopoly. Entry is regulated by

the FDA and is very costly in time and money. The withdrawal of one competitor

increases the residual demand, and therefore equilibrium quantity supplied, by remaining

producers.4 If this increase in sales offsets the loss of previous customers who quit

because of the withdrawal of the related drug, the remaining drugs enjoy competitive

benefits.

           Several studies in finance have tested whether competitive benefits dominate

negative spillovers by examining how pharmaceutical firms’ share prices change in the

wake of bad news about a competitor’s product. Ahmed, Gardella and Nanda (2002) find

that competitors’ share prices rose significantly five days after the announcements of

drug withdrawals that occurred between 1966 and 1998. Dowdell, Govindaraj, and Jain

(1992) find that in the wake of the Tylenol poisonings, the share prices of rival

pharmaceutical manufacturers rose relative to the share price of the manufacturer of

Tylenol (Johnson & Johnson).

           On the other hand, one might expect negative spillovers to dominate any

competitive benefits. Negative spillovers arise if, for example, consumers become


4
    Overall sales of the class could fall even if sales of the remaining drugs are higher after the withdrawal.


                                                         4
concerned about the safety of the entire class of drugs and decrease their utilization of the

non-withdrawn drugs to such an extent that those quits exceed the number of patients

switching from the withdrawn to the non-withdrawn drugs. Jarrell and Peltzman (1985)

study drug withdrawals during 1974-1982 and find evidence of net negative spillovers;

specifically, the share prices of pharmaceutical companies fall an average of 1 percent in

the two weeks surrounding the announcement of bad news that led to the withdrawal of a

rival drug.5

        Interestingly, some stock price studies of drug withdrawals find competitive

benefits (Ahmed et al., 2002; Dowdell et al. 1992) while another finds negative spillovers

(Jarrell and Peltzman, 1985). A further study finds no net effect of drug withdrawals on

the share prices of rival pharmaceutical firms (Dranove and Olsen, 1994).

        These studies of stock price changes following drug withdrawals are informative

about investor beliefs (e.g. about changes in the likelihood of regulation or FDA scrutiny

of future drugs) but may not reflect changes in actual drug utilization patterns. Moreover,

the follow-up period of these studies (ranging from days to weeks) is too brief to assess

long term trends following withdrawals. The fact that the studies come to divergent

conclusions about spillovers underscores the need for a direct study of consumer behavior

following drug withdrawals.

        This paper makes a number of contributions to the literature on the competitive

effects of prescription drug withdrawals. First, it is the only direct study of how

consumers respond to drug withdrawals. Earlier research has focused on investor beliefs,

5
  Examples from outside the pharmaceutical industry in which the negative spillovers of information
dominated competitive benefits include: decreases in the prices of shares for airlines after a crash by a
competing airline (Bosch, Eckard, and Singal, 1998) and decreases in the price of shares for nuclear energy
firms after the 1979 core meltdown at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant (Hill and Schneeweis,
1983).


                                                     5
not consumer behavior. Second, this paper uses multiple measures to study competitive

effects, including drug utilization, initiations, and quits of non-withdrawn drugs in

response to withdrawals in the same class. This approach recognizes the

multidimensional nature of competitive responses and provides a sense of the robustness

of the results to alternative competitive outcome measures. Third, this paper uses a

longer follow-up than previous studies of stock prices; we track consumers from up to

three years before to three years after a drug withdrawal. Fourth, it provides a test of

whether drugs within the same therapeutic class constitute a product market. While drug

product markets are conventionally defined in terms of whether drug utilization patterns

respond to significant changes in competitors’ prices or other competitive variables,6 in

practice such changes are often difficult to observe. Studies have found evidence that

brand name drugs within the same therapeutic class compete, however. Thus,

Lichtenberg and Philipson (2002) find that changes in the number of drugs in a

therapeutic class affect utilization of drugs within that class. Lu and Comanor (1998)

report that a brand’s intertemporal rate of price increase was lower when there were more

branded competitors in the market.7 Our study contributes to this literature by providing

six natural experiments to investigate whether utilization patterns of drugs within a

therapeutic class are linked to the withdrawal of another drug within that class.

         This paper also relates to a literature in pharmaceutical economics on how

consumers respond to information. Studies of the pharmaceutical industry most


6
  More specifically, in defining product markets, the Department of Justice guidelines recommend that all
relevant information be considered, including “evidence that sellers base business decisions on the prospect
of buyer substitution between products in response to relative changes in price or other competitive
variables…” See: www.usdoj.gov/atr/public/guidelines/horiz_book/01.html at section 1.11.
7
  For a review of the evidence on competition between brand-name drugs see: Congressional Budget Office
(1998): How Increased Competition from Generic Drugs has Affected Prices and Returns in the
Pharmaceutical Industry, ch. 3 (available at www.cbo.gov/showdoc.cfm?index=655&sequence=0).


                                                     6
commonly focus on the impact of advertising on the sales of the drug that was advertised

(Azoulay, 2002; Calfee, et al., 2002; Rizzo, 1999; Berndt et al., 2002, 1995; Hurwitz and

Caves, 1988; Leffler, 1981). However, recent research documents how the benefits of

advertising may spill over to other drugs in the same therapeutic class. For example,

direct-to-consumer advertising (DTCA) for one drug increases the sales of the entire class

of drugs (Rosenthal et al., 2003; Iizuka and Jin, 2003).8 DTCA also appears to have

spillover benefits at the intensive margin: DTCA of one drug increases compliance

among users of other drugs within the same therapeutic class (Wosinska, 2003, 2004). In

addition, marketing for prescription drugs has positive spillover effects for same-brand

over-the-counter (OTC) versions of the drugs, although DTCA for OTC products do not

appear to spill over to same brand in the prescription drug market (Ling, Berndt, and

Kyle, 2002). Other research has focused on how physician prescribing behavior responds

to various types of information, such as detailing and the results of clinical trials

published in professional journals (Azoulay, 2002; Stern and Trajtenberg, 1998). We

contribute to this literature by studying how pharmaceutical consumers respond to bad

news in general and a drug withdrawal in particular.



                                               Methods

        Ideally, we would like to compare the market for a particular therapeutic class of

drugs after a withdrawal in the class to its counterfactual: how that same market would

look in the same years if the drug had not been withdrawn. Obviously, such information

is unavailable. Nor is there any satisfactory “control” group in the form of a therapeutic


8
 DTCA appears to increase the advertised drug’s market share within the class only if that brand has
preferred status on the third-party payer’s formulary (Wosinska, 2001).


                                                    7
class with identical trends in unobserved variables but no drug withdrawals (which would

permit estimation of a differences-in-differences model).

         Therefore, we study the impact of prescription drug withdrawal by comparing the

consumer use of competing drugs before withdrawal to consumer use of them after

withdrawal, controlling for salient observables. One key observable is the number of

scrips for all prescription drugs filled, per capita, by year in the respondent’s geographic

region; this regressor is particularly important because during the period we study (1996-

2002) there was a general upward trend in the use of pharmaceuticals in the U.S.

(Banthin and Miller, 2005; Berndt, 2002). Failure to control for this trend would bias our

results in favor of finding competitive benefits.9

         A limitation of our empirical strategy is that there may be trends in unobserved

variables that changed specific drug markets around the time of the drug withdrawal; in

other words, there may be omitted variable bias. We believe that such bias is likely to be

relatively modest. Drug withdrawals are generally extremely well-publicized and are

likely the dominant event in their therapeutic classes. For example, the withdrawal of

fen-phen was accompanied by editorials in the New England Journal of Medicine and

JAMA and prominent coverage in virtually all major U.S. newspapers (the Los Angeles

Times won a Pulitzer Prize for its coverage of the withdrawal of Redux).

         In addition, we look for common patterns across six drug classes in which a

withdrawal occurred between 1997 and 2001. If we see the same pattern across all six

drug classes, we can be more confident that it is due to the withdrawals than due to

9
 Another potentially important unobservable is the change in the FDA’s policy allowing direct-to-
consumer advertising, which occurred during the period of our study. This provides a further motivation
for controlling for scrip use over time to the extent that this policy change affected drug use. We thank an
anonymous referee for calling this point to our attention.


                                                      8
random chance that unobserved changes happened to occur in each class around the time

of withdrawal (which ranges across markets from 1997 to 2001).

         While our model does not control for the prices of anti-obesity drugs or

advertising expenditures on such drugs, for our purposes these variables do not cause

omitted variable bias. The reason is that we consider how the manufacturers of

remaining drugs changed their price and advertising strategies in the wake of drug

withdrawal to be part of the overall impact of drug withdrawal and thus these influences

do not represent bias but part of what we wish to measure.

         We estimate three types of models: 1) utilization, in which the binary dependent

variable equals one if the respondent is using a non-withdrawn drug in that class in that

year10; 2) initiation, in which the binary dependent variable equals one if the respondent

reports using a non-withdrawn drug in the current interview but did not report using one

in the previous interview11; and 3) quit, in which the binary dependent variable equals

one if the respondent reported using a non-withdrawn drug in the previous, but not the

current interview. The utilization, initiation, and quit equations are estimated as logit

models.

         The coefficients on year indicator variables provide information about the net

effect of the drug withdrawals on remaining drugs. Specifically, we compare the year



10
   If utilization were the only outcome in which we were interested this could be measured roughly by using
aggregate sales data. However, we also wish to test how drug withdrawals affect initiations and quits, and
this requires longitudinal micro data. Even with respect to utilization, we wish to control for correlates of
demand such as income and insurance status, which also requires micro data.
11
   There are several steps involved for a patient to receive a prescription drug. First, the patient must decide
to visit a physician. Second, the physician must determine whether to prescribe any drug, and then which
drug to prescribe. Third, the patient must decide whether to fill the prescription. We set aside explicit
consideration of the agency relationship between consumer and physician and study consumer use of drugs
as an outcome; thus our results reflect consumer behavior under the average agency relationship.


                                                       9
prior to drug withdrawal to years after drug withdrawal (the year of withdrawal is a

mixture of pre-treatment and post-treatment and so is not the primary focus).

       In the MEPS data, the number of people with a given condition may fluctuate by

chance with the selection of new MEPS sample members. Moreover, there have been

trends over time in some conditions; for example, obesity has doubled in the past twenty-

five years in the U.S. (Hedley et al., 2004). To control for changes in the conditions of

sample respondents over time, we control in our models for an indicator variable that

equals one if the respondent has the condition treated by the class of drugs under

consideration.

       We control for the following variables in our regressions: the trend in per capita

number of scrips in respondent’s geographic area, indicator variables for year, whether

the respondent has the condition treated by that class of drugs, gender, African-American,

Hispanic, other race/ethnicity, married, whether the respondent has health insurance,

whether the respondent’s health insurance includes prescription drug coverage, age

categories, urban residence, Census Region categories, income categories, and education

categories.




                           Data and Empirical Specification

This paper uses 1996-2002 data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS),

which is collected by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). The

MEPS database is drawn from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) sample, so it

is designed to be nationally representative and each year of the MEPS data may be linked

to information from the previous year's NHIS survey. The MEPS database has a complex


                                            10
survey design which, beyond stratifying by sampling units, includes clustering, and

oversampling of certain subgroups such as minorities. Therefore, our statistical analyses

use weights provided in MEPS to correct mean values, and appropriate statistical

methods in Stata to obtain correct standard errors.

        The MEPS has an overlapping panel design in which two calendar years of

information are collected from each household through six interviews. We pool both

calendar-year observations on each adult (age 18 and older) and pool years 1996 to 2002.

Our final sample is 124,314. We use the first of two calendar years of MEPS data on

each person in order to determine whether in the second period the person has initiated or

quit using a relevant drug. As a result, we lose half of our data when we estimate models

of initiation.

        The MEPS database consists of a number of files. We linked the Full Year

Consolidated File to the Prescribed Medicines File for each year. The Full-Year

Consolidated File is at the person-year level and includes information on health care

utilization and expenditures, sociodemographic and socioeconomic characteristics, and

health insurance status. The Prescribed Medicines File is an event-level file that includes

information on specific drug use, the amounts paid for those drugs by patient and

insurers, and the length of time that the drug was taken. We convert this event-level data

into person-year data and link it to the consolidated MEPS files, which include patient-

year level information on the other variables included in this analysis.

        Given the way the MEPS data are collected, we must study consumer utilization

of drugs by calendar year; for example, we are not able to study quits in the same year

that the withdrawals occurred. The reason is that the MEPS asked respondents to list all




                                             11
drugs taken since the last interview up to the end of the year. So even though Redux and

Pondimin were withdrawn in September of 1997, any MEPS respondents who had used

anti-obesity drugs prior to the withdrawal were still listing them even if they were

interviewed in October through December of 1997. Quits can only be ascertained in the

next calendar year.

       We study the seven drugs from six therapeutic classes that were withdrawn

between 1997 and 2001 that are listed in Table 1. Pondimin and Redux, both anti-obesity

drugs, were withdrawn in 1997 for causing valvular heart disease. Duract was a pain

medication withdrawn in 1998 for causing liver failure. Posicor was an anti-hypertensive

drug also withdrawn in 1998 for lowering heart rates and causing adverse drug

interactions. Propulsid was a heartburn medication withdrawn in 2000 for causing

potentially fatal irregular heartbeat. Lotronex treated Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)

and was withdrawn in 2000 for causing ischemic colitis (intestinal inflammation due to

lack of blood flow). Baycol was a cholesterol-busting drug withdrawn in 2001 for

causing fatal rhabdomyolysis (severe adverse muscle reaction that can damage the kidney

and other organs).

       We use the Multum Lexicon File, released in Fall 2004, to identify drugs that

remain available in the therapeutic class of each withdrawn drug. These drugs that

remained on the market, and the name of their therapeutic class, are also listed in Table 1.

For the sake of clarity, we will refer to these remaining drugs by the indication that the

drugs treat.

       We are forced to exclude from our analysis a few other drugs that were withdrawn

between 1997 and 2001. We exclude Seldane and Hismanal, both of which treated




                                             12
seasonal allergies and caused potentially fatal irregular heartbeats, because their

withdrawals occurred in consecutive years (1998 and 1999), making it impossible to

disentangle the change in utilization due to each withdrawal. Rezulin, a diabetes drug,

was withdrawn in 2000 for causing liver failure, but we exclude it from our analysis

because it was the only drugs in its class – there were no competitors to suffer spillovers

or reap competitive benefits.

       We study the following three outcomes: 1) an indicator that equals one if the

respondent in that year had a scrip for an anti-obesity drug; 2) an indicator that equals one

if the respondent began taking an anti-obesity drug; and 3) an indicator that equals one if

the respondent quit taking an anti-obesity drug.

       The means of the dependent variables by class are listed in Table 2. Drugs that

treat pain are the ones most often used by MEPS respondents; use at some point in a

calendar year is reported by 10.8 percent of observations. Hypertension and cholesterol

drugs are next most common, used by 6.8 and 6.5 percent of the sample. Drugs that treat

obesity, heartburn, and IBS are much less frequently used; only one half of a percent or

less of the sample reports their use in a year. (Note that these do not include use of the

withdrawn drug in the years prior to withdrawal.)

       There exist several measures of, or proxies for, the out-of-pocket price of drugs,

each with its advantages and drawbacks. MEPS respondents list the amount they paid

out of pocket for each drug, but the prices faced by those who did not buy drugs are not

observed. National average wholesale prices are available from Medi-Span, but these are

collinear with the year fixed effects. To address patient costs while avoiding problems of

multicollinearity, we use two proxies for the out-of-pocket cost of prescription drugs.




                                             13
The first is an indicator variable for whether the respondent lacked health insurance;

uninsurance would raise the cost of a physician visit to receive a prescription. The

second price proxy is an indicator for whether the respondent’s health insurance includes

prescription drug coverage, which would lower the cost of filling a prescription. We

acknowledge that these indicators for health insurance coverage are endogenous; those

who sought to consume large quantities of prescription drugs might be more likely to

acquire health insurance and prescription drug coverage.

         We calculate the number of scrips for all prescription drugs filled, per capita, by

year in the respondent’s geographic area, where the area is defined by MEPS sampling

areas. There are 258 such areas, and we calculate the per capita scrips per year for each.

         We determine whether the respondent has the condition treated by a given class of

drugs using the ICD9 condition codes provided in the MEPS.12                  For obesity, we use the

FDA and NIH medical criteria for the use of anti-obesity drugs: a body mass index (BMI)

of 30 or greater, or BMI of 27 or higher with at least one obesity-related comorbidity

(such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, type II diabetes, coronary heart disease, or sleep

apnea). Body mass index is constructed using self-reported weight and height from the




12
  Specifically, respondents are considered to have pain if they have ICD9 code 204 (joint pain), 205 (back
problems), or 84 (headache); hypertension if they have code 98 (hypertension); heartburn if they have code
787 (heartburn and others); IBS if they have code 565 (IBS and others); and to have high cholesterol if they
have code 53 (lipid disorders including high cholesterol). There are limitations to the use of ICD9 codes to
classify respondents as having the condition treated by a particular drug class. For some ICD9 codes, false
positives are a concern: ICD9 53 includes other lipid disorders than high cholesterol. Likewise, the ICD9
codes for heartburn and IBS are broader than we would like. On the other hand, there are likely false
negatives for pain; the ICD9 codes permit us only to control for particular sources of pain (back, joint,
head). While there are limitations to the use of ICD9 codes to identify respondents with a given condition,
they remain the best data for that purpose available in the MEPS.


                                                    14
NHIS corrected for reporting error (Cawley, 2004). For those with a BMI of less than 30,

we re-classify them as obese if they have ICD9 code 278 (obesity).13




                                               Empirical Results

            Tables 3-5 present the results of our regressions for utilization, initiation, and

quitting. In the interest of brevity, the tables present only the parameters of interest: the

coefficients on the year indicator variables.14

            Table 3 includes results from logit regressions of utilization. Each cell of the

table includes the odds ratio and, below that, the t-statistic in parentheses. The odds ratio

indicates the odds of utilizing non-withdrawn drugs in a given class in a given year

relative to the year prior to the drug withdrawal. Note that the year prior to drug

withdrawal differs by class. For obesity drugs it is 1996, for pain and hypertension drugs

it is 1997, for heartburn and IBS it is 1999, and for cholesterol it is 2000. Also note that

there are empty cells in the table. Because the MEPS began in 1996, there are data for

only one year prior to the withdrawal of Pondimin and Redux in 1997. In contrast, for

cholesterol drugs, we have many years prior to the withdrawal of Baycol in 2001, but

only one year after withdrawal.

            The first row of Table 3, which corresponds to the anti-obesity drugs, provides

evidence of negative spillovers. One year after the withdrawal of Pondimin and Redux,

MEPS respondents were only 67.3 percent as likely to be taking an anti-obesity drug as

they were the year before the withdrawals. These negative spillovers are long-lived; the
13
 We determine obesity-related comorbidities using ICD9 codes, but sleep apnea is not one recorded by
MEPS.

14
     The full set of regression results is available from the authors on request.


                                                         15
probability of use is only 66.4 percent as likely two years after withdrawal, and only 43.6

percent as likely three years later. Each of these is statistically significant, and the fact

that the odds ratios continue to fall suggests that the negative spillovers may not have run

their course even after three years.

           There is a similar pattern of negative spillovers for pain medications. One year

after the withdrawal of Duract, utilization is only 88.6 percent as likely as it had been the

year before withdrawal. Two years later it is only 73.4 percent as likely, and three years

it is 68.4 percent as likely.

           The utilization of hypertension drugs does not immediately experience a

statistically significant change; one year after withdrawal, utilization is 96.1 percent as

likely as it was the year prior to withdrawal (which is not statistically significant).

However, the decrease in utilization is statistically significant two years after withdrawal

(when it falls to 89.3 percent as likely) and three years after withdrawal (89.2 percent as

likely).

           The pattern of use of IBS drugs is also consistent with negative spillovers, but

they quickly dissipate. One year after the withdrawal of Lotronex, use of IBS drugs was

only 68.2 percent as likely as it had been the year before withdrawal. The decrease in

utilization two years after withdrawal is not statistically significant.

           The drop in utilization of non-withdrawn obesity, pain, hypertension, and IBS

drugs is consistent with the findings in Jarrell and Peltzman (1985) that the stock price of

pharmaceutical firms falls after a drug withdrawal by a rival; presumably the lower stock

price reflects decreased anticipated market share due to negative spillovers.




                                                16
       For two other drug classes there appears to be evidence of competitive benefits,

which is consistent with the stock price studies of Ahmed et al. (2002) and Dowdell et al.

(1992). The use of non-withdrawn heartburn medications is 53.7 percent more likely one

year after the withdrawal of Propulsid than the year before withdrawal. The use of

cholesterol drugs is 52.3 percent more likely one year after the withdrawal of Baycol than

it was the year before withdrawal. However, the pattern of odds ratios across years for

these drugs suggests that these results may reflect long-term trends in unobservables

rather than the withdrawals. For example, the point estimates of odds ratios for heartburn

medications are rising throughout the period observed: from .598 three years before

withdrawal to 1 the year before withdrawal (by construction) to 1.408 two years after

withdrawal. This pattern suggests that utilization of heartburn medications was rising

throughout this period, and therefore the changes observed after withdrawal should not be

attributed solely to the withdrawal.

       A similar pattern is evident for cholesterol medications. The point estimates of

odds ratios rise from .781 three years prior to withdrawal to 1 the year before withdrawal

(by construction) to 1.523 the year after withdrawal. For both heartburn and cholesterol

drugs, there seems to be a trend towards increasing use over this period; while we control

for the trend in scrips per capita by geographic area, the use of cholesterol and heartburn

medications may have exceeded that of all drug classes as a whole. As a result of this

trend, increases in utilization after withdrawal should not necessarily be interpreted as

evidence of competitive benefits.

       We next study changes in utilization: initiations and quits. A limitation of these

regressions is that we are forced to exclude about half of our data; the MEPS includes




                                             17
two observations for each person (each corresponding to a calendar year) and the first of

those must be used to determine whether the second period represents an initiation or

quit. All observations from 1996 must be dropped for this reason. This is a particular

problem for studying the obesity drugs, because 1996 is the only year in the MEPS that is

prior to the withdrawal of Pondimin and Redux in 1997. As a result, the best we can do

for obesity drugs is compare changes in utilization after withdrawal to those the year of

withdrawal. This is a limitation. For example, there may have been withdrawal-based

initiations of non-withdrawn obesity drugs in 1997 because Pondimin and Redux were

withdrawn on September 15, 1997. Thus the treatment effect may already be apparent in

our omitted year for obesity drugs. For all other drug classes, dropping 1996 is not a

problem because the drug withdrawals in those classes took place in 1998 or later so

there remains at least one pre-withdrawal year of data in the MEPS.

       Results for initiations of non-withdrawn drugs are provided in Table 4, which

reports odds ratios relative to the year prior to withdrawal. There is evidence of negative

spillovers in the form of significantly lower initiations post-withdrawal for obesity, pain,

and IBS medications. For obesity drugs, initiation of non-withdrawn drugs was only 44.4

percent as likely one year after withdrawal as the year of withdrawal. Initiations

remained significantly lower two and three years after withdrawal, with initiation only

33.2 percent as likely three years after withdrawal. These results may overstate the

negative spillovers, however. Because many former users of Pondimin and Redux could

have switched to non-withdrawn drugs in the year of the withdrawal (the omitted

comparison year in this case), initiations in subsequent years may seem small by

comparison. However, it is unknown the degree to which the negative spillovers are




                                             18
overstated. The results for utilization (for which the omitted year was that prior to

withdrawal since it did not need to be used to assess the change in utilization) also

indicated substantial negative spillovers lasting at least three years, however.

       Initiations of pain medications also reflect negative spillovers. Relative to the

year before withdrawal, initiations were only 87.7 percent as likely one year after

withdrawal, 70.3 percent as likely two years after, and 68 percent as likely three years

after. The negative spillovers for IBS drugs are shorter-lived. Only one year after

withdrawal is initiation significantly lower (45.8 percent as likely as the year before

withdrawal).

       Initiations of non-withdrawn hypertension drugs fell to only 69.1 percent of their

previous level the year of withdrawal. In subsequent years the odds ratios remain below

1 but the change relative to the year before withdrawal is not statistically significant.

       Only one drug class, for heartburn, has results consistent with competitive

benefits. One year after withdrawal, the initiation of non-withdrawn heartburn drugs was

160.8 percent more likely than it was the year before withdrawal. There are no

statistically significant benefits in the following year (two years after withdrawal),

however.

       Quits of non-withdrawn drugs are detailed in Table 5. Quits of non-withdrawn

obesity drugs rise 113.3 percent the year after withdrawal. One year after that, the

change in quits is not statistically significant. No other drug class exhibits negative

spillovers in quitting behavior.

       In contrast, hypertension and cholesterol drugs appear to enjoy competitive

benefits as a result of the withdrawal of a rival drug. Quitting of non-withdrawn




                                              19
hypertension drugs is only 53.8 to 61.3 percent as likely in any of the three years

following withdrawal as it was the year before withdrawal. Quits of non-withdrawn

cholesterol drugs are only 70.2 percent as likely one year after as one year before

withdrawal. However, the cholesterol results are curious because quitting was also

significantly less likely three years before and two years before withdrawal; it may be

that by chance (or because news of Baycol’s adverse effects was disseminating) the year

before withdrawal had an unusually high quit rate and as a result in every other year quits

were significantly less likely.

       We also examined a special kind of quitting: quitting of the entire class of drugs

by those who were taking the withdrawn drugs in the year they were withdrawn. This is

a very small subsample of our overall sample, because we can only study those who in

their first MEPS observation are taking the withdrawn drug in the year it was withdrawn

(and therefore at risk of quitting). Across all drug classes, 70.8 percent of those taking

the withdrawn drug in the year it was withdrawn (N=79) did not switch to a drug that

remained available in the same class; that is, they quit the entire class. For the two

classes with the largest number of observations in this analysis, 48.7 percent of the 37

MEPS respondents who took Baycol in 2001 quit taking any cholesterol drug, and 94.7 of

the 19 MEPS respondents who took Pondimin or Redux in 1997 quit taking any anti-

obesity drug.



                Predicting Negative Spillovers or Competitive Benefits

       Our results indicate that there is no definitive pattern following drug withdrawal,

though most results point to negative spillovers. In this section we briefly explore what




                                             20
factors might determine whether a drug class enjoys competitive benefits or suffers

negative spillovers. Because the MEPS data cover only seven withdrawals in six classes,

we are unable to test our class-level hypotheses, but we can check to see if the results in

this paper are consistent with our predictions.

       The withdrawal of a drug is expected to impose both gross negative spillovers and

gross competitive benefits. The gross negative spillover is that non-withdrawn drugs will

lose customers they would have otherwise had as a result of the withdrawal, both in the

form of increased quits and decreased initiation; perhaps because the patients fear that the

adverse effects of the withdrawn drug are shared by the remaining drugs in the class. The

gross competitive benefit is that the non-withdrawn drugs gain some business as a result

of the withdrawal; some of those who were previously taking the withdrawn drug will

switch to other drugs that remain available in the same therapeutic class after their drug is

withdrawn from the market.

       In order for there to be competitive benefits on net, the number of former users of

the withdrawn drugs who switch to remaining drugs must exceed the number of previous

users of non-withdrawn drugs who quit the class plus the number of people who would

have initiated use in the absence of the withdrawal but will not initiate because of the

withdrawal, or:

                        gross increase > gross decreases
                  switchers > additional quits + lost initiators
                       NW *(1 − x) > N NW * y + N NONE * z
Where NW is the number of people who were taking the withdrawn drug, N NW is the

number of people who were taking the non-withdrawn drugs, and N NONE is the number of

people not using any drug in the class (i.e. the number at risk of initiating use). Letting



                                              21
x denote the percentage of people previously taking the withdrawn drug who quit the

class entirely after the drug withdrawal, (1- x ) is the percentage of those who previously

used the withdrawn drug who switch to a drug that remains on the market in the

therapeutic class. The increase in rate of quits of non-withdrawn drugs as a result of the

withdrawal is denoted as y, and z is the decrease in the initiation rate of non-withdrawn

drugs due to the withdrawal.

       According to these equations, competitive benefits are more likely if, ceteris

paribus, the following conditions hold. First, the number of people taking the withdrawn

drug is large relative to the number of people already taking the non-withdrawn drugs in

the same class and the number of lost initiators. Competitive benefits are more likely

when the withdrawn drug had a high market share because it ensures that a large number

of people are at risk of switching to non-withdrawn drugs in the same class. The market

share of the withdrawn drugs we study varies dramatically. In the MEPS Prescribed

Medicines File, Propulsid represented 57.7 percent of the heartburn medication market at

the time it was withdrawn, and Pondimin and Redux jointly represented 46.9 percent of

the anti-obesity drug market. In contrast, Lotronex accounted for 8.1 percent of the IBS

market, and Baycol for 4.7 percent of the cholesterol drug market. The other two

withdrawn drugs had trivial shares of the market: Duract was 1.2 percent of the pain

medication market when it was withdrawn, and Posicor was only 0.3 percent of the

hypertensive market. The large market shares of withdrawn drugs in the obesity and

heartburn markets suggests that we should be more likely to find net competitive benefits

of the withdrawals in the obesity and heartburn classes, ceteris paribus. In the heartburn

class, we do in fact find evidence of net competitive benefits in the overall utilization




                                             22
(Table 3) and initiation (Table 4). However, for obesity drugs we find strong evidence of

net negative spillovers in those same two outcomes.

       We also find evidence of negative spillovers in overall utilization and initiation

for two classes in which the withdrawn drug had small market share: pain and

hypertension medications. Duract and Posicor were used by so few that the number

switching from them to non-withdrawn drugs in the same class was insufficient to offset

the quits of non-withdrawn drugs. In both cases, overall utilization of non-withdrawn

drugs fell after withdrawal.

       However, market share of the withdrawn drug is not the only variable that

matters. Competitive benefits are more likely the smaller are x (the percentage of

previous users of the withdrawn drug that quit the entire class after withdrawal), y (the

increase in rate of quits by users of non-withdrawn drugs after withdrawal), and z (the

decrease in initiations of non-withdrawn drugs after withdrawal). Each of these may be

more likely when the remaining drugs are perceived by consumers and physicians to be

unlikely to share the adverse health events that led to the withdrawal of the other drug in

the class, when the remaining drugs are especially efficacious, or when there exist few

over-the-counter or non-pharmacologic treatments for the condition. While we do not

have quantitative measures of these factors, we consider this to be an important direction

for future work, so the FDA can better predict how consumers will respond if they

withdraw a given drug from the market.




                                             23
                                      Generalizability

        Several factors should be considered when generalizing the results associated with

these drug withdrawals to other classes. First, the withdrawal of Redux and Pondimin

was extremely well-publicized and this may have led to greater response by consumers

than is typical.

        Second, one non-withdrawn obesity drug, phentermine, was both a substitute to

and a complement for the withdrawn drugs. It was a substitute because it could be

prescribed in the place of Redux or Pondimin, but was also a complement in that it was

the other ingredient in the drug cocktail fen-phen. The complementary nature of

phentermine suggests a smaller increase in utilization after the withdrawal of Redux and

Pondimin than one would predict if phentermine were exclusively a substitute for the

withdrawn drugs. Markets in which remaining drugs are exclusively substitutes may

exhibit greater competitive benefits and weaker negative spillovers.

        Third, the withdrawn IBS drug Lotronex is a special case because it was returned

to market in November of 2002, approved for only a small segment of the patient

population. There is no respondent in the 2002 MEPS data who reports taking Lotronex,

but the fact that it was returned to market at all makes it a special case and may limit its

generalization to permanent drug withdrawals in other classes.



                                        Conclusions

        Our findings complement a literature in finance that documents changes in the

prices of shares in pharmaceutical companies after a rival firm’s drug is withdrawn from

the market. Some papers in that literature document negative spillovers (Jarrell and




                                             24
Peltzman, 1985) while others document competitive benefits (e.g. Ahmed et al., 2002;

Dowdell et al. 1992). Our results vary by drug class. For three classes (obesity, pain, and

IBS) we find evidence of negative spillovers, while in two others (heartburn and

cholesterol) we find evidence of competitive benefits. In another class (hypertension) we

find evidence of both negative spillovers (in the form of decreased utilization and

initiations) and competitive benefits (in the form of lower quits). Across all drug classes

and outcomes, the evidence for competitive benefits is weaker because it is also

consistent with trends in unobserved factors or idiosyncratic comparison years.

       These results also have implications for drug product market definition. Both the

positive and negative spillovers in the wake of drug withdrawal we document suggest

that drugs within the same therapeutic class are to some extent substitutable and hence

compete within the same product market. Finally, our paper also relates to a recent

literature in pharmaceutical economics that documents consumer responses to positive

information such as direct-to-consumer advertising (Rosenthal et al. 2003; Iizuka and Jin

2003). Our finding establishes that the effects of bad news also can spill over throughout

a drug class.




                                            25
                                       References

Agovino, Theresa. “Merck Faces Huge Fallout Over Vioxx Suits.” Washington Post,
      November 4, 2004.

Ahmed, Parvez, John Gardella, and Sudhir Nanda. “Wealth Effect of Drug Withdrawals
     on Firms and Their Competitors.” Financial Management, 31(3) (2002): 21-41.

Arbeeny, Cynthia M. “Addressing the Unmet Medical Need for Safe and Effective
      Weight Loss Therapies.” Obesity Research, 12(8) (2004): 1191-1196.
Azoulay, Pierre. “Do Pharmaceutical Sales Respond to Scientific Evidence?” Journal of
      Economics & Management Strategy 11(4) (2002): 551-594.

Banthin, Jessica S. and G. Edward Miller. “Trends in Prescription Drug Expenditures by
       Medicaid Enrollees.” Working paper, Agency for Healthcare Research and
       Quality (2005). Paper presented at 2005 Association for Public Policy Analysis
       and Management meetings.

Berndt, Ernst. “Pharmaceuticals in U.S. Health Care: Determinants of Quantity and
       Price.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(4) (2002): 45-66.

Berndt, Ernst, A. Bhattacharjya, DN Mishol, A Arcelus, and T Lasky. “An Analysis of
       the Diffusion of New Antidepressants: Variety, Quality, and Marketing Efforts.”
       The Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics 5 (2002): 3-19.

Berndt, Ernst, et al. Information, Marketing, and Pricing in the U.S. Antiulcer Market.
       American Economic Review 85(2) (1995): 100-105.

Bosch, J.C., E.W. Eckard, and V. Singal. “The Competitive Impact of Air Crashes:
       Stock Market Evidence.” Journal of Law & Economics 41 (1998): 503-519.
Bound, John, Charles Brown, and Nancy Mathiowetz. “Measurement Error in Survey
      Data.” in Handbook of Econometrics, volume 5, ed. James Heckman and Ed
      Leamer. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2002.

Calfee John, et al. Direct-to-Consumer Advertising and the Demand for Cholesterol-
       Reducing Drugs.” Journal of Law & Economics 45 (2002): 673-690.

Cawley, John. “The Impact of Obesity on Wages.” Journal of Human Resources 39(2)
      (2004): 451-474.




                                           26
Congressional Budget Office. How Increased Competition from Generic Drugs Has
      Affected Prices and Returns in the Pharmaceutical Industry. Washington, DC:
      Congressional Budget Office, 1998.
Connolly, H.M., Crary J.L., M. McGoon, et al. “Valvular Heart Disease Associated with
      Fenfluramine-Phentermine.” New England Journal of Medicine 337(9) (1997):
      581-588.
Dowdell, T. D., S. Govindaraj, and P.C. Jain. “The Tylenol Incident, Ensuing Regulation
     and Stock Prices.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 27 (1992):
     283-301.
Dranove, David, and Chris Olsen. “The Economic Side Effect of Dangerous Drug
      Announcements.” Journal of Law & Economics 37(2) (1994): 323-348.
Farrigan, C., and Pang, K. “Obesity Market Overview.” Nature Reviews/Drug Discovery
       1: 257-258, April 2002.

Flegal, K. M., M. D. Carroll, R. J. Kuczmarski, and C. L. Johnson. “Overweight and
        Obesity in the United States: Prevalence and Trends, 1960-1994.” International
        Journal of Obesity 22 (1998): 39-47.

Flegal, Katherine M., Margaret D. Carroll, Cynthia L. Ogden, and Clifford L. Johnson.
        “Prevalence and Trends in Obesity Among U.S. Adults, 1999-2000.” JAMA.
        288(14) (2002): 1723-1727.

Fontaine, K., and Bartlett, S. “Access and Use of Medical Care Among Obese Persons.”
       Obesity Research 8 (2000): 403-406.

Goldman, Dana P., Geoffrey F. Joyce, Jose J. Escarce, et al. 2004. “Pharmacy Benefits
      and the Use of Drugs by the Chronically Ill.” JAMA 291(19): 2344-2350.

Gura, Trisha. “Obesity Drug Pipeline Not So Fat.” Science 299 (20030: 849-852.

Harris, Gardiner. “FDA Failing in Drug Safety, Official Asserts.” New York Times,
        November 19, 2004.

Hedley, A.A., C.L. Ogden, C.L. Johnson, M.D. Carroll, L.R. Curtin, and K.M. Flegal.
      “Prevalence of Overweight and Obesity Among US Children, Adolescents, and
      Adults, 1999-2002.” JAMA 291(23) (2004): 2847-2850.

Hill, J. and T. Schneeweis. “The Effect of Three Mile Island on Electricity Utility Stock
         Prices: A Note.” Journal of Finance 38 (1983): 1285-1292.
Hurwitz, M., and Caves, Richard. Persuasion or Information? Promotion and the Shares
      of Brand Name and Generic Pharmaceuticals. Journal of Law & Economics 31
      (1988): 299-320.




                                           27
Iizuka, Toshiaki and Ginger Z. Jin. “The Effects of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising in
        the Prescription Drug Markets.” Unpublished manuscript (2003).

Jarrell, Gregg and Sam Peltzman. “The Impact of Product Recalls on the Wealth of
         Sellers.” Journal of Political Economy 93(3) (1985): 512-536.

Jick, Hershel. “Heart Valve Disorders and Appetite-Suppressant Drugs.” JAMA 283(13)
       (2000): 1738-1740.

Leffler, Keith. Persuasion or Information? The Economics of Prescription Drug
        Advertising. Journal of Law & Economics 24(1) (1981): 45-74.

Lee, Lung-fei and Jungsywan H. Sepanski. “Estimation of Linear and Nonlinear Errors-
       in-Variables Models Using Validation Data.” Journal of the American Statistical
       Association 90(429) (1995): 130-40.

Lichtenberg, Frank and Tomas Philipson. “The Dual effects of Inteleectual Property
       regulations: Within- and Between-Patent Competition in the US Pharmacetuicals
       Industry.” Journal of Law & Economics 45 (2002): 643-672.

Ling, Davina C., Ernst R. Berndt, and Margaret K. Kyle. “Deregulating Direct-to-
       Consumer Marketing of Prescription Drugs: Effects on Prescription and Over-the-
       Counter Product Sales.” Journal of Law & Economics 45 (2002): 691-723.

Lu, John and William S. comanor. “Strategic Pricing of New Pharmaceuticals.” Review
       of Economics and Statistics 80 (1998): 108-118.

Meadows, Michelle. “Why Drugs Get Pulled Off the Market,” FDA Consumer, January-
     February (2002).

Mirasol, Feliza. “Biotechs Pursue Anti-Obesity Drugs, the Holy Grail of
       Pharmaceuticals.” Chemical Market Reporter 265(9) (20040: 8.

Mokdad, A.H., B.A. Bowman, E.S. Ford, et al. “Prevalence of Obesity, Diabetes, and
     Obesity Related Health Risk Factors, 2001.” JAMA 289 (2003):76–79.

Mundy, Alicia. Dispensing With the Truth: The Victims, the Drug Companies, and the
     Dramatic Story Behind the Battle over Fen-Phen. (New York: St. Martin’s Press),
     2001.

Nieto-Garcia, F. Javier, Trudy L. Bush, and Penelope M. Keyl. “Body Mass Definitions
       of Obesity: Sensitivity and Specificity Using Self-Reported Weight and Height.”
       Epidemiolog, 1(2) (1990): 146-152.




                                          28
Padwal, R., S.K. Li and D.C.W. Lau. “Long-Term Pharmacotherapy for Overweight and
      Obesity: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Control
      Trials.” International Journal of Obesity 27 (2003): 1437-1446.

Powell, A.D. and Kahn, A.S. “Racial Differences in Womens’ Desires to be Thin.”
       International Journal of Eating Disorders 17 (1995): 191-195.

Rizzo, John. (1999). “Advertising and Competition in the Ethical Pharmaceutical
       Industry: The Case of Antihypertensive Drugs.” Journal of Law & Economics
       42 (1999): 89-116.

Rosenthal, Meredith B., et al. “Demand Effects of Recent Changes in Prescription Drug
      Promotion.” Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation Report (2003).

Rowland, Michael L. “Reporting Bias in Height and Weight Data.” Statistical Bulletin
      70(2) (1989): 2-11.

Sobal, J. “Sociological Analysis of the Stigmatisation of Obesity. In: Germov, John,
        and Williams, Lauren (eds.). A Sociology of Food and Nutrition: The Social
        Appetite. 2nd Edition. (Melbourne: John Wiley) (2004).

Sobal, J. and Stunkard, A.J. “Socioeconomic Status and Obesity: a Review of the
        Literature.” Psychological Bulletin 105 (1989): 260-75.

Stafford, Randall S. and David C. Radley. “National Trends in Antiobesity Medication
       Use.” Archives of Internal Medicine 163 (2003): 1046-1050.

Stern, Scott, and Manuel Trajtenberg. “Empirical Implications of Physician Authority in
        Pharmaceutical Decisionmaking.” NBER Working Paper #6851 (1998).

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. “Cardiac Valvulopathy Associated with
       Exposure to Fenfluramine or Dexfenfluramine.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
       Report 46(45) (1997): 1061-1066.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Surgeon General’s Call to Action
       to Prevent and Decrease Overweight and Obesity. Washington, DC: U. S.
       Government Printing Office (2001).

Williamson, Donald A. and Patrick Mahlen O’Neil. “Behavioral and Psychological
       Correlates of Obesity.” In Bray, George A., Claude Bouchard, and W.P.T. James
       (eds.), Handbook of Obesity (New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.) (1998)

Wosinska, Marta. “Advertising and Optimal Consumption Path: The Case of Prescription
      Drugs.” Unpublished manuscript (2003).

Wosinska, Marta. “Direct-to-Consumer Advertising and Patient Therapy Compliance.”



                                          29
      Unpublished manuscript (2004).

Wysowski, Diane K. and Lynette Swartz. 2005. “Adverse Drug Event Surveillance and
     Drug Withdrawals in the United States, 1969-2002.” Archives of Internal
     Medicine 165:1363-69.




                                       30
                                                  Table 1
                                       Seven Drug Withdrawals Studied

  Brand      Indication       Date        Primary Health        Name of Class          Drugs In Class
 Name of      Treated      Withdrawn     Risk (Reason Drug                           Remaining on Market
Withdrawn                                   Withdrawn)
   Drug
Pondimin      Obesity      9/15/1997     Valvular heart                          Adipex, Ionamin, Meridia,
Redux                                    disease                 Anorectics      Phentermine, Diethylpropion,
                                                                                 Dexedrine
Duract          Pain       6/22/1998     Liver failure          Non-steroidal    Arthrotec, Naproxon, Ibuprofin,
                                                                     anti-       Diclofenac, Daypro, Diclofenac
                                                                inflammatory     Sodium
Posicor     Hypertension    6/8/1998     Lowered heart rate,       Calcium       Adalat, Calan, Cardizem,
                                         adverse interactions      channel       Covera, Diltiazem Hcl, Norvasc
                                         with 26 other drugs       blockers
Propulsid    Heartburn     7/14/2000     Potentially fatal      GI stimulants    Metoclopramide Hcl, Reglan
                                         irregular heartbeat
Lotronex     Irritable     11/28/2000    Ischemic colitis       Antidiarrheals   Carafate, Cytotec, Sucralfate
              Bowel
            Syndrome
Baycol         High         8/8/2001     Fatal                   HMG-CoA         Lipitor, Zocor, Pravachol,
            Cholesterol                  rhabdomyolysis          Reductase       Lescol, Mevacor
                                                                 Inhibitors




                                                         31
                                         Table 2
                               Means of Dependent Variables
                       (Refer to Non-Withdrawn Drugs in Each Class)

           Indication Treated by             Utilization          Initiations         Quits
                Class That
             Experienced Drug
                Withdrawal
          Obesity                              .005                 .003              .665
                                            (N=124,314)          (N=55,030)         (N=297)

          Pain                                 .108                 .065             .592
                                            (N=124,314)          (N=48,852)        (N=6,475)

          Hypertension                         .068                 .015             .230
                                            (N=124,314)          (N=51,730)        (N=3,597)

          Heartburn                            .004                 .002              .549
                                            (N=124,314)          (N=55,125)         (N=202)

          IBS                                  .004                 .002              .632
                                            (N=124,314)          (N=55,133)         (N=194)

          Cholesterol                          .065                 .022             .148
                                            (N=124,314)          (N=51,926)        (N=3,401)



Notes:
1) Data: Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, 1996-2002
2) Each row refers to non-withdrawn drugs in a therapeutic class that remained after the named drugs were
withdrawn. For example, the first row refers to obesity drugs that remained on the market after Redux and
Pondimin were withdrawn.
3) Sample size shown in parentheses below mean of the dependent variable.




                                                   32
                                                  Table 3
                      Utilization of non-withdrawn drugs in that therapeutic class
                                                N=124,314
                                        Odds ratios and (t-statistics)
 Indication      Withdrawal Withdrawal              Year        Withdrawal Withdrawal                         Withdrawal
  Treated         – 3 Years       – 2 Years    Withdrawn          + 1 Year  + 2 Years                          + 3 Years
Obesity                                            1.104          0.673**    0.664*                            0.436***
                                                   (0.70)           (2.16)    (1.93)                             (4.18)
Pain                               1.076*          0.960         0.886***   0.734***                           0.684***
                                    (1.79)         (0.96)           (2.94)    (6.63)                             (7.97)
Hypertension                      1.291***         0.930            0.961    0.893*                             0.892*
                                    (4.42)         (1.31)           (0.61)    (1.75)                             (1.81)
Heartburn          0.598*           1.094          1.249          1.537**     1.408
                    (1.85)          (0.45)         (1.09)           (2.21)    (1.55)
IBS                 1.229           0.901          0.772           0.682*     0.919
                    (0.89)          (0.49)         (1.16)           (1.86)    (0.40)
Cholesterol        0.781**         0.846**       1.271***        1.523***
                    (2.49)          (2.50)         (3.94)           (4.30)

       Notes:
       1) Data: Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, 1996-2002
       2) Cells contain odds ratios and the absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
       3) Asterisks indicate statistical significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
       1%
       4) In addition to time indicators, models control for the following regressors: the trend in per capita number
       of scrips in respondent’s geographic area, indicator variables for whether the respondent has the condition
       treated by that class of drugs, gender, African-American, Hispanic, other race/ethnicity, married, whether
       the respondent has health insurance, whether the respondent’s health insurance includes prescription drug
       coverage, age categories, urban residence, Census Region categories, income categories, and education
       categories.
       5) Standard errors are cluster-corrected by individual
       6) The STATA command svylogit is used to account for MEPS sample weights and the MEPS survey
       design (stratum and psu).




                                                            33
                                                          Table 4
                               Initiation of non-withdrawn drugs in that therapeutic class
                                                Odds ratios and (t-statistics)
 Indication           N         Withdrawal Withdrawal            Year          Withdrawal Withdrawal                       Withdrawal
  Treated                        – 3 Years      – 2 Years     Withdrawn          + 1 Year   + 2 Years                        + 3 Years
Obesity            55,030                                                      0.444***   0.506**                          0.332***
                                                                               (2.68)     (2.07)                           (3.82)
Pain               48,852                                    0.915             0.877*     0.703***                         0.680***
                                                             (1.14)            (1.89)     (4.12)                           (4.46)
Hypertension       51,730                                    0.691**           0.888      0.894                            0.994
                                                             (2.30)            (0.66)     (0.74)                           (0.04)
Heartburn          55,125      1.127          1.468          1.995             2.608**    1.330
                               (0.24)         (0.73)         (1.53)            (2.27)     (.059)
IBS                55,133      1.175          0.720          0.607             0.458**    0.936
                               (0.43)         (0.97)         (1.16)            (2.09)     (0.16)
Cholesterol        51,926      0.791          0.596***       0.905             1.269
                               (1.55)         (3.16)         (0.61)            (1.41)

              Notes:
              1) Data: Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, 1996-2002
              2) Cells contain odds ratios and the absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
              3) Asterisks indicate statistical significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
              1%
              4) In addition to time indicators, models control for the following regressors: the trend in per capita number
              of scrips in respondent’s geographic area, indicator variables for whether the respondent has the condition
              treated by that class of drugs, gender, African-American, Hispanic, other race/ethnicity, married, whether
              the respondent has health insurance, whether the respondent’s health insurance includes prescription drug
              coverage, age categories, urban residence, Census Region categories, income categories, and education
              categories.
              5) Standard errors are cluster-corrected by individual
              6) The STATA command svylogit is used to account for MEPS sample weights and the MEPS survey
              design (stratum and psu).




                                                                   34
                                                        Table 5
                                Quits of non-withdrawn drugs in that therapeutic class
                                             Odds ratios and (t-statistics)
 Indication           N        Withdrawal Withdrawal           Year         Withdrawal Withdrawal                              Withdrawal
  Treated                       – 3 Years     – 2 Years    Withdrawn         + 1 Year   + 2 Years                               + 3 Years
Obesity              297                                                      2.133*      1.188                                   0.743
                                                                               (1.72)     (0.33)                                  (0.66)
Pain                6,475                                     0.871            1.066      1.134                                  1.242**
                                                              (1.55)           (0.66)     (1.35)                                  (2.01)
Hypertension        3,597                                   0.603***         0.554***   0.613***                                0.538***
                                                              (3.38)           (3.53)     (3.30)                                  (3.66)
Heartburn            202          1.948         0.988         2.322            0.634      0.569
                                  (0.97)        (0.02)        (1.31)           (0.74)     (0.83)
IBS                  194          1.508         0.533         1.305            1.763      3.233
                                  (0.55)        (0.80)        (0.34)           (0.68)     (1.29)
Cholesterol         3,400        0.665**       0.696*        0.717*           0.702*
                                  (1.99)        (1.77)        (1.84)           (1.72)

              Notes:
              1) Data: Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, 1996-2002
              2) Cells contain odds ratios and the absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
              3) Asterisks indicate statistical significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
              1%
              4) In addition to time indicators, models control for the following regressors: the trend in per capita number
              of scrips in respondent’s geographic area, indicator variables for whether the respondent has the condition
              treated by that class of drugs, gender, African-American, Hispanic, other race/ethnicity, married, whether
              the respondent has health insurance, whether the respondent’s health insurance includes prescription drug
              coverage, age categories, urban residence, Census Region categories, income categories, and education
              categories.
              5) Standard errors are cluster-corrected by individual




                                                                   35
