NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SMEs, GROWTH, AND POVERTY
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
Ross Levine
Working Paper 11224
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11224
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt: World Bank; Levine: University of Minnesota and the NBER. We would like to
thank Gerard Caprio, Maria Carkovic, George Clarke, Simeon Djankov, Mary Hallward-Driemeier, Patrick
Honohan, Phil Keefer, Aart Kraay, Norman Loayza, Richard Messick, Brad Roberts, Nick Stern, Chris
Woodruff, an anonymous referee and seminar participants at the World Bank for very helpful comments. We
greatly appreciate the outstanding research assistance we received from Meghana Ayyagari and April Knill.
This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they representThe views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

SMEs, Growth, and Poverty
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 11224
March 2005
JEL No. O1, O2, L11, L25
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the relationship between the relative size of the Small and Medium Enterprise
(SME) sector, economic growth, and poverty alleviation using a new database on the share of SME
labor in the total manufacturing labor force. Using a sample of 45 countries, we find a strong,
positive association between the importance of SMEs and GDP per capita growth. The data do not,
however, confidently support the conclusions that SMEs exert a causal impact on growth.
Furthermore, we find no evidence that SMEs alleviate poverty or decrease income inequality.
Thorsten Beck
World Bank
tbeck@worldbank.org
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
World Bank
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org
Ross Levine
Finance Department, Room 3-257
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

I.

Introduction
To accelerate growth and reduce poverty, the World Bank Group and other international

aid agencies provide targeted assistance to small and medium size enterprises (SMEs) in
developing economies. For example, the World Bank Group approved more than $10 billion in
SME support programs over the period 1998 – 2002 and $1.3 billion in 2003.1
This pro-SME policy is based on three core arguments (World Bank, 1994, 2002, 2004).
First, SME advocates argue that SMEs enhance competition and entrepreneurship and hence
have external benefits on economy-wide efficiency, innovation, and aggregate productivity
growth. From this perspective, direct government support of SMEs will help countries exploit
the social benefits from greater competition and entrepreneurship. Second, SME proponents
frequently claim that SMEs are more productive than large firms but financial market and other
institutional failures impede SME development. Thus, pending financial and institutional
improvements, direct government financial support to SMEs can boost economic growth and
development. Finally, some argue that SME expansion boosts employment more than large firm
growth because SMEs are more labor intensive. From this perspective, subsidizing SMEs may
represent a poverty alleviation tool.
While the international community channels a large amount of aid into subsidizing
SMEs, four skeptical views question the efficacy of this policy. First, some authors stress the
advantages of large firms and challenge the assumptions underlying the pro-SME view.
Specifically, large enterprises may exploit economies of scale and more easily undertake the
fixed costs associated with research and development (R&D) with positive productivity effects

1

These statistics are from World Bank (2002, 2004). The World Bank provides direct and indirect support to
SMEs. In terms of World Bank activities, 80 percent of World Bank programs involve direct financial assistance to
SMEs, while 20 percent of World Bank programs involve indirect support such as technical assistance for SMEs and
for institutions that support SME development.

1

(Pagano and Schivardi, 2001; Pack and Westphal, 1986). Also, some hold that large firms
provide more stable and therefore higher quality jobs than small firms with positive ramifications
for poverty alleviation (Rosenzweig, 1988; Brown et al., 1990).
A second set of skeptical views directly challenges the assumptions underlying pro-SME
arguments. In particular, some research finds that SMEs are neither more labor intensive, nor
better at job creation than large firms (Little, et al., 1987). Furthermore, recent work finds that
under-developed financial and legal institutions hurt many types of firms besides SMEs. Indeed,
research finds that under-developed institutions constrain firms from growing to their efficient
sizes (Beck, et al., 2003; and Kumar, et al., 2001).
A third set of skeptical views question the validity of considering firm size as an
exogenous determinant of economic growth. From the industrial organization literature, natural
resource endowments, technology, policies, and institutions help determine a nation’s industrial
composition and optimal firm size (Kumar, et al., 2001). For instance, some countries may have
endowments that give the country a comparative advantage in the production of goods that are
produced efficiently in large firms while other countries will have a comparative advantage in
goods produced most economically in small firms (You, 1995). Similarly, countries that are
open to international trade may have a larger optimal firm size than countries that are less
integrated internationally (Caves et al., 1980). As a final example, institutional theories suggest
that firm size will reflect the margin between intra-firm transactions costs and market
transactions costs, such that as market transaction costs fall relative to intra-firm transactions
costs the optimal firm size falls (Coase, 1937). This margin will vary across industries and
countries for various institutional and technological reasons. Thus, pro-SME subsidization
policies could actually distort firm size and potentially hurt economic efficiency.

2

A fourth skeptical view regarding the efficacy of pro-SME policies, which we term the
business environment view, doubts the crucial role of SMEs, but instead stresses the importance
of the business environment facing all firms, big and small. Low entry and exit barriers, welldefined property rights, and effective contract enforcement characterize a business environment
that is conducive to competition and private commercial transactions. While these factors may
encourage SMEs, the focus of the business environment view is not on SMEs per se; it is on the
environment facing all businesses. Thus, consistent with the other skeptical views, the business
environment view questions the pro-SME policy prescription of subsidizing SME development.
The microeconomic evidence from individual countries does not provide much support
for the pro-SME view. The bulk of the firm-level evidence does not support the contention that
SMEs are particularly effective job creators. Furthermore, microeconomic research does not
universally support the claim that SMEs foster innovation. Finally, while some firm-level
studies find that SMEs intensify competition, the direct evidence on productivity growth fails to
confirm the pro-SME view. Thus, as we discuss further in the next section, firm-level studies do
not provide an empirical foundation for subsidizing SMEs.
These microeconomic studies, however, are country-specific and only involve a small
number of countries. Thus, it is natural to ask whether cross-country evidence provides an
empirical basis for pro-SME policies. However, the absence of comparable international data on
SMEs has hampered cross-country analyses of SMEs, growth, and poverty.
This paper provides the first cross-country evidence on the links between SMEs and
economic growth and poverty alleviation using a newly built database on SMEs. Our SME
measure is the share of the manufacturing labor force in firms with 250 or fewer employees in
total manufacturing labor force. We then assess the relationship between the size of SME sector
and economic growth as measured by per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth
3

averaged over the 1990s. Next, we examine the relationship between SMEs, income inequality
and poverty, using four measures: (1) the growth rate of the income of the poorest quintile of the
population during the 1990s, (2) the growth rate in the Gini coefficient, (3) the growth rate in the
percentage of the population living on less than a dollar a day, and (4) the growth rate in the
“poverty gap,” which is a weighted average of the fraction of the population living on less than a
dollar a day and how far below one dollar day incomes fall. In conducting these analyses, we
control for an array of country-specific factors. Further, besides examining the relationship
between the size of the SME sector and economic development, we offer an initial assessment of
whether SMEs exert a causal impact on economic growth and poverty alleviation.
The cross-country regressions yield three results. First, in the sense of Levine and Renelt
(1992), there is a robust, positive relationship between the relative size of the SME sector and
economic growth. Thus, even when controlling for many other growth determinants - including
an aggregate index of the overall business environment that incorporates information on entry
and exit barriers, effective property rights protection, and sound contract enforcement, we find a
statistically significant and economically large relationship between growth and the size of the
SME sector. This relationship is also robust to controlling for the effects of outliers and to using
an indicator of the SME sector limited to the first available observation in the 1990s. Second,
we find that the SME-growth relationship is not robust to using instrumental variables to control
for endogeneity. While SMEs are a characteristic of fast-growing economies, cross-country
analyses do not necessarily support the conclusion that SMEs exert a causal impact on long-run
growth. Third, we do not find a significant relationship between SMEs and poverty alleviation.
Specifically, the size of the SME sector is not significantly associated with the growth rates of (i)
the income of the poorest quintile of society, (ii) the Gini coefficient, (iii) the percentage of the
population living on less than one dollar a day, or (iv) the poverty gap when controlling for the
4

growth of GDP per capita. Thus, we do not find that SMEs exert a differential impact on the
poor.
Consistent with industrial organization theories described above, this paper finds that
although fast growing economies tend to have large SME sectors, cross-country analyses do not
provide strong support for the view that SMEs exert a causal impact on growth and poverty
alleviation. As discussed in more detail below, the causality results should be interpreted
cautiously. The regressions do not necessarily lead to the conclusion that SMEs do not foster
growth and poverty alleviation. Rather, we generally fail to reject the hypothesis that SMEs do
not exert a causal impact on growth and poverty. In sum, the cross-country results are consistent
with the view that a large SME sector in manufacturing is a characteristic of successful
economies, not necessarily an exogenous, causal factor.
A number of qualifications must be emphasized. First, this paper examines cross-country
regressions and therefore does not trace the experience of any single country in depth. Thus,
individual countries may have experiences that differ from the aggregate results presented here.
Second, as discussed in Levine and Zervos (1993), some observers hold that countries are
so different that they cannot be viewed as being drawn from the same population and therefore
reject the validity of cross-country regressions. Our own assessment is that we control for
sufficient country characteristics such that we garner useful –albeit not definitive -- information
from the cross-country comparisons. Furthermore, our skeptical results regarding pro-SME
policies are consistent with the bulk of the microeconomic evidence.
Third, when computing the average rate of per capita GDP growth over the 1990s, the
data may reflect steady-state growth factors, transitional dynamics, business cycle phenomena,
and crises. Given that our SME data are limited to the 1990s, we cannot assess the long-term
SME-growth relationship over 20- or 30-year periods as would be preferable. This confounds
5

one’s ability to interpret the growth regressions as relating solely to long-run growth. We control
for non-steady-state growth influences using standard methods, but recognize that aggregation
problems are endemic to cross-country growth regressions.
Finally, this paper examines SME employment, not the subsidization of SMEs. Thus,
even if the cross-country regressions were to indicate that SMEs exogenously increase growth
and development and reduce poverty, this does not necessarily imply that government
subsidization of SMEs will have these positive effects.2 Nevertheless, this paper is a necessary
first step in using cross-country analyses to help assess the links between SMEs and both growth
and poverty alleviation.
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant
literature and the questions we address. Section 3 describes the data and methodology. Section
4 presents our main results. Section 5 concludes with policy implications.

II.

Existing Literature
This section reviews the existing microeconomic evidence on whether SMEs boost

growth and reduce poverty. 3
As noted in the introduction, a growing body of work suggests that SMEs do not boost
the quantity and quality of employment. Initially, Birch (1979) argued that small firms are
particularly important in job creation. He reports that over the 1970s, firms with fewer than 100
employees generated eight out of ten new jobs in America. However, a wide array of evidence
rejects the view that small firms are the engines of job formation (Dunne, Roberts, and
2

Further, all pro-SME policies are not the same. Some pro-SME policies might stimulate overall employment
growth, while others simply induce a substitution out of large firms and into small ones. Our work will not identify
these differences. Rather, we assess the impact of SME size on economic development. Future research can

6

Samuelson, 1989; Leonard, 1986; Brown, Hamilton, and Medoff, 1990). For instance, Davis,
Haltiwanger and Schuh (1993) show that while gross rates of job creation and destruction are
higher in small firms, there is no systematic relationship between net job creation and firm size.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, Biggs and Shah (1998) find that large firms were the dominant source of
net job creation in the manufacturing sector.
Furthermore, empirical evidence suggests that firm size is not a good predictor of labor
intensity, and that labor intensity varies more across industries than across firm-size groups
within industries. Many small firms are more capital intensive than large firms in the same
industry (Little, Mazumdar, Page, 1987; Snodgrass and Biggs, 1996). This suggests that SMEs
are not necessarily more suitable to the labor abundance and capital shortage characteristics of
developing countries.
In terms of job quality, microeconomic evidence does not support the pro-SME view that
small firms create better quality jobs than large firms. Empirical evidence shows that large firms
offer more stable employment, higher wages and more non-wage benefits than small firms in
developed and developing countries, even after controlling for differences in education,
experience and industry (Brown, Medoff and Hamilton, 1990; Rosenzweig, 1988). Many small
firms are created as last resort rather than as first choice and have therefore limited growth
potential (Compare Liedholm and Mead (1987) for Africa and de Soto (1987) for Latin
America.).
Although the Pro-SME view argues that small firms are more innovative than large firms,
the microeconomic evidence is at best inconclusive. Examining U.S. firms, Acs and Audretsch
(1987) find that small firms have higher innovation rates in “high technology” skill-intensive

usefully assemble cross-country data on different SME policies to draw inferences on the relationship between
growth and SME policies per se.

7

industries and larger firms have the innovative edge in “lower technology,” capital –intensive
industries. For a sample of European industries, however, Pagano and Schivardi (2001) show
that a larger average firm size is associated with faster innovation rates. In developing countries,
there is little R&D activity, so that technology transfers from abroad and imitation drive
productivity improvement (Rosenberg, 1976; Baumol, 1994). In developing countries,
researchers find that large exporting firms are typically the primary mechanism through which
technologies are adapted from abroad to local circumstances (See Biggs, Shah, and Srivastava,
1996 for Sub-Saharan Africa; Pack, 1992, and Pack and Westphal, 1986 for Asia). Thus, from a
developing country perspective, the firm level evidence does not favor SME subsidization as a
mechanism for boosting innovation and productivity growth.
Although Pro-SME proponents hold that SMEs intensify competition and hence exert
external effects on national productivity, the firm-level evidence does not generally support this
conclusion. As reviewed above, the direct evidence on innovation rates does not support a proSME approach. Moreover, productivity studies show that total factor productivity is actually
highest for medium-sized firms and that the smallest firms are the least efficient (Little,
Mazumdar and Page, 1987).

3

This review draws heavily on Hallberg (2001) and Biggs (2002).

8

Consistent with theoretical arguments outlined in the Introduction,4 emerging empirical
evidence supports the view that firm size responds to national characteristics. Beck, DemirgucKunt, and Maksimovic (2003) find that financially more developed countries tend to have larger
firms. This suggests that financial development eases financial constraints on successful firms
and allows them to grow. Kumar, Rajan and Zingales (2001) show that countries with better
institutions, as measured by judicial system efficiency, tend to have larger firms. Sleuwaegen and
Goedhuys (2002) show that restrained access to inputs, especially credit, results in a bi-modal
firm size distribution in Côte d’Ivoire – the “missing middle” – with small firms growing slower
and large firms growing faster than in developed economies. Thus, institutional development is
associated with countries having larger firms. Furthermore, Kumar, Rajan, and Zingales (2001)
find that improvements in patent protection increase the size of firms in R&D intensive
industries. These results emphasize the institutional sources of cross-country differences in firm
size. Moreover, these findings do not support the pro-SME presumption that financial and
institutional development will boost SMEs relative to large firms and hence lead to economic
growth.5,6

4

A large theoretical literature holds that firm size distribution is a function of national endowments, technologies,
national policies and institutions (Kumar et al., 2001; Hallberg, 2001; Snodgrass and Biggs, 1996; You, 1995;
Caves, Porter, and Spence, 1980). Also, Piore and Sabel (1984) explain the importance of SME in Italy’s textile
industry around Florence and Pitoia with the emergence of industry federations and networks, the role of middlemen
and political support. Rasiah (2002) shows the importance of government-business coordination for the
development of a vibrant SME sector in Malaysia; variation in the quality of government-business relations, mostly
explainable by socio-ethnic characteristics can explain differential performance of small machine tool firms in two
different regions. Yamawaki (2002) reports that the existence of leading large firms, the existence of a pooled labor
market, and the presence of public research and testing facilities can explain the emergence of SME clusters in
Japan. Kawai and Urata (2002) show that subcontracting opportunities promote entry of new firms in Japan while
subsidized credit programs discourages it. Levy (1991) shows that the greater role of small manufacturers and
export traders in the footwear industry in Taiwan relative to Korea can be explained by higher costs for market
transactions in Korea than Taiwan. He explains the lower costs of market transactions in Taiwan with higher GDP
per capita, higher levels of education, longer commercial experience and less homogeneous society. Biggs, Raturi,
and Srivastava (2002) show the importance of ethnic networks for access to informal sources of finance in Kenya.
5
Note, however, that recent evidence provides support for the view that SMEs face greater obstacles. Using a firmlevel survey of small, medium-sized and large enterprises in 80 developing, developed and transition economies,
Schiffer and Weder (2001) show that small firms face significantly higher growth obstacles in several areas, such as
financing, taxation and regulation, exchange rate management, corruption, street crime, organized crime, and anti-

9

To complement these firm and industry level studies, this paper undertakes the first broad
cross-country examination of the impact of SMEs on growth and poverty using a new database
on SMEs.7 Specifically, we first examine the empirical connections between the size of the SME
sector and economic growth and poverty. Second, we assess whether these relationships are
robust to controlling for simultaneity bias. Finally, we evaluate whether SMEs influence the
rate of poverty reduction beyond any links with economic growth.

III.

Data and Methodology

A. Measures of SMEs and Business Environment
To measure the role of SMEs in the economy, we use a newly constructed database on
the share of total manufacturing employment accounted for by SMEs (Ayyagari, Beck and
Demirguc-Kunt, 2003). While these are the most comprehensive data on SMEs for a broad
cross-section of countries, they are not without their shortcomings. For instance, it would be
useful to have information on SME employment beyond manufacturing, but cross-country data
are unavailable for the share of SMEs in other sectors.8 Further, our SME measure is static in the
sense that it does not account for the entry of new firms, graduation of successful SMEs into
large enterprises, and the exit of failing enterprises. In our empirical analysis, therefore, we
control for the degree to which laws, regulations, and fees impede the entry and exit of firms.
Another potential problem is that these measures of the SME sector only include formal

competitive practices by other enterprises or the government. Using the same dataset, Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and
Maksimovic (2005) show that the relationship between financial, legal and corruption obstacles and firm growth is
stronger for small firms and in countries with lower levels of financial and institutional development. These papers
do not, however, show that countries with larger SME sectors enjoy greater economic success.
6
There is a separate, very extensive literature on the turnover and mobility of firms, see Caves (1998).
7
Shaffer (2002) assesses the impact of firm size distribution in manufacturing and retail on growth rates of real
household income across 700 U.S. cities.
8
Many SME advocates, however, would not see the benefits of small enterprises in manufacturing as limited to the
manufacturing sector.

10

enterprises and exclude informal enterprises. To assess the importance of this limitation, we
therefore incorporate estimates of the size of the informal sector relative to the formal sector in
each economy.
SME250 is the share of the SME sector in the total formal labor force in manufacturing
when a level of 250 employees is taken as the cutoff for the definition of an SME. This variable
provides us with a consistent measure of firm size distribution across countries.9 This variable is
averaged over all available observations for the 1990s.
Initial SME250 is the first observation of SME250 for the 1990s. For some countries,
we only have one observation for SME250 during the 1990s. More specifically, 18 countries
have more than one observation on the SME sector in the 1990s, so we take the first available
value in creating Initial SME250. For the remaining 27 countries, we simply use the observation
that we have for SME250.
While data on SME250 are available for 54 countries, we lose some observations due to
data restrictions on control variables, so that our regression sample comprises up to 45 countries.
Table I lists GDP per capita and SME250. There is a large variation in economic development
and the relative importance of SMEs. GDP per capita ranges from Tanzania (US$ 183) to
Luxembourg (US$ 45,185). The importance of SMEs varies between Zimbabwe with 15% of
total formal manufacturing employment in SMEs to Thailand with 87%.
SME250 is correlated with GDP per capita, as shown in Figure 1, with a correlation
coefficient of 40%, significant at the 1% level (Table II Panel B).
We use an aggregate index of the business environment. The values are listed in Table 1.
Business Environment is an aggregate indicator of the business climate in which firms operate

9

We also tried an indicator SMEOFF that uses the official country definition of SME, with the official country
definition varying between 100 and 500 employees. Our results are confirmed when using this alternative indicator.

11

that includes information on the degree of private property rights protection, the cost of contract
enforcement, the cost of entering the market, and the efficiency of the bankruptcy system.
Specifically, we use the first principal component of four measures. Property Rights indicates
the degree to which property rights are protected in an economy. Entrepreneurs will only be
willing to invest their personal wealth and to reinvest profits if their property rights on capital
and future returns are protected. Data are from the Heritage Foundation. Cost of contract
enforcement measures the attorney fees and court costs incurred when enforcing a debt contract
through courts relative to Gross Net Income (GNI) per capita. Better contract enforceability
induces lower transaction costs in both product and credit markets. Given the character of
finance as intertemporal contract, contract enforcement is especially important for access to
finance for firms of all sizes. Data are from Djankov et al. (2003). Cost of entry measures the
cost in terms of legal fees to formally register a new firm relative to GNI per capita. Higher
entry costs might impede new entry of formal enterprises and prevent informal entrepreneurs to
enter the formal sector. Data are from Djankov et al. (2002). Efficiency of Bankruptcy measures
the cost, duration, observance of priority of claims and efficiency of an insolvency process, with
higher values indicating a less expensive and faster process, which observes priority of claims
and reaches the most efficient outcome. Efficient exit mechanisms are the counterpart to low
entry barriers, guaranteeing an efficient reallocation of resources. Data are from the World
Bank’s web-page on Doing Business. Including an indicator of the business environment is not
only important to assess the robustness of the SME-economic growth relationship, but interesting
in itself, as one of the SME-skeptic views focuses on the business environment faced by all
firms, independent of their size.

12

B. Measures of economic growth and poverty
As dependent variables in our analyses, we use measures of economic growth, changes in
income inequality and changes in poverty.
GDP per capita growth equals the average annual growth rate in real GDP per capita
averaged over the period 1990-2000.
Income growth of the poor equals the average annual growth rate of GDP per capita of
the lowest income quintile. We thus evaluate whether there is a differential effect of the size of
the SME sector on the lowest income quintile beyond its impact on the growth rate and level of
overall GDP per capita.
Growth of Gini is the annualized log difference of the Gini coefficient, and thus a
measure of the evolution of income distribution. The Gini coefficient is defined as the ratio of
area between the Lorenz curve, which plots population shares against income shares received,
and the diagonal to the area below the diagonal. Higher values indicate more income inequality,
so that larger negative growth rates indicate a faster movement towards income equity.10
Headcount is the share of the population living on less than one dollar a day. The
national estimates are based on population-weighted sub-group estimates from household
surveys (Chen and Ravallion, 2001). We use the annualized growth rate of Headcount to assess
the impact of SME development on poverty alleviation.
Poverty gap is a weighted measure of (i) the fraction of the population living on less than
one dollar per day and (ii) how far below one dollar per day incomes fall. Specifically, it is the
mean shortfall from the poverty line, expressed as a percentage of the poverty line. This

10

While the Gini coefficient is a broader indicator of income inequality than the income share of the lowest income
quintile, empirically, the latter is an almost linear function of the former (Dollar and Kraay, 2002).

13

measures the breadth and depth of poverty (Chen and Ravallion, 2001). We use the annualized
growth rate of the poverty gap.

C. Methodology
1. Growth regressions
To evaluate the relationship between SMEs and economic growth over the period 19902000, we use the following regression:
(yi,2000-yi,1990)/10= αyi,1990+βSME250i +γXi +εi ,

(1)

where y is the log real GPD per capita, X is a set of conditioning information, i is the country
index, and ε is the white-noise error term. Except for y, all data are averaged over the 1990s.
Following Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000), we include initial income to control for convergence
effects and secondary school enrolment to capture human capital accumulation. Further, we
include several policy variables, such as government expenditures as a share of GDP, the share
of exports and imports in GDP, the inflation rate, the black market premium and the share of
credit to the private sector by financial institutions in GDP. Finally, we also include Business
Environment.

14

2. Inequality and poverty regressions
We also examine the relationship between the SME sector and (i) the growth rate of the
lowest income quintile, (ii) the growth rate of the Gini coefficient, and (iii) headcount and
poverty gap growth rates. Specifically, following Dollar and Kraay (2002), we regress the
growth rate of GDP per capita for the lowest income quintile ( y i ,l , 2000 − y i ,l ,1990 ) on real GDP per
capita growth for the whole population ( y i , 2000 − y i ,1990 ) and our indicator of the importance of
SMEs in manufacturing.11
(yi,l,2000-yi,l,1990)/10= α yi,l,1990 + β(yi,2000- yi,1990)/10 + γSME250i + εi ,

(2)

The coefficient β indicates whether income of the lowest income quintile grows
proportionally with overall income growth in the economy, while γ indicates whether there is any
differential effect of SME development on income growth of the lowest income quintile beyond
any impact on overall income growth. A positive (negative) γ indicates the lowest income
quintile benefits more (less) than proportionally from SME development.
Similarly, we regress the annualized log difference of the Gini coefficient on the log of its
initial value, GDP per capita growth, and SME250.
(Gi, 2000-Gi, 1990)/10= αGi, 1990 + β(yi,2000- yi,1990)/10 + γSME250i +εi ,

(3)

where G is the log of the Gini coefficient. The sign and significance of the coefficient γ indicate
whether SME development has any relationship with the evolution of income distribution in the
economy. A positive γ would suggest an adverse effect, while a negative γ a favorable
relationship between SME development and the evolution of income distribution.
To evaluate the relation between the size of the SME sector and changes in the depth and
breadth of poverty, we use the following regression

15

(Pi, t-Pi, t-1)/t= α Pi, t-1 + β(yi,2000- yi,1990)/10 + γSMEi +εi ,

(4)

where P is the log of either headcount, or poverty gap. Thus, we examine whether the
relative size of the SME sector has a particularly large impact on poverty alleviation.
3. Endogeneity and Measurement Error
The analyses are prone to biases resulting from endogeneity and measurement error.
Faster GDP per capita growth might foster the entry of more small firms. Furthermore, the SME
indicator might be subject to substantial measurement error.
To address concerns of reverse causation, we first present results using Initial SME250,
which is SME250 in the first year in the 1990s for which data are available. Using initial values,
however, has several shortcomings. Theory stresses the potential connection between growth and
the contemporaneous share of SMEs. Further, the use of initial values instead of values measured
over the entire estimation period implies an informational loss. Thus, to control for simultaneity
bias, it is also appropriate to use instrumental variables (IV) to extract the exogenous component
of SME250.
Second, we present IV regressions. The lack of theory and empirical cross-country work
on the determinants of the size of the SME sector in manufacturing is a significant hurdle in
selecting appropriate instrumental variables. We therefore focus on exogenous national
characteristics that theory and past empirical findings suggest influence the business
environment. In our core instrument set, we use an indicator of ethnic diversity and dummy
variables for transition, African and Latin American countries. Easterly and Levine (1997) show
that ethnic diversity tends to reduce the provision of public goods, including the institutions that
support business transactions and the contracting environment. Countries with a recent socialist

11

Since income share and Gini data are not available for all countries on an annual basis, we take the earliest year
between 1985 and 1990 as the beginning year.

16

legal heritage had legal institutions that were not encouraging of entrepreneurship and new firm
formation. Finally, countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America might show geographic
and cultural characteristics that influence SME development and the Business Environment.
Empirically, ethnic fractionalization and the three dummies explain 69% of the variation in
SME250, while other historical variables, such as latitude or religious composition, do not add
any explanatory power to these regressions.
Although it is appropriate to question this identification strategy because no specific
theory links the share of SMEs in manufacturing to these particular exogenous variables, we use
these instruments for three reasons. First, past work shows that these instruments help explain
current institutions associated with economic success and the overall business environment (e.g.,
Easterly and Levine, 1997, 2003). Thus, there are reasons for believing that these instruments
will extract that part of SME250 associated with economic growth, which may bias the results
toward finding a positive relationship between SME250 and growth. Thus, we also present IV
regressions while simultaneously controlling for the overall business environment as a
robustness check. Second, given potential concerns about endogeneity, we believe it is crucial to
use an assortment of procedures -- including the use of Initial SME250 and different instrument
sets - to assess the relationship between the size of the SME sector and economic growth and
poverty alleviation. Third, these instruments pass the standard econometric tests of whether the
instruments are valid.
We provide two tests to assess the appropriateness of the instruments. First, we provide
the F-Test of the excluded exogenous variables in the first stage regression. That is we test the
null hypothesis that the instruments do not explain cross-country differences in the SME sector
and provide the p-value in the tables. Second, we use the Hansen test of the overidentifying
restrictions, which assesses whether the instrumental variables are associated with the dependent
17

variable beyond their effect through SME250 or the other explanatory variables. The Hansen
test thus assesses whether Ethnic Fractionalization and the African and Latin American continent
dummies are correlated with the component of GDP per capita growth that is not explained by
SME250, the Business Environment or any of the other explanatory variables. We refer to this
test as “Overid” in the tables. Under the joint null hypothesis that the excluded instruments (i.e.,
the instruments not included in the second stage regression) are valid instruments, i.e.,
uncorrelated with the error term, and that the excluded instruments are correctly excluded from
the estimated equation, the Hansen test is distributed χ2 in the number of overidentifying
restrictions. Failure to reject the null hypothesis implies a failure to reject the validity of the
instruments and thus a failure to reject the view that the coefficient estimate on SMEs and the
business environment captures the impact of SME importance on economic growth. In the tables
we provide the p-value of the test of the overidentifying restrictions.
In some regressions, we will also control for the endogeneity of both SME250 and
Business Environment. In these regressions, we add dummy variables for French, British and
German legal origin to our set of excluded exogenous variables. Cross-country analyses show
that differences in legal systems influence the contracting environment with implications on
corporate finance and hence firm formation and growth (Beck and Levine, 2002). A first-stage
regression of Business Environment on the legal origin dummies, ethnic fractionalization, a
dummy for transition economies and continent dummies for Africa and Latin America yields an
adjusted R-square of 84%. As in the case of SME250, we present the F-test for the excluded
exogenous variables from the first stage regression.

18

D. Descriptive Statistics and Correlations
Table II lists summary statistics and correlations. There is a wide variation in economic
growth across the countries in our sample over the period 1990-2000, ranging from –2% in
Zambia to 7% in Ireland. There is also substantial variation across countries in government
policies and legal traditions.
Panel B shows the correlations between the level of SME development, the dependent
variables and the variables in the conditioning information set. Simple correlations indicate that
the size of the SME sector and the business environment are positively correlated with GDP per
capita growth. Our measures of changes in income inequality and poverty alleviation, on the
other hand, are not significantly correlated with the importance of SMEs or the business
environment. SMEs’ share of employment is also higher in countries with higher education and a
more developed financial sector, while it is lower in countries with more exchange rate
distortions. The business environment indicators are positively and significantly correlated with
education, monetary stability, financial development and lack of exchange rate distortions.
Finally, countries with a business environment that is conducive to competition and commercial
contracting have a larger SME sector.
Panel C shows that historic determinants help explain the importance of SMEs in the
economy and the overall business environment. SMEs are more important in countries with less
ethnic fractionalization, while they are less important in countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and
countries with British legal origin. Sub-Saharan African countries and countries with higher
ethnic fractionalization have a business environment that is less conducive to private sector
transactions.

19

IV.

Empirical results

A. SMEs and Economic Growth
The ordinary least squares (OLS) results in Table III indicate that the share of SME
employment in total manufacturing employment is associated with higher rates of GDP per
capita growth, while the IV regression results shed doubt on whether we should interpret this
relationship as causal. Table III reports regression results based on equation (1). Besides the
SME indicators, the regressions include initial GDP per capita, the initial level of educational
attainment, government consumption expenditures, the rate of inflation, the black market
exchange rate premium, the level of international trade to GDP, and the degree of financial
development as measured by financial intermediary credit to the private sector as a share of
GDP. Regressions (3) and (4) are the IV version of regressions (1) and (2), where we use ethnic
fractionalization and dummy variables for transition, African and Latin American economies to
extract the exogenous component of the respective SME indicator. As discussed below,
regressions (1) and (3) use the whole sample, while regressions (2) and (4) drop outliers.
SME250 enters significantly and positively in column (1) of Table III at the one-percent
significance level. These results are robust to controlling for a large number of other potential
determinants of economic growth. Specifically, the findings hold when controlling for initial
income, educational attainment, government consumption, inflation, the black market exchange
rate premium, trade openness, and financial development. Furthermore, we confirm the results
when controlling for the size of each country’s informal sector, which is an estimate of the size
of the unofficial economy as a percentage of GDP.12 In unreported sensitivity analyses, we also

12

See the Appendix table for data sources on the informal sector. Incorporating information on the size of each
country’s informal sector dramatically reduces the size of the sample.

20

found that the relationship between SMEs and economic growth is robust to leaving out
transition economies and countries in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Figure 2 displays the positive relationship between SME250 and GDP per capita, but also
illustrates the potential importance of controlling for outliers. Figure 2 presents a partial scatter
plot of GDP per capita growth against SME250, the two-dimensional representation of the
regression plane in GDP per capita growth – SME250 space. To obtain this figure, we regress
GDP per capita growth on all control variables, collect the residuals, and call them e(GDP per
capita growth | X). Next, we regress SME250 against all control variables, collect the residuals,
and call them e( SME250 | X ). Figure 2 plots e(GDP per capita growth | X) against e( SME250 |
X ). Figure 2 suggests that outliers may exert an excessively large influence on the relationship
between the SME share in manufacturing and economic development.
To assess more formally the impact of outliers, we follow the procedure outlined in
Besley, Kuh, and Welsch (1980) and confirm that the results hold when omitting influential
observations. We (i) computed the change in the coefficient on SME250 when the ith
observation is omitted from the regression, (ii) scale the change by the estimated standard error
of the coefficient, (iii) take the absolute value, and (iv) call the result ∆βi. Then, we use a critical
value of three and identify those observations where abs (∆βi) > 2/sqrt (n), where abs(x) yields
the absolute value of x, sqrt(x) yields the square root of x, and n represents the number of
observations in the regression. This analysis identifies Cameroon and Zimbabwe as influential
observations. When omitting these two “outliers”, SME250 continues to enter positively and
significantly at the five-percent level, as shown in column (2) of Table III.
The coefficient size suggests not only a statistically significant but also economically
meaningful relationship between the importance of SMEs in an economy and its GDP per capita.
If we compare the countries at the 25th and 75th percentiles of SME250, the results suggest that
21

Romania (SME250= 37%) would have grown 1.4% faster if it had had the same SME share as
Denmark (69%). This is large, considering that the sample mean annual growth rate for the
1990s was 1.5%.
So far the results indicate a robust and significant relationship between the relative size of
the SME sector and the rate of economic growth. Countries with large SME sectors in
manufacturing tend to grow faster. Given that we have used a simple OLS framework, however,
the results are subject to concerns that a large manufacturing SME sector is a characteristic of
successful economies, but not a causal force.
The instrumental variable results in columns (3) and (4) indicate that the positive
relationship between the size of the SME sector in manufacturing and economic growth is not
very robust to controlling for endogeneity. SME250 does not enter significantly at the 5% level
in the growth regressions when using these instruments. While SME250 still enters significantly
at the 10% level when using the whole sample (column 3), it does not enter significantly at any
conventional significance level once outliers are removed following Besley, Kuh and Welch
(1980) as described above (column 4).13 Figure 3 confirms the lack of a significant relationship
between the exogenous component of SME250 and GDP per capita growth. While there is still a
positive relationship, it is not significant. Specification tests confirm the validity of the
instrumental variables. We cannot reject the test of the overidentifying restrictions (Overid),
while we strongly reject the null hypothesis that the excluded exogenous variables do not explain
the size of the SME sector in the first stage. In unreported regressions, we tried different
instrumental variable sets, adding, separately, legal origin dummies and latitude to the core set of
instruments. However, neither of the two instrument sets adds explanatory power to the first
stage. Further, these alternative instrumental variable specifications confirm the core findings

22

from Table III. If one begins with the null hypothesis that SMEs do not exert a causal impact on
economic growth, the instrumental variable estimation fails to reject this view.
The twin findings that (i) SMEs are associated with growth in OLS regressions but (ii)
SMEs are not robustly linked with growth in 2SLS regressions are consistent with the view that a
large SME sector is a characteristic of fast growing economies, but not necessarily a determinant
of this rapid growth.
The results in Table IV confirm our findings with Initial SME250, which takes the first
available observation for SME250 during the 1990s. Initial SME250 enters significantly at the
5% level in the OLS regressions GDP (columns 1). This result is robust to eliminating outliers
(column 2).14 Further, this result is robust to controlling for the importance of the informal
economy, though as noted above, we do not report these confirmatory results in the tables
because the sample size drops considerably when adding the proxy for the size of the informal
economy in each country. When extracting the exogenous component of Initial SME250 with
Ethnic Fractionalization and dummy variables for African, Latin American and transition
economies, Initial SME250 still enters significantly at the 5% level. Once we follow the Besley,
Kuh, and Welch (1980) procedure and remove outliers, the relationship between Initial SME250
and GDP per capita growth turns insignificant in the IV regression (Table IV, column 4).15
When controlling for the overall business environment, we obtain the same results: There
is a significant positive relationship between SME250 and economic growth, but the statistical
significance of this relationship vanishes when controlling for endogeneity. Table V presents
both OLS and IV regressions that control for the business environment as well as the other
control variables. While regressions (1) and (3) use the whole sample, we run regressions (2)
13
14

Here we drop Cameroon, Ghana, Philippines, Tanzania.
Ireland and Zimbabwe are identified as outliers and dropped from regression 2.

23

and (4) without the outliers identified through the procedure proposed by Besley, Kuh, and
Welch (1980) with a critical value of three.16
As before, SME250 enters significantly and positively in the OLS regression and turns
insignificant once we instrument for it. To extract the exogenous component of both SME250
and Business Environment, we add dummy variables for French, German and British legal origin
to the original instrumental variable set of Ethnic Fractionalization and dummy variables for
Africa, Latin America and transition economies. As shown, the instruments are quite powerful
and past standard validity assessments. They explain more than 65 percent of the cross-sectional
variation in the importance of SMEs and about 80 percent of the variation in Business
Environment. The F-test of joint significance of the excluded exogenous variables is rejected at
the 1% level. The test of overidentifying restrictions suggests that the excluded exogenous
variables do not impact GDP per capita growth beyond their influence through SME250,
Business Environment or any of the policy control variables. While the Overidentifying
restrictions tests are weak form tests because they are based on a failure to reject the null
hypothesis that the instruments are valid, the econometric methodology satisfies the traditional
specifications tests. In sum, even when controlling for the overall business environment, we
continue to find that SMEs are closely associated with growth, but we cannot reject the view that
SMEs do not cause growth.
We conducted additional, unreported robustness tests. First, we controlled for the share of
manufacturing in GDP and its interaction with SME250 since SME250 is limited to the
manufacturing sector. Neither of the two interaction terms entered significantly. Second, instead
using GDP per capita growth as the dependent variable, we also used per worker growth of value
15

Cameroon and, Ghana are identified as influential observations and excluded.

24

added in manufacturing. This did not change the results. We did not find a significant
relationship between the SME sector and per worker growth of value added in manufacturing.
Third, we ran regressions that included an interaction term between SME250 and Business
Environment to test whether more SMEs are particularly conducive to growth in countries with
more competitive business conditions. The interaction term did not enter significantly.

B. SMEs, Inequality and Poverty Alleviation
Next, we examine the relationship between the importance of SMEs in manufacturing
and changes in income distribution and in poverty. We examine four different dimensions.
First, we assess whether SMEs influence the growth rate of the income of the poorest quintile of
the country. Second, we examine the relationships between SMEs and changes in income
distribution, as measured by the growth rate in the Gini coefficient. Third, we study the link
between the change in the percentage of people living in poverty and the size of the SME sector
in manufacturing. Finally, we investigate the connection between changes in the severity and
depth of poverty in a country and the role SMEs play in manufacturing. In all cases we control
for GDP per capita growth to be able to focus on distributional effects of the SME sector in
manufacturing.17
The results in Table VI suggest that SMEs do not influence the poorest segment of
society differently from the average person. In column 1, we regress the growth rate of GDP per
capita of the lowest income quintile on the initial income per capita of the lowest income
quintile, the growth rate of GDP per capita respectively and SME250. While GDP per capita

16

In column (2), Zimbabwe is dropped. In column (4), Nigeria, Philippines and Poland are identified as outliers and
dropped.
17
We also ran regressions controlling for Business Environment and using Initial SME250 instead of SME250. Our
findings are confirmed.

25

growth enters positively and significantly, SME250 does not. This implies that SMEs do not
influence the poorest quintile of economies differently from their link with the overall growth
rate of the economy.
Furthermore, the findings indicate that larger SME sectors do not make income
distribution more equal. In column 2, we regress the annual growth in the Gini coefficient on the
log of the initial Gini coefficient, GDP per capita growth and SME250. SME250 does not enter
significantly, suggesting that the importance of SMEs in manufacturing has no direct impact on
how an economy’s income distribution evolves. Neither GDP per capita growth nor the log of
the initial value of Gini enters significantly.
Finally, the Table VI regressions do not identify a significant relationship between SMEs
and poverty alleviation. In columns 3 and 4, we regress the annualized growth rates of
Headcount and Poverty gap on the log of the respective initial value, GDP per capita growth and
SME250. We do not find any evidence for a role of SMEs in alleviating poverty; SME250 does
not enter significantly at any conventional significance levels. While GDP per capita growth
does not enter significantly in either regression, the negative sign on the initial value suggests a
convergence effect in the development of poverty.
The results in Tables VI do not provide any evidence for a poverty alleviating effect of a
larger SME sector. These results certainly do not prove that SMEs do not alleviate poverty.
Rather, they simply represent a failure to reject the null hypothesis that SMEs do not reduce
poverty. In unreported robustness tests, we found that our findings are robust to (i) eliminating
outliers according to the same procedure as in Tables II, IV and V, (ii) controlling for the
importance of the informal economy, and (iii) controlling for the business environment.

26

V.

Conclusions
This paper explored the relationship between the size of the SME sector and both

economic growth and measures of poverty alleviation. We use a new database that assembles
consistent data on the share of SME labor in the total manufacturing labor force for 45
developing and developed countries.
Although there is a strong positive association between SME development and economic
growth, this relationship is not robust to controlling for simultaneity bias. In particular, OLS
regressions indicate a positive, statistically significant relationship between the size of the SME
sector and economic growth that is robust to conditioning on many country characteristics.
However, the relationship between SMEs and economic growth becomes statistically
insignificant when controlling for endogeneity. Thus, although a prosperous SME sector is a
characteristic of flourishing economies, we cannot reject the view that SMEs do not cause
growth. Furthermore, cross-country comparisons do not indicate that SMEs exert a particularly
beneficial impact on the incomes of the poor and we do not find a significant relationship
between SMEs and measures of the depth and breadth of poverty. Thus, the results do not
provide empirical support for the pro-SME prescription of directly subsidizing SME
development to accelerate growth and reduce poverty.

27

REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. (2001). ”The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91,
1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson.(2002). “Reversal of Fortunes:
Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 117, 1231-94.
Acs, Zoltan J., and David B. Audretsch. (1987). “Innovation, Market Structure and Firm Size.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 69, 567-574.
Ayyagari, Meghana, Thorsten Beck, and Asli Demirgüç-Kunt. (2003). “Small and Medium
Enterprises across the Globe: A New Database.” World Bank mimeo.
Baumol, William J. (1994). Entrepreneurship, Management and The Structure of Payoffs.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza. (2000). “Finance and the Sources of
Growth.” Journal of Financial Economics 58, 261-300.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. (2003). “Financial and Legal
Institutions and Firm Size” World Bank mimeo.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. (2005). “Financial and Legal
Constraints to Firm Growth: Does Firm Size Matter?” Journal of Finance 60, 137-7.
Biggs, Tyler. (2002). “Is Small Beautiful and Worthy of Subsidy? Literature Review.” IFC
mimeo.
Biggs, Tyler, Mayank Raturi, and Pradeep Srivastava. (2002). “Ethnic Networks and Access to
Credit: Evidence from the Manufacturing Sector in Kenya.” Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization 1435, 1-14.
Biggs, Tyler, Vijaya Ramachandran, and Manju Shah. (1998). “The Determinants of Enterprise
Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa: Evidence from the Regional Program on Enterprise
Development.” World Bank. RPED Discussion Paper 103.
Biggs, Tyler, Manju Shah, and Pradeep Srivastava. (1996). “Technological Capability and
Learning in African Firms.” World Bank (Africa Region) Technical Paper.
Birch, David L. (1979). The Job Generation Process: Final Report to Economic Development
Administration. Cambridge, MA: MIT Program on Neighborhood and Regional Change.
Brown, Charles, James Medoff, and Jay Hamilton. (1990). Employers: Large and Small.
Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press.
28

Caves, Richard E. (1998). “Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and
Mobility of Firms.” Journal of Economic Literature 36, 1947-1982.
Caves, Richard E., Michael E. Porter, and Michael A. Spence. (1980). Competition in the Open
Economy: A Model Applied to Canada. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chen, Shaohua, Ravallion, Martin. (2001). “How Did the World’s Poor fare in the 1990s?”,
Review of Income and Wealth 47, 283-300.
Coase, Ronald H. (1937). “The Nature of the Firm.” Economica 4, 386-405.
Davis, Steven, J., John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh. (1993). “Small Business and Job Creation:
Dissecting the Myth and Reassessing the Facts.” Business Economics 29, 13-21.
De Soto, Hernando. (1987). The Other Path. New York: Harper and Row, 352 p.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. (2002).
“The Regulation of Entry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1-37.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. (2003).
“Courts.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 453-517.
Dollar, David, and Aart Kraay. (2002). “Growth is Good for the Poor.” Journal of Economic
Growth 7, 195-225.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. (1989). “Growth and Failure of U.S.
Manufacturing Plants.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 671-698.
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. (1997). “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1203-1250.
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. (2003). “Tropic, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments
Influence Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 3-39.
Friedman, Eric, Simon Johnson, Daniel Kaufmann, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton. (2000). “Dodging
the Grabbing Hand: the Determinants of Unofficial Activity in 69 Countries.” Journal of Public
Economics 76, 459-493.
Gallup, John L., Jeffrey D. Sachs, and Andrew D. Mellinger. (1998). “Geography and Economic
Development.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6849.
Hahn, J. and J. Hausman. (2002). “A New Specification Test for the Validity of Instrumental
Variables.” Econometrica 70, 163-89.
Hallberg, Kristin. (2001). “A Market-Oriented Strategy For Small and Medium-Scale
Enterprises.” IFC Discussion Paper # 48.
29

Hayashi, F. Econometrics. 2000. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kaufman, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi. (2003). “Governance Matters III:
Governance Indicators for 1996-2002”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2196.
Kawai, Hiroki, and Shurijo Urata. (2002). “Entry of Small and Medium Enterprises and
Economic Dynamism in Japan.” Small Business Economics 18, 41-51.
Kumar, Krishna B., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Luigi Zingales. (2001). “What Determines Firms
Size?” University of Chicago. CRSP Working Paper No. 496.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. (1999). “The
Quality of Government.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279.
Levine, Ross, and David Renelt. (1992). “A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth
Regressions.” American Economic Review 82, 942-963.
Levine, Ross, and Sara Zervos. (1993). “What We Have Learned About Policy and Growth
From Cross-Country Regressions.” American Economic Review 83, 426-430.
Levy, Brian. (1991). “Transaction Costs, the Size of Firms and Industrial Policy: Lessons from a
Comparative Study of the Footwear Industry in Korea and Taiwan.” Journal of Development
Economics 34, 151-178.
Little, Ian M.D. (1987). “Small Manufacturing Enterprises in Developing Countries.” World
Bank Economic Review 1, 203-235.
Little, Ian M.D., Dipak Mazumdar, and John M. Page, Jr. (1987). Small Manufacturing
Enterprises: A Comparative Analysis of India and Other Economies. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Liedholm, Carl, and Donald Mead. (1987). “Small-Scale Industries in Developing Countries:
Empirical Evidence and Policy Implications.” Michigan State University International
Development Papers, Number 9.
Pack, Howard. (1992). “Learning and Productivity Change in Developing Countries.” In Trade
Policy, Industrialization and Development: New Perspectives, edited by Gerald K. Helleiner, pp.
21-45. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pack, Howard, and Larry Westphal. (1986). “Industrial Strategy and Technological Change:
Theory versus Reality.” Journal of Development Economics 22, 87-128.
Pagano, Patrizio, and Fabiano Schivardi. (2001). “Firm Size Distribution and Growth.” Banca
d’Italia Working Paper 394.

30

Piore, Michael J. and Charles E. Sabel. (1984). The Second Industrial Divide: Possibilities for
Prosperity. New York: Basic Books.
Rasiah, Rajah. (2002). “Government-Business Coordination and Small Enterprise Performance
in the Machine Tools Sector in Malaysia.” Small Business Economics 18, 177-195.
Rosenberg, Nathan. (1976). Perspectives on Technology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. (1988). “Labor Markets in Low-Income Countries.” In Handbook of
Development Economics, Vol. 1, edited by Hollis B. Chenery and T.N. Srinivasan. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Schiffer, Mirjam, and Weder, Beatrice. (2001). “Firm Size and the Business Environment:
Worldwide Survey Results.” IFC Discussion paper 43.
Schneider, Friedrich. (2000). The Size and Development of the Shadow Economies and Shadow
Economy Labor Force of 18 Asian and 21 OECD Countries: First Results for the 90s, mimeo.
Schneider, Friedrich, and Dominik Enste. (1998). “Increasing Shadow Economies All Over the
World – Fiction or Reality: A Survey of the Global Evidence of Its Size and of Its Impact from
1970 to 1995, IMF and University of Linz, August 21.
Shaffer, Sherrill. (2002). “Firm Size and Economic Growth.” Economics Letters 76, 195-203.
Sleuwaegen, Leo, and Micheline Goedhuys. (2002). “Growth of Firms in Developing
Countries, Evidence from Côte d’Ivoire.” Journal of Development Economics 68, 117-135.
Snodgrass, Donald, and Tyler Biggs. (1996). Industrialization and the Small Firm. San
Francisco: International Center for Economic Growth.
Staiger, D. and J.H. Stock. (1997). “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments.”
Econometrica 65, 557-86.
World Bank. (2002). Review of Small Business Activities. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. (2004). Review of Small Business Activities. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. (1994). “Can Intervention Work? The Role of Government in SME Success.”
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Yamawaki, Hideki. (2002). “The Evolution and Structure of Industrial Clusters in Japan.”
Small Business Economics 18, 121-140.
You, Jong-Il. (1995). “Small Firms in Economic Theory.” Cambridge Journal of Economics 19,
441-462.

31

Table I
SMEs and Business Environment Across the World
GDP per capita is the log of real GDP per capita averaged over the period 1990-2000. SME250 is the SME sector’s share of employment when 250
employees is taken as the cutoff for the definition of an SME. Business environment is a principal component indicator of Property Rights, Contract
enforcement, Entry and Bankruptcy.

Country
Argentina
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
Cameroon
Chile
Colombia
Cote d'Ivoire
Croatia
Czech
Republic
Denmark
Ecuador
Finland
France
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Kenya
Korea, Rep.
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
Nigeria
Panama
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovak
Republic
Spain
Sweden
Taiwan, China
Tanzania
Thailand
Turkey
United
Kingdom
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Business
Environment
0.00
1.08
0.96
-0.34
-0.12
-1.98
-0.21
0.18
-1.76
-0.59

GDP per capita
7,484
29,619
27,572
4,327
1,487
653
4,476
2,290
746
4,454

SME250
70.18
66.1
69.25
59.8
50.01
20.27
86
67.2
18.7
62

5,015
34,576
1,521
26,814
27,236
30,240
377
11,594
1,460
4,608
19,528
19,218
42,520
341
10,508
45,185
3,390
27,395
257
2,999
2,162
1,099
3,391
11,121
1,501

64.25
68.7
55
59.15
67.3
59.5
51.61
86.5
32.3
45.9
67.2
79.7
71.7
33.31
76.25
70.9
48.48
61.22
16.72
72
67.9
66
63
79.9
37.17

3,651
15,362
27,736
12,474
183
2,590
2,865

56.88
80
61.3
68.6
32.1
86.7
61.05

-0.58
0.44
-0.12

19,361
419
643

56.42
36.63
15.2

2.18
-0.62
-0.78

-0.28

1.60
0.51
0.82
-1.06
-0.38
-1.01
-0.65
1.04
0.04
1.09
-1.00
1.03
-0.25
1.60
-0.76
-0.86
-0.43
-0.70
0.15
0.29
-1.09

0.22
1.23

32

Table II
Summary Statistics and Correlations
SME250 is the SME sector’s share of employment when 250 employees is taken as cutoff for the definition of SME, averaged over the
period. Initial SME250 is the SME sector’s share of employment when 250 employees is taken as cutoff for the definition of SME, for
the first available year in the 1990s. Business environment is a principal component indicator of Property Rights, Contract
enforcement, Entry and Bankruptcy. GDP per capita growth is measured over the period 1990-2000. Initial GDP per capita is for
1990. Income growth of the poor is the income growth per capita of the lowest income quintile. Growth in Gini is the growth rate in
the Gini coefficient. Headcount growth is the growth rate of headcount where headcount is defined as the percentage of population
living on less than a dollar a day. Poverty gap growth is the growth rate of poverty gap where poverty gap is defined as the amount of
additional income per capita, expressed as a proportion of the poverty line (one dollar a day), that, if available to the poor would lift
them out of extreme poverty. Education is secondary school enrollment (% gross). Government consumption is the general govt.
final expenditure as a % of GDP. Inflation is measured by the annual growth rate of the GDP deflator. Black market premium is the
overvaluation of the official relative to the black market exchange rate in percentages. Trade is share of exports and imports in GDP.
Private credit is claims of financial institutions on the private sector, as a share of GDP. Transition is a dummy variable that takes on
value one for transition economies and zero otherwise. German, British and French legal origin are dummy variables that take on
value one if the country has the respective legal origin and zero otherwise. Ethnic fractionalization is the probability that two
inhabitants of a country do not speak the same language. Africa is a dummy variable that takes on value one for countries in SubSaharan Africa and zero otherwise. Latin is a dummy variable that takes on value one for countries in Latin America and zero
otherwise. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix.

Panel A: Summary Statistics
Observations

Mean

Std Dev

Minimum

Maximum

SME250

45

58.36

18.78

15.2

86.7

Initial SME250

45

58.21

19.33

15.20

99.50

Business Environment

40

-0.03

0.93

-1.98

2.18

GDP per capita growth

45

1.54

1.92

-1.99

6.53

Initial GDP per capita

45

10221.26

11591.84

188.77

39955.40

Income growth of the poor

32

0.00

0.06

-0.16

0.13

Growth in Gini

32

0.01

0.03

-0.05

0.15

Headcount growth

21

0.04

0.15

-0.14

0.39

Poverty gap growth

21

0.03

0.18

-0.25

0.57

Education

45

4.20

0.62

1.69

4.89

Government consumption

45

2.73

0.33

1.77

3.30

Inflation

45

0.23

0.37

0.01

1.87

Black market premium

45

0.11

0.21

0

0.99

Trade

45

4.59

0.07

4.31

4.82

Private credit

45

3.59

0.96

1.58

5.26

Transition

45

0.16

0.37

0

1

German Legal Origin

45

0.11

0.32

0

1

British Legal Origin

45

0.20

0.40

0

1

French Legal Origin

45

0.47

0.50

0

1

Ethnic fractionalization

45

0.28

0.29

0

0.89

Africa

45

0.18

0.39

0

1

Latin

45

0.20

0.40

0

1

33

Panel B: Correlations
Business
Initial Environme
SME250
Informal
nt
1.000

GDP per
capita
growth

SME250
Initial SME250
0.949***
Business
0.541*** 0.583***
1.000
Environment
Informal
-0.202
-0.292* -0.652***
1.000
GDP per capita
0.652*** 0.721*** 0.521***
-0.027
1.000
growth
Initial GDP/cap
0.403*** 0.432*** 0.774*** -0.692*** 0.293*
Income growth of
0.529*** 0.508***
0.352*
-0.240
0.669***
the poor
Growth in Gini
-0.191
-0.171
-0.092
0.220
-0.287
Headcount growth
-0.022
0.020
0.158
-0.570**
-0.203
Poverty gap growth
-0.016
0.030
0.147
-0.502*
-0.015
Education
0.651*** 0.657*** 0.663*** -0.573*** 0.392***
Govt consumption
0.184
0.197
0.486*** -0.711*** -0.054
Inflation
-0.174
-0.168
-0.272*
0.234
-0.393***
Black market
-0.492*** -0.491*** -0.374**
0.266
-0.466***
premium
Trade
-0.025
-0.018
0.074
0.220
0.059
Private credit
0.566*** 0.559*** 0.704*** -0.453*** 0.534***
***
, ** and * stand for significance levels at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.

Initial
GDP/cap

Income
Govt
growth of Growth in Headcount Poverty gap
ConsumpGini
growth
growth Education
the poor
tion

Black
market
premium

Trade

0.447***
1.000
0.043
0.177
-0.457*** -0.531***

1.000
0.085

Inflation

1.000
0.412**
1.000
-0.371** -0.762***
1.000
0.140
-0.482*
0.475*
0.091
-0.320
0.271
0.594***
0.288
-0.103
0.561***
-0.035
0.038
-0.3615** -0.711*** 0.515***
-0.363**
0.078
0.694***

-0.357**
-0.113
0.608***

0.137
0.192
-0.415**

1.000
0.921***
0.504**
0.285
0.250

1.000
0.409*
0.157
0.076

1.000
0.473***
-0.164

1.000
0.027

0.153
0.186
-0.431*

-0.010
0.079
-0.434**

-0.327**
0.211
0.604***

-0.086
0.122
0.377**

1.000

Panel C: Correlations
Business
Initial SME250 Environment
SME250
Initial SME250
0.949***
1.000
Business Environment
0.541***
0.583***
1.000
Transition
-0.097
-0.106
-0.182
French Legal Origin
0.226
0.172
-0.202
German Legal Origin
0.192
0.202
0.373**
British Legal Origin
-0.387***
-0.303**
-0.058
Ethnic fractionalization
-0.693***
-0.722***
-0.646***
Africa
-0.758***
-0.733***
-0.564***
Latin
0.101
0.109
-0.182
***
, ** and * stand for significance levels at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.

Transition

1.000
-0.402***
-0.152
-0.215
-0.178
-0.200
-0.215

French Legal German Legal British Legal
Origin
Origin
Origin

1.000
-0.331**
-0.468***
-0.031
-0.202
0.535***

34

1.000
-0.177
-0.267*
-0.164
-0.177

1.000
0.536***
0.639***
-0.250*

Ethnic
fractionalization

Africa

1.000
0.856***
-0.117

1.000
-0.233

Table III

SME Employment and Growth
The regression equation estimated in specifications (1) and (2) is: GDP per capita growth = α + β1 Initial income + β2 SME250 +β3 Education+
β4Govt. consumption + β5Inflation + β6Black market premium + β7Trade + β8 Private credit. GDP per capita growth is the real growth rate of
GDP over the period 1990-2000. Initial GDP per capita is the log value measured in 1990. SME250 is the share of employment in firms with less
than 250 employees in manufacturing. Education is secondary school enrollment (% gross). Government consumption is the general govt. final
expenditure as a % of GDP. Inflation is measured by the annual growth rate of the GDP deflator. Black market premium is the overvaluation of
the official relative to the black market exchange rate in percentages. Trade is share of exports and imports in GDP. Private credit is claims of
financial institutions on the private sector, as a share of GDP. Log values of all right hand side variables were used. Two stage instrumental
variable regressions are carried out in specifications (3) and (4). The first stage regression equation is: SME250 = α0 + β1 Transition + β2 Africa +
β3 Latin + β4 Ethnic fractionalization +β5 Initial Income+β6 Education+ β7Govt. consumption + β8Inflation + β9Black market premium + β10Trade
+ β11Private credit. The second stage regression equation estimated is the same as the OLS regression in specification (1) and (2) with the
predicted value of SME being used from the first-stage. The instrument variables are defined as follows: Transition is a dummy variable that
takes on value one for transition economies and zero otherwise. Africa is a dummy variable that takes on value one for countries in Sub-Saharan
Africa and zero otherwise. Latin is a dummy variable which takes the value one for Latin American countries and zero otherwise. Ethnic
fractionalization is the probability that two inhabitants of a country do not speak the same language. Specifications (3) and (4) also report the pvalues of the F-test for the excluded exogenous variables, the p-values for the test of overidentifying restrictions and the adjusted R-square from
the first stage. Regressions in columns 1 and 3 are run with the complete sample, while regressions in columns 2 and 4 are without outliers
identified following the procedure suggested by Besley, Kuh, and Welch (1980) on identifying influential observations. Values are 1990-99
averages where available. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix.

(1)
Outliers
Estimation technique
SME250

Observations
Adj. R-squared
F-Test
Adj. R-squared (1st stage)
OIR Test

(2)

(3)

Removed

(4)
Removed

OLS
2.197***
[0.687]

OLS
2.600***
[0.546]

IV
1.863*
[1.047]

IV
1.386
[1.122]

45
0.444

43
0.435

45

41

0.000***
0.716
0.118

0.000***
0.782
0.274

35

Table IV
Initial SME Employment and Growth
The regression equation estimated in specifications (1) and (2) is: GDP per capita growth = α + β1 Initial income + β2 Initial SME250 +β3
Education+ β4Govt. consumption + β5Inflation + β6Black market premium + β7Trade + β8 Private credit. GDP per capita growth is the real growth
rate of GDP over the period 1990-2000. Initial GDP per capita is the log value measured in 1990. Initial SME250 is the share of employment in
firms with less than 250 employees in manufacturing for the first available year in the 1990s. Education is secondary school enrollment (% gross).
Government consumption is the general govt. final expenditure as a % of GDP. Inflation is measured by the annual growth rate of the GDP
deflator. Black market premium is the overvaluation of the official relative to the black market exchange rate in percentages. Trade is share of
exports and imports in GDP. Private credit is claims of financial institutions on the private sector, as a share of GDP. Log values of all right hand
side variables were used. Two stage instrumental variable regressions are carried out in specifications (3) and (4). The first stage regression
equation is: Initial SME250 = α0 + β1 Transition + β2 Africa + β3 Latin + β4 Ethnic fractionalization +β5 Initial Income+β6 Education+ β7Govt.
consumption + β8Inflation + β9Black market premium + β10Trade + β11Private credit. The second stage regression equation estimated is the same
as the OLS regression in specification (1) with the predicted value of SME being used from the first-stage. The instrument variables are defined
as follows: Transition is a dummy variable that takes on value one for transition economies and zero otherwise. Africa is a dummy variable that
takes on value one for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and zero otherwise. Latin is a dummy variable which takes the value one for Latin
American countries and zero otherwise. Ethnic fractionalization is the probability that two inhabitants of a country do not speak the same
language. Specifications (3) and (4) also report the p-values of the F-test for the excluded exogenous variables, the p-values for the test of
overidentifying restrictions and the adjusted R-square from the first stage. Regressions in columns 1 and 3 are run with the complete sample,
while regressions in columns 2 and 4 is without outliers identified following the procedure suggested by Besley, Kuh, and Welch (1980) on
identifying influential observations. Values are 1990-99 averages where available. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed
variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix.

(1)
Outliers
Estimation technique
Initial SME250

Observations
Adj. R-squared
F-Test
Adj. R-squared (1st stage)
OIR Test

OLS
2.754***
[0.790]

(2)
Removed
OLS
3.167***
[0.541]

45
0.508

43
0.534

(3)
IV
2.369**
[1.105]

(4)
Removed
IV
1.625
[1.054]

45

43

0.003***
0.680
0.131

0.001***
0.727
0.205

36

Table V
SME Employment, Business Environment, and Growth
The regression equation estimated in specifications (1) and (2) is: GDP per capita growth = α + β1 Initial income + β2 SME250 +β3 Education+
β4Govt. consumption + β5Inflation + β6Black market premium + β7Trade + β8 Private credit + β9 Business Environment. GDP per capita growth is
the real growth rate of GDP over the period 1990-2000. Initial GDP per capita is the log value measured in 1990. SME250 is the share of
employment in firms with less than 250 employees in manufacturing. Education is secondary school enrollment (% gross). Government
consumption is the general govt. final expenditure as a % of GDP. Inflation is measured by the annual growth rate of the GDP deflator. Black
market premium is the overvaluation of the official relative to the black market exchange rate in percentages. Trade is share of exports and
imports in GDP. Private credit is claims of financial institutions on the private sector, as a share of GDP. Business Environment is a principal
component indicator of Property Rights, Contract Enforcement, Entry and Bankruptcy. Except for Business Environment, log values of all right
hand side variables were used. Two stage instrumental variable regressions are carried out in specifications (3) - (4). The first-stage regressions in
columns (3) and (4) are: SME250 = α0 + β1 Transition + β2 Africa + β3 Latin + β4 Ethnic fractionalization + β5 French legal origin + β6 German
legal origin + β7 British legal origin + β8 Initial Income+ β9 Education+ β10 Govt. consumption + β11 Inflation + β12 Black market premium + β13
Trade + β14 Private credit and Business Environment = α0 + β1 Transition + β2 Africa + β3 Latin + β4 Ethnic fractionalization + β5 French legal
origin + β6 German legal origin + β7 British legal origin + β8 Initial Income+ β9 Education+ β10 Govt. consumption + β11 Inflation + β12 Black
market premium + β13 Trade + β14 Private credit. The instrument variables are defined as follows: Transition is a dummy variable that takes on
value one for transition economies and zero otherwise. Africa is a dummy variable that takes on value one for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa
and zero otherwise. Latin is a dummy variable which takes the value one for Latin American countries and zero otherwise. Ethnic
fractionalization is the probability that two inhabitants of a country do not speak the same language. French, German and British legal origin are
dummy variables that take on value one if the country has the respective legal origin and zero if not. Specifications (3) and (4) also report the pvalues of the F-test for the excluded exogenous variables in the fist stage regression, the p-values for the test of overidentifying restrictions and
the adjusted R-square from the first stage regression(s). Regressions in columns 1 and 3 are run with the complete sample, while regressions in
columns 2 and 4 are without outliers identified following the procedure suggested by Besley, Kuh, and Welch (1980) on identifying influential
observations. Values are 1990-99 averages where available. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions and
sources are given in the appendix.

(1)
Outliers
Estimation Technique
SME250
BE
Observations
Adj. R-squared
F-Test for SME (1st stage)
F-Test for Business Environment
(1st stage)
Adj. R-squared for SME (1st stage)
Adj. R-squared for Business
Environment (1st stage)
OIR Test

OLS
1.812***
[0.642]
0.859**
[0.406]
40
0.494

(2)
Removed
OLS
2.402***
[0.643]
0.815**
[0.397]
39
0.512

37

(3)
IV
1.22
[1.092]
1.366*
[0.772]
40
0.586
0.000***

(4)
Removed
IV
1.279
[1.166]
1.25
[0.848]
37
0.54
0.000***

0.000***
0.721

0.000***
0.652

0.843
0.302

0.780
0.393

Table VI
SME Employment, Income Distribution, and Poverty Alleviation
The regression equation estimated is the Growth in Income of the Poor/Growth in Gini/ Headcount growth /Poverty gap growth=α + β1GDP per
capita growth+ β2Initial value + β3SME250. Growth in Income of the Poor is the annual growth rate in income of the lowest income quintile over
the period 1990-2000. Growth in Gini is the annual growth in the Gini coefficient over the period 1990-2000. Headcount growth is the annual
growth rate of Headcount over the period 1990-2000, where Headcount is defined as the percentage of population living on less than one dollar a
day. Poverty gap growth is the annual growth rate of the Poverty Gap over the period 1990-2000, where poverty gap is defined as the amount of
additional income per capita, expressed as a proportion of the poverty line (one dollar a day), that, if available to the poor would lift their incomes
over one dollar a day. GDP per capita growth is the real growth rate of GDP over the period 1990-2000. Initial value is the log of Income of the
lowest income quintile, Gini coefficient, Headcount or Poverty Gap in the 1990. SME250 is the log of SME sector’s share of employment in
manufacturing firms with less than 250 employees. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions and sources are
given in the appendix.

Dependent variable
Initial Value
GDP per capita Growth
SME250
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

(1)
(2)
Growth in Income
Growth in Gini
of the Poor

(3)

(4)

Headcount growth

Poverty gap growth

0.008

-0.027

-0.050***

-0.063***

[0.008]
1.169***
[0.336]
0.006
[0.023]
-0.099
[0.083]
31
0.483

[0.031]
-0.236
[0.183]
-0.002
[0.012]
0.114
[0.121]
31
0.062

[0.013]
-0.015
[0.016]
-0.022
[0.052]
0.214
[0.202]
21
0.566

[0.021]
-0.001
[0.023]
-0.089
[0.076]
0.397
[0.284]
21
0.402

38

Figure 1: Plot of SME250 against log of GDP per capita in 1990
This graph shows the correlation of SM250 against log of GDP per capita in 1990 and the
corresponding regression line.

39

Figure 2: Partial Scatter Plot of GDP per capita growth against SME250
Using regression 1 of Table 3, which regresses GDP per capita Growth against SME250 and
several control variables X, this figure represents the two-dimensional representation of the
regression plane in GDP per capita growth – SME250 space. To obtain this figure, we regress
GDP per capita growth on X, collect the residuals, and call them e(GDP per capita growth | X).
Next, we regress SME250 on X, collect the residuals, and call them e(SME250 | X ). Then, we
plot e(GDP per capita growth | X) against e(SME250 | X ).

40

Figure 3: Partial Scatter Plot of GDP per capita growth against SME250, IV regression
Using regression 3 of Table 3, which regresses GDP per capita Growth against the predicted
value of SME250 and several control variables X, this figure represents the two-dimensional
representation of the regression plane in GDP per capita growth – predicted SME250 space. To
obtain this figure, we regress GDP per capita growth on X, collect the residuals, and call them
e(GDP per capita growth | X). Next, we regress the predicted SME250 from the first stage on X,
collect the residuals, and call them e(SME250 | X ). Then, we plot e(GDP per capita growth | X)
against e(SME250 | X ).

41

Appendix Table 1: Variable Definitions
Variable

Variable Definition

Source

Annual real GDP per capita growth
Log value of real GDP per capita in 1990
GDP per capita growth of the lowest income quintile group
The annual growth rate in the Gini coefficient where the Gini coefficient is defined as
ratio of the area below the Lorenz Curve, which plots share of population against
income share received, to the area below the diagonal. It lies between 0 and 1 and is
a measure of income inequality.
Annual log change of headcount where headcount is the percentage of the
population living below the national poverty line.
National estimates are based on population-weighted sub-group
estimates from household surveys.
Annual growth rate of pverty gap, which is the amount of additional income per
capita, expressed as a proportion of the poverty line (defined as $1 a day), ,
that, if available to the poor would lift them out of extreme poverty.

World Development Indicators (WDI)
WDI
WDI, Dollar and Kraay (2002)

SME250

SME sector employment as a percentage share of total employment in the
country (Definition of SME: <=250 employees)

Country-specific sources; see Ayyagari, Beck and
Demirguc-Kunt (2003)

Initial SME250

Share of employment in firms with less than 250 employees in manufacturing for
the first available year in 1990s

Country-specific sources; see Ayyagari, Beck and
Demirguc-Kunt (2003)

INFORMAL

Unofficial economy (% of GDP)

Friedman, Johnson, Kaufman, and Zoido-Lobaton (2000)

Secondary school enrollment (%, gross)
General government final consumption expenditure (% of GDP)
Annual growth rate of the of the GDP deflator
Share of imports plus exports in GDP
Overvaluation of the official relative to the black market exchange rate
Claims on private sector by deposit money banks and other
financial institutions as share of GDP

WDI
WDI
International Financial Statistics (IFS)
WDI
WDI
IFS, own calculations

Dependent variables
GDP per capital growth
Initial GDP per capita
Growth for poor
Growth in Gini

Headcount Growth

Poverty Gap growth

WDI, Dollar and Kraay (2002)

Povcal Net, World Bank
Povcal Net, World Bank

SME variables

Policy control variables
Education
Government consumption
Inflation
Trade
Black market premium
Private Credit

42

Endowment variables
Ethnic fractionalization

Average value of five indices of ethnolinguistic fractionalization, with
values ranging from 0 to 1, where higher values denote higher levels of
fractionalization. Sources: Atlas Narodov Mira, 1964; Muller, 1964;
Roberts, 1962; Gunnemark, 1991 – probability that two randomly selected
individuals in a country will not speak the same language

Easterly and Levine (1997)

Legal Origin-British
Legal origin – French
Legal origin – German
Legal origin – Scandinavian
Legal origin – Socialist

La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)

The degree to which property rights are protected in an economy
Attorney fees and court costs incurred when enforcing a debt contract through courts
Relative to Gross Net Income per capita.
Cost in terms of legal fees to formally register a new firm Relative to GNI per capita
Cost, duration , observance of priority claims and efficiency of an insolvency
Process with higher values indicating a less expensive and faster process.
Principal component indicator of the above four measures.

Heritage Foundation
Djankov et al. (2003)

Legal Origin Variables
British
French
German
Scandinavian
Transition
Business Environment Variables
Property Rights
Cost of Contract Enforcement
Cost of entry
Efficiency of Bankruptcy
Business Environment

43

Djankov et al. (2002)
http://rru.worldbank.org/doingbusiness/
Authors’ calculations.

