                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           AN INFORMATION APPROACH TO INTERNATIONAL CURRENCIES

                                            Richard K. Lyons
                                            Michael J. Moore

                                         Working Paper 11220
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11220


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




Lyons’ affiliations are U.C. Berkeley and NBER and Moore’s is Queen’s University Belfast
m.moore@qub.ac.uk). We thank the following for valuable comments: Philipp Hartmann, Hélène Rey,
Dagfinn Rime, Cedric Tille, and seminar participants at U.C. Berkeley, LSE, and the Stockholm conference
on Microstructure Analysis in International Macro (April 2003). Lyons thanks the National Science
Foundation for support, which includes a web clearinghouse for micro-based exchange rate research (at
faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/lyons). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Richard K. Lyons and Michael J. Moore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
An Information Approach to International Currencies
Richard K. Lyons and Michael J. Moore
NBER Working Paper No. 11220
March 2005
JEL No. F3, F4, G1

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper addresses currency competition from an information perspective. Transactions in

traditional models do not convey information, so transaction costs – the driver of competition

outcomes – are driven by market size. In our model transactions do convey information (consistent

with recent empirical findings). Several important departures arise. First, adding the information

dimension resolves the traditional indeterminacy of currency trade patterns (by mitigating the

concentrating force of market-size economies). Second, whether transactions are executed directly

or through a vehicle actually affects prices (because these trading methods do not in general reveal

the same information). Third, our model provides a new rationale for why some currency pairs never

trade directly (information is not sufficiently symmetric to support trading). Fourth, our model

formalizes the arbitrage process and shows that arbitrage transaction quantities and price levels are

jointly determined. Empirically, the paper provides a first integrated analysis of transactions in a

triangle of markets: ¥/$, $/   , and ¥/   . Data for the full triangle permits comparison of direct,

indirect and arbitrage transactions, for each pair. The information model predicts that transactions

should affect prices across markets (e.g., flow in the ¥/$ market should convey information relevant

to $/   and ¥/    prices), which is borne out.

Richard K. Lyons
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
lyons@haas.berkeley.edu

Michael J. Moore
Queen’s University
m.moore@qub.ac.uk
       An Information Approach to International Currencies



        Why do people choose one country’s money over another’s? The question’s empirical
relevance is clear: different monies play very different roles internationally. For example, the
current roles of the U.S. dollar and Swiss franc are disproportionately large, whereas the roles of
the Japanese yen and European euro are disproportionately small (proportions based on, for
example, economic size). This paper addresses an important dimension of this international-
currency question, namely cross-currency exchange. Why are some currencies foci in the pattern
of currency exchange, while others remain peripheral? Our answer involves not only currencies’
medium-of-exchange function, but also, critically, their store-of-value function (the latter via
currency-denomination of portfolio choices).
        Our approach is radically different from the two existing approaches. The focus of the
earliest approach is on currency market size (Krugman 1980). The basic idea underlying the
market-size approach is that transaction costs in a bilateral market are a decreasing function of the
total volume traded. Krugman is agnostic about the mechanism underlying the transaction cost
effect. His focus is instead on the increasing returns (and multiple equilibria) that result from
market-size economies: the choice to trade particular currencies has effects on transaction costs
that promote further trade in those currencies, and vice versa. The market-size approach was
much enriched by Matsuyama et al. (1993), Zhou (1997), and Rey (2001), who use a search-
theoretic basis for why transaction costs should decrease with market size.1 The work of Rey is
particularly relevant in that she specifically analyzes the existence and use of vehicle currencies
(i.e., currencies used in the indirect exchange of two other currencies by means of two offsetting
transactions). That vehicle currencies can, and indeed generally must, arise is central to
understanding equilibrium patterns of currency exchange (a point stressed by Krugman).
        The second main approach to modeling patterns of currency exchange is the
marketmaker-risk approach (Black 1991 and Hartmann 1998). This approach adds exchange rate
volatility to the determinants of transaction costs. When exchange rates are more volatile, the risk
faced by liquidity-providing marketmakers increases, inducing them to increase the transaction
spread they receive as compensation.2 Models in this second approach highlight the importance of

1
  The search-theoretic basis for transaction costs that decrease with market size is not the only possible
basis. For example, fixed costs to marketmaking will also produce declining costs as market size grows.
2
  Models of marketmaker risk and its effect on transaction costs launched a sub-field of finance in the
1970s called microstructure (see, e.g., Garman 1976 and Stoll 1978).


                                                    1
exchange rate second moments in determining currency exchange patterns, a significant point that
was absent in the earlier literature.
        The approach to international currencies in this paper is instead information based. The
basic idea is that when transactions convey information, then the cost of effecting those
transactions will be an increasing function of the information they convey (which in turn feeds
back into the currencies people choose to trade). This mechanism is well known within the
theoretical literature on informative trading (e.g., Copeland and Galai 1983, Kyle 1985, and
Glosten and Milgrom 1985). It has not been used to model patterns of currency exchange,
however. A fundamental idea that comes from these information models is that one cannot simply
use posted bid-ask spreads—which generally apply to smaller transactions—as a measure of
transaction costs. Rather, what matters is the price impact of trades, i.e., if one wants to establish
or liquidate a large position, at what price will the last bits be executed? This is a richer (and more
realistic) way of thinking about effective transaction costs. In this setting, the percentage cost of
individual trades increases with size (i.e., transactable prices are sloping schedules, not single bid
and ask prices good for any quantity, as would be the case under proportional costs). In contrast,
the costs of transacting in the two existing approaches are assumed proportional—individual
transactions generate no economies or diseconomies.
        Why do we choose this approach and why does it matter? Consider first our choice. It is
motivated on both empirical and theoretical grounds. Empirically, a recent series of papers at both
the micro (i.e., individual marketmaker) and market-wide levels has established that foreign
exchange transactions do indeed convey information that affects price (e.g., Lyons 1995, Rime
2001, Killeen et al. 2001, Covrig and Melvin 2002, Evans and Lyons 2002a,b, Payne 2003,
Bjonnes and Rime 2003). Not only are these effects present, they are large: they can account for
40-80 percent of the daily variation in major rates (Evans and Lyons 2002b).3 This empirical
perspective was not present at the time the two earlier approaches to international currencies were
developed.
        Theoretical motivation for our information approach includes two main elements. The
first relates to the nature of the information conveyed by transactions and why, theoretically, this
role for transactions makes sense. For information models to be relevant to FX it is not necessary
that private information be of the “concentrated” type, e.g., inside information in the hands of one
or a few individuals (regarding some macro variable). Rather, our information model is consistent
with an economic environment where information is of the “dispersed” type, i.e., in which there

3
  Moreover, daily exchange rates are very nearly a random walk, which means this accounted-for variation
is very persistent.


                                                   2
are myriad bits of information relevant to exchange rates that are not observable to all agents and
need to be aggregated via market processes. Think, for example, about heterogeneous shifts in
money demands or risk preferences, both of which will produce currency transactions that, in
turn, inform the market about those shifts.
        The second theoretical motivation for our approach is linked to cross-sectional (versus
time-series) variation in information environments. Specifically, our model helps identify
information differences across bilateral markets that can drive currency competition outcomes.
Hartmann (1998) recognizes the possibility of modeling currency exchange using an information
approach, but argues that “information-cost effects are transitory and therefore less relevant for
the emergence of vehicle currencies” (page 43, footnote 3). The Hartmann argument against
information-based analysis is a time-series argument: the information-cost effects he is
considering are due to shocks to trading volume over time. Our focus here, in contrast, is on
cross-sectional differences among markets. Cross-sectional differences are by their nature
persistent.4 They include any variables that affect the per-dollar information intensity of flows in
a given market. Examples include the relative concentration of marketmaking, the relative
importance of currency transactions tied to real trade, and the relative slopes of the markets’ net
excess supply curves (i.e., the relative elasticity of economy-wide liquidity provision in the two
markets).5 These variables—as well as many others—affect the signal-to-noise ratio in flows,
which translates into cross-market differences in transaction costs. For concreteness, consider the
first of these examples in more detail. Suppose there are two currency markets, one in which the
three largest marketmaking banks enjoy an 80 percent market share (i.e., they observe 80
percent), the other in which the three largest marketmaking banks enjoy a 20 percent market
share. Given that currency transaction flows convey information, and given that transaction flows
are not observable to all participants, the result is cross-market differences in information
symmetry.
        Analytical results from our information model include several important departures from
traditional results. First, adding the information dimension resolves the traditional indeterminacy
of currency trade patterns. The reason is that the convex trading costs faced by individual agents
mitigate the concentrating force of market-size economies (the latter being the focus of Krugman

4
   That the time-series of information effects should be associated with unexpected trading volume, as
argued by Hartmann (1998), is not always true as a theoretical matter. For example, in the Kyle-model
framework we use here, unexpectedly high volume has no additional information content, dollar for dollar
(i.e., the parameter governing the price impact of a dollar of order flow is not a function of realized
volume). For evidence on persistent cross-sectional differences in the information environments of
individual stocks, see Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2002).
5
  See Hau and Rey (2002) for analysis of how supply curve slopes affect exchange rate determination.


                                                   3
1980). Second, the pattern of currency trade is not driven by the pattern of real trade, as it is in
traditional models (e.g., Krugman 1980 and Rey 2001), but instead by the pattern of asset trade. It
is well known that currency trade resulting from underlying real trade accounts for less than 5
percent of trading volume in the major currency markets (though this number was much higher in
the pre-1950 period when sterling was the world’s dominant currency).6 Third, exchange rate
levels are actually affected by whether transactions are executed directly or indirectly. This is
because these trading methods do not in general reveal the same information (i.e., the equilibrium
price impact from the two indirect trades does not in general equal the price impact from the
equivalent direct trade). Fourth, our model provides a new rationale for why some currency pairs
never trade directly: in information models of the type we analyze here, if the information
available to various market participants is not sufficiently symmetric, then the market breaks
down—there is insufficient incentive to participate (see, e.g., Bhattacharya and Spiegel 1991 and
the earlier literature on “no-trade theorems”, e.g., Milgrom and Stokey 1982). The conditions in
our model that lead to the absence of direct trade—what Krugman calls total indirect exchange—
are of a completely different nature than those outlined by Krugman.
         By modeling currency exchange patterns using a pure information model, we do not
mean to imply that market size and volatility—the driving forces in the two earlier approaches—
are irrelevant. Size and volatility are definitely relevant. Rather, our objective is to learn what we
can from a pure information model, given it has never been addressed in the literature, and given
the strong empirical motivation for doing so.
         Our empirical analysis is the first integrated analysis of transactions in a triangle of
markets: ¥/$, $/€, and ¥/€.7 Data on the full triangle permits comparison of direct and indirect
exchange for each (e.g., ¥/$ × $/€ = ¥/€). We also formalize the incentives to engage in triangular
arbitrage.   Unlike the traditional market-size approach, our information model predicts that
transactions should affect prices across markets (e.g., flow in the $/€ market should convey
information relevant to ¥/€ and ¥/$ prices). This prediction is borne out.
         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I presents our model of how
information transmission affects currency exchange patterns. Section II extends the model to
address vehicle currency determination. Section III presents supporting empirical work. Section
IV concludes.


6
  To be fair, the Rey (2001) and Krugman (1980) models can also serve as metaphors for countries’
balance-of-payments accounts more broadly (i.e., not just real trade, but also the capital account). But even
the sum of capital-account transactions and those from real trade is far too low to account for FX volume.
7
  Danielsson, Payne, and Luo (2002) analyze data for a full currency-market triangle, but treat each of the
three markets separately (i.e., there is no integration of triangular arbitrage into their order flow model).


                                                     4
I. An Information Model of Currency Exchange Patterns
        This section develops a model for analyzing direct versus indirect currency exchange.
The basic structure is simple, drawing on the Kyle (1985) order flow model.8 Though simple, our
model is rich enough to embed the cross-market information links that are particular to FX.
Information links across markets arise in the model because order flow in one market conveys
information relevant for the pricing of the other exchange rates. This information relates to
fundamental cash flows and is conveyed by the trades of agents who have amassed superior
information of this type (e.g., through observation of market transaction flows correlated with
future cash flows, but not yet fully impounded in price). Though there is an existing multi-market
version of the Kyle model in the literature (Chowdhry and Nanda 1991), it does not include the
triangular parity relationships across markets that are our focus here. Indeed, to our knowledge
our model is the first trading model to address these issues.
        There is another feature of the forex market that motivates our use of the Kyle (1985)
framework. Aggregation of dispersed information takes time. During that time some participants
(e.g., commercial banks with large forex customer bases) are observing informative transaction
flows before this information is fully impounded in price, which results in information advantages
becoming increasingly concentrated. This squares with the strategic informed trading that is the
hallmark of Kyle-type models. Do the largest players in this market (e.g., large commercial banks,
hedge funds) in fact trade strategically in order to minimize their price impact? For anyone who
has observed these markets, the answer is a clear yes. This is precisely what the Kyle model is
designed to capture.


Payoffs, information, and triangular parity
        There are three markets in the model: market 1 (for concreteness, $/€), market 2 (¥/$),
and market 3 (¥/€). Let p1, p2, and p3 denote the change in the log of prices in the three markets,
measured as dollars per euro, yen per dollar, and yen per euro, respectively. If triangular parity
were to hold (i.e., no triangular arbitrage opportunities), the following would also be an identity:

8
  There is an important distinction between the “flow approach” adopted by Krugman (1980) and the
central role of “order flow” in Kyle-type models. Krugman is apologetic, writing that his use of flow
demands and supplies in determining exchange rates is motivated by tractability and that his analysis
“should therefore be regarded as preliminary”. The only currency flows arising in the Krugman model are
those from real trade flows, i.e., there are no agents in the model concerned about their total stock of
holdings, and therefore nothing to ensure that all stocks are willingly held (stock equilibrium). Flows
determine prices in the Kyle model as well, but there are agents who are optimizing over cumulated stocks.
Thus, despite the central role played by (order) flow, the Kyle model is consistent with stock equilibrium.


                                                    5
(1)                                           p 3 = p1 + p 2

As will be clear below, this relationship is not as trivial in the micro context as it is assumed to be
in international macroeconomics. In particular, the issue of how triangular parity is actually
achieved needs to be addressed. For part of the market, this is an irrelevant point because most
minor currencies have inter-dealer markets with only one other currency, usually the dollar.9
Cross-rates to currencies other than the dollar are then arithmetically calculated using indirect
rates. However, the yen, sterling and Swiss franc all have independent inter-dealer markets with
both the dollar and the euro. The seven currency pairs in these triangles constitute 70% of the
total world market (BIS, 2004).10
        The first point to note is that as an empirical matter, exact triangular parity in these pairs
does not hold at every instant. To see this, we show the deviation from parity in Figure 1.11 Figure
1 plots the euro/yen exchange rate calculated indirectly (i.e., via a transaction through the dollar)
as a ratio of the direct euro/yen rate. Though the mean is nearly unity (no deviation), the range is
from +34 basis points to -30 basis points, with a standard deviation of nearly 7 basis points. For
comparison, average bid-ask spreads for brokered inter-dealer trades around that time were
roughly 1, 1, and 3 basis points for €/$, $/¥ and €/¥, respectively.12 That triangular parity does not
hold at every instant has already been observed by De Jong, Mahieu, and Schotman (1998) using
high-frequency data from the Reuters FXFX system. They model adjustment to triangular parity
in the $, ¥, DM triangle as an error correction mechanism, but do not explore behavioral aspects
of the disparity. The work of Evans (2002) is perhaps even more compelling in this regard:
looking within a single market (DM/$), he finds that prices exhibit significant dispersion that is
purely cross-sectional (using four months of ultra-high frequency transactions data).
        Let ν1 denote the innovation in the fundamental value of the bilateral $/€ pair (i.e.,
terminal payoff, measured as dollars per euro).            Analogously, ν2 is the innovation in the
fundamental value for the bilateral ¥/$ pair (yen per dollar) and ν3 is the innovation in the
fundamental value for the bilateral ¥/€ pair (yen per euro). The value innovations are i.i.d.
Normal, with mean zero and scalar variance Σ v .

9
  For the Scandinavians and the ten new members that joined the EU in May 2004, it is the euro.
10
   The seven pairs are USD/EUR, USD/JPY, USD/GBP, USD/CHF, EUR/JPY, EUR/GBP and EUR/CHF.
11
   The data cover all of 1999, sampled daily at 9pm GMT (when the trading day in New York winds down).
The source is Olsen & Associates, Zurich; we are grateful to Richard Olsen for his generosity. Importantly,
these data were prepared with full knowledge of how they were going to be used, i.e., with an eye toward
eliminating any non-synchronization problems.
12
   See Hau, Killeen and Moore (2002b), Table 3. Data are from August 1999.


                                                    6
Timing
           The trading day is divided into three events (more on notation and specifics below).13
First, the informed traders observe the value innovation ν        j
                                                                      in their respective market. Second,

orders are submitted by both informed traders ( x j ) and liquidity-motivated traders ( c j ), where a
positive order denotes a purchase and a negative order denotes a sale. Third, marketmakers set
prices to clear markets based on the orders submitted and based on any information conveyed by
those orders.


                                                Figure 1
                                  Sequence of Events in Each Market




           νj                                   x j and c j                                     pj
      observed                                 submitted                                    determined




We now describe each of these three agent types—marketmakers, liquidity traders, and informed
traders.


Marketmakers
The three marketmakers are competitive (meaning they expect to earn zero profit) and risk-
neutral. Marketmakers cannot distinguish between trader types (i.e., they observe the sum of all
orders submitted, not the components separately). Because competition ensures that each
marketmaker sets price such that expected profit is zero, marketmakers will necessarily set price
at their expectation of the fundamental value conditional on order flows observed. Though the
three marketmakers may see each others’ order flows, the assumption that innovations are
orthogonal means that only own-order flow is relevant for price setting. Order flow in another
market conveys no additional information. This is the inference problem they must solve.




13
  Our empirical analysis is at the daily frequency, so it is not important for our model to capture intraday
variation in liquidity (e.g., by including multiple intraday trading rounds for each trader type).


                                                     7
Liquidity traders
        There are three aggregate liquidity trades, one in each of the three markets, which are
random and exogenous. (These can represent, for example, aggregations of large numbers of
underlying liquidity demands in each market.) We have denoted the three aggregate liquidity
trades as c1, c2, and c3 respectively. Each of the liquidity trades is distributed Normal (0, Σ cj ),

where Σ cj is a scalar variance. The three liquidity trades and the three fundamental values are

mutually independent. Note that these relative liquidity-trade variances are one way to calibrate
market size (i.e., to provide links to the market-size approach to international currencies in
Krugman 1980 and Rey 2001).14


Informed traders
        There are three risk-neutral informed traders. Each observes the realization of
fundamental value in one currency pair.15 We have denoted the three informed trades as x1, x2,
and x3 respectively. The task of the informed trader is to select the size of his trade to maximise
profit (which is affected by his trading costs, in the form of his trades’ price impact).
        To fix ideas, let us first solve for a simple version of the model in which each informed
trader trades only in his own market. Since the innovations are orthogonal, a trader has no
incentive to trade directly in a market in respect of which he has no information. The only type of
trading that we are ruling out is arbitrage trading: this is introduced in the next section. Using the
informed trader in market 1 as an example, that problem can be expressed as:16


(2)                                     Max E  x1 ( v1 − p1 ) 
                                         x1




MM Rule:                                  p1 = E ν 1 c1 + x1 



14
   In contrast with the market-size approach, though, expected liquidity flow in our model has no effect on
prices—marketmakers simply net it out in making their inferences. Another possible link to the market-size
approach would be to introduce capital constraints on informed traders, which would tend to amplify
market-size effects (where size is parameterized by the liquidity-trade variances).
15
   This specification with the informed trader observing the fundamental value without noise follows Kyle,
but need not: adding noise is straightforward but adds nothing to the economics of the problem. (The
informed traders and marketmakers are risk neutral here so it is simply the expectation of fundamental
value that matters for determining their decision rules.)




                                                     8
As in the original Kyle (1985) model, we solve for the linear equilibrium. Given our assumption
that liquidity trades and value innovations are Normally distributed, this gives linear pricing rules
for each of the three marketmakers of the form:


(3)                                           (
                                     p j = λj c j + x j      )     for j=1,2,3


or, in matrix notation:


                                      p1   λ1 0                0       c1 + x1 
                                      2                                 2     2
(4)                                   p  =  0 λ2               0     c + x 
                                      p3    0 0               λ3     c3 + x3 
                                                                                 

The solution (from Kyle) is:


(5)                                      x j = β jν j            for j=1,2,3


                                      β j = ( Σ cj Σ v )
                                                             12
where:                                                              for j=1,2,3



                                       λ j = ( 2β j )
                                                        −1
and:                                                              for j=1,2,3


We know from this equilibrium that:


Var[v j ] = 2Var[v j | c j + x j ]


And in our case we can write departures from triangular parity as:


Var[ p1 + p 2 − p 3 ] = λ12Var[c1 + β1v1 ] + λ22Var[c 2 + β 2 v 2 ] + λ32Var[c3 + β 3v3 ]


Since the innovations are independent, the Kyle result goings through straightforwardly: strategic
trading by the informed traders cuts the variance of deviations from triangular parity in observed
exchange rates to half of the variance of deviations from triangular parity in the innovations.

16
     Note that ν and pj are logs of their cash values, so this maximization problem involves a monotonic
                j




                                                             9
II. Adding Vehicle Currencies
        The equilibrium above has the unappealing theoretical property that informed traders are
not permitted to trade indirectly through the other two markets (sometimes called one-way
arbitrage, i.e., building a position less expensively by doing the trade indirectly), nor are they able
to do round-trip trades to profit from departures from triangular parity (two-way arbitrage)17. In
addition, this equation has the property that order flow in each market conveys no information
that is relevant for price determination in the other markets (i.e., the matrix of λ’s in equation (4)
is diagonal).
        We now extend the model to allow informed agents to trade indirectly via a vehicle
currency and to engage in two-way arbitrage.18 Let the subscripts d, i, and a refer to direct,
indirect, and arbitrage (two-way) trades respectively, so that xi1 , for example, denotes the indirect

trade of the trader who is informed about the market 1 value innovation v1. As an indirect trade,
xi1 is part of the order flow in both market 2 and market 3, but not part of order flow in market 1.
Other than re-specification of the informed traders’ problem, the model has the same structure as
that above (save, of course, that the flows that each marketmaker now sees include six
components rather than two: the liquidity trade c1 and direct informed trade xd1 as before, plus an

indirect and an arbitrage trade from each of the two other-market informed traders).
        Though the notation above seems simple enough, it embeds a subtlety that warrants
further attention. Specifically, getting the sign of the trade direction right in Kyle-type models is
crucial. So, take for example the indirect trade of the informed trader in market 3, xi3 . When

positive, this is indirect buying of euros, and paying of yen, which we refer to as “buying ¥/€”.
Buying ¥/€ indirectly therefore involves buying ¥/$ and also buying $/€, i.e., when xi3 > 0 , then

this constitutes positive order flow in both markets 1 and 2. This is not the case for indirect
trading by the other two insiders, however. Consider the indirect trade of the informed trader in
market 2, xi2 : when positive, this is indirect buying of dollars, and paying of yen. Buying ¥/$



transformation of the “price” argument.
17
   The distinction between one-way and two-way arbitrage is well established in international economics.
It was first introduced by Deardorff (1979): it was developed by Callier (1981), Bahmani-Oskooee et al.
(1985) and Clinton (1988).
18
   Though we do not add them here, one could also introduce strategic liquidity trading, for example,
allowing the liquidity traders to trade either directly or indirectly.


                                                  10
indirectly therefore involves buying ¥/€ and selling $/€, i.e., when xi2 > 0 , this constitutes positive

order flow in market 3 but negative order flow in market 1. Similarly, buying $/€ indirectly
involves buying ¥/€ and selling ¥/$, i.e., when xi1 > 0 , this constitutes positive order flow in

market 2 but negative order flow in market 1. These same sign issues affect the two-way arbitrage
trades.19 An arbitrage trade x a3 will denote a sale in market 3, and therefore purchases in both

markets 1 and 2. An arbitrage trade x 1a will denote a sale in market 1, a purchase in market 3, and

a sale in market 2. An arbitrage trade x a2 will denote a sale in market 2, a purchase in market 3,

and a sale in market 1.
         The task of the informed trader is to select the size and location of his trades so as to
maximise profit. This is of course affected by the extent to which the informed trader’s actions
move price. Each informed trader still observes the fundamental innovation in one of the three
markets. When he trades indirectly, the trades he places in the other two markets eliminate any
net position in the vehicle currency. (For example, the trader in the ¥/€ market now has the
option of taking positions in ¥/€ indirectly via equal dollar-sized trades in the ¥/$ and $/€
markets—one a dollar purchase and the other a sale, to eliminate any net dollar position.)20 When
he trades for arbitrage, the trades he places in the three markets eliminate any net position in any
of the three currencies, save for any dollar profit generated from the arbitrage.
         First, marketmakers set regret-free prices based on the full matrix of order flows:21


                         p1   λ11 λ12       λ13   c1 + xd1 − xi2 + xi3 − xa2 + xa3 
                         2                                                            
(6)                      p  = λ21 λ22       λ23   c 2 + xd2 − xi1 + xi3 − xa1 + xa3 
                         p 3   λ31 λ32     λ33  c3 + xd3 + xi1 + xi2 + xa1 + xa2 
                         


Naturally, the informed traders integrate this pricing rule into their strategy. Consider, for
example, the problem for the informed trader in market 3, the ¥/€ trader. He has to take account
of the impact of his order flow in all markets because he is trading both directly and indirectly.



19
   The two-way arbitrage example is clarified in the appendix.
20                                                                                                    1
   For clarification on our notation, note that the informed trader in market 1 accounts for all of xd and all
     1                2     3
of xi , but none of xi or xi .
21
   Buying a given quantity indirectly will not, in general, involve the same trade quantity in both indirect
markets. The approximation involved in specifying the problem as in equation (6) is second-order,
however—see the second part of the appendix. A convenient way of thinking about the quantities in (6) is
as numbers of trades, as opposed to cash values.


                                                      11
(7)                      Max E  xd3 ( v3 − p 3 ) + xi3 ( v 3 − p 3 ) + xa3 ( p 3 − v 3 ) 
                         xd3 , xi3 , xa3



where the indirect price for currency 3 is p 3 ≡ p1 + p 2 and the arbitrage buying price for

currency 3 purchased in the other two markets is v 3 ≡ p1 + p 2 , the two being equal.


        The first-order condition with respect to direct trading xd3 is:

                  3 λ33 (x1a + xi1 + xa2 + xi2 + xd3 )+λ32 (-x1a - xi1 + xd2 +xa3 + xi3 )  
            Ev3 v -                                                                          
                       +λ31 (xd - xa - xi + xa + xi )
                                1     2    2   3     3
                                                                                            
            = λ33 xd3 + (λ13 +λ23 ) xi3 +(λ13 +λ23 - λ33 ) xa3

and the first-order condition with respect to indirect trading (one-way arbitrage) xi3 is:



               λ13 (xa1 + xi1 + xa2 + xi2 +xd3 )+λ23 (xa1 + xi1 + xa2 + xi2 +xd3 )  
                                                                                       
      Ev3 v3 - λ12 (-xa1 - xi1 + xd2 +xa3 + xi3 )+λ22 (-xa1 - xi1 + xd2 + xa3 + xi3 )  
                                                                                       
                λ11 (xd - xa - xi + xa + xi )+λ21 (xd - xa - xi + xa + xi )  
                          1    2   2      3     3         1       2    2     3     3
          
      = (λ31 + λ32 ) xd3 + (λ11 + λ12 + λ21 + λ22 ) xi3 + (λ11 + λ12 +λ21 +λ22 - λ31 - λ32 ) xa3

Finally, the first order condition with respect to two-way arbitrage xa3 is:

           - λ13 (xa1 + xi1 + xa2 + xi2 + xd3 ) - λ23 (xa1 + xi1 + xa2 + xi2 + xd3 ) + 
                                                                                        
           λ33 (xa + xi + xa + xi + xd ) - λ12 (-xa - xi + xd + xa + xi ) - 
                     1     1     2      2      3             1     1    2      3     3


       E  λ22 (-xa1 - xi1 + xd2 + xa3 + xi3 ) + λ32 (-xa1 - xi1 + xd2 + xa3 + xi3 ) - 
          λ11 (xd1 - xa2 - xi2 + xa3 + xi3 ) - λ21 (xd1 - xa2 - xi2 + xa3 + xi3 ) +     
                                                                                        
          λ31 (xd1 - xa2 - xi2 + xa3 + xi3 )                                           
       = (λ31 + λ32 ) xd3 + (λ11 +λ12 + λ21 + λ22 ) xi3 +(λ11 + λ12 + λ21 + λ22 - λ31 - λ32 ) xa3


        These conditions are interpretable as follows: the informed trader stops building his
position at the point where the expected gap between price and fundamental value is equal to the
full impact on price from the informed trader’s trades (the right-hand side in both cases
representing that full impact on price).          For the first two equations, the “fundamental value” is
the inside information to which the trader has access with regard to the value of the ¥/€ pair. For
the last equation, the fundamental value is common knowledge: namely that deviations from
triangular arbitrage should be precisely zero.                 Nevertheless, the trader does not drive such


                                                          12
deviations precisely to zero: the expected deviation on the left hand side is indeed zero but even
two-way arbitrage is costly because of the price impact of order flow.
        The signal v 3 provides no information about the other two traders’ demands because of
the orthogonality of the innovations. Consequently their expected value is zero. Using the above
first order conditions, we can then solve for the optimal trading pattern of the ¥/€ investor:


                       ( λ + λ )( λ + λ23 + λ33 ) − 2λ33 ( λ11 + λ12 + λ21 + λ22 )  3
(8)             xd3 =  31 32 13                                                          v
                       2λ33 {( λ13 + λ23 )( λ31 + λ32 ) − λ33 ( λ11 + λ12 + λ21 + λ22 )} 
                                                                                         


                 λ132 + λ232 + λ23 ( λ31 + λ32 − 2λ33 ) + λ13 ( 2λ23 + λ31 + λ32 − 2λ33 )  
                 −                                                                                  
                   −2 λ    ( λ    +  λ   +  λ    +  λ   ) +  λ   ( λ     + λ     + λ    )             3
          xi3 =  
                          33     11     12      21     22       33     31      32      33
(9)                                                                                                      v
                       2λ 33 { ( λ 13 + λ 23 )( λ 31 + λ 32 ) − λ 33 ( λ 11 + λ  12 + λ  21 + λ22 )}    
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        

                      ( λ13 + λ23 )( λ13 + λ23 + λ31 + λ32 )                                    
                      −                                                                          
                        − λ    ( 2 λ   + 2 λ    +  2λ     + 2 λ    +  λ   + λ    − λ   − λ    )
                                                                                            32   3
                                                                                                  
               xa3 =  
                              33      11       12       21       22      13     23    31
(10)                                                                                                 v
                       2λ 33 {( λ 13 +  λ23 )( λ 31 + λ 32 ) − λ 33 ( λ11 + λ12 +  λ21 + λ22 )}     
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    



We are now in a position to use the model to address a number of fundamental questions
regarding vehicle currency use.22 Specifically, ratios of the expressions in equations (8)-(10) pin
down the relative intensity of direct, indirect, and arbitrage trading within and across currencies.


(i) What determines the choice of direct versus vehicle trade?

        Consider the decision whether to trade directly in market 3, the ¥/ € market, or to use the
$ as a vehicle for arbitrage trading, both one and two-way. The total of arbitrage trading is the
sum of xi3 in equation (9) and xa3 in equation (10). This is:

                                                   λ13 + λ23 − λ33                          3
(11)           xi3 + xa3 =                                                                 v
                            2 {( λ13 + λ23 )( λ31 + λ32 ) − λ33 ( λ11 + λ12 + λ21 + λ22 )} 
                                                                                           
22
 To assist the reader, the derivation of equations (8)-(12) is available in the form of a Mathematica
notebook. Analogous solutions for the other two traders are available in the same format.


                                                         13
The ratio of arbitrage to direct ¥/ € trading is equation (11) divided by (8):


               xi3 + xa3                        λ33 ( λ13 + λ23 − λ33 )
(12)                     =
                    3
                   xd      −2λ33 ( λ11 + λ12 + λ21 + λ22 ) + ( λ31 + λ32 )( λ13 + λ23 + λ33 )



This is a manifestation of a point we made in the introduction: when trades convey information,
the key to vehicle-currency choice is not bid-ask spreads, but price impact (including, as is not
often recognized, cross-market price impact. Simplifying, the above expression leads to the
following proposition:


    Proposition 1: When λij = 0 ∀i ≠ j , the ratio of arbitrage to direct trade is decreasing in

                     λ33 and increasing in λ11 + λ22 .


This follows from equation (12). In fact, when λij = 0 ∀i ≠ j equation (12) takes a particularly

simple form:

                                         xi3 + xa3         λ33
                                                   =
                                              3
                                             xd      2 ( λ11 + λ22 )
Thus, the ratio:
                                                    λ33
(13)
                                                 λ11 + λ22

provides a relative cost measure of direct to indirect trading (euro/yen market). Note that the
condition that λij = 0 ∀i ≠ j still leaves room for flow originating in market 2 (i.e., from the

market-2 informed trader) to affect order flow and price in market 1, e.g., via the indirect trades
routed through market 1. This condition on the λij describes a setting in which the marketmaker

in a given market, say market 1, finds flows realized in markets 2 and 3 to be redundant for
estimating ν 1 . Because value innovations are independent, this means that he finds them
redundant for estimating the market-1 informed trader’s trades (given observation of flow in his
own market). From equation (6), a sufficient condition for this is that the expected value of




                                                     14
xi1 + x1a in markets 2 and 3 is zero, conditional on having observed total flow in all three
markets.23


(ii) What determines the relative importance of a currency as a vehicle?
           To answer this we need to compare use of the dollar as a vehicle (i.e., arbitrage ¥/€
trading via the dollar) to use of the euro as a vehicle (i.e., arbitrage ¥/$ trading via the euro).
Equation (11) provides an expression for the former. The analogous expression for the euro is:


                                                      λ32 − λ12 − λ22                          2
(14)              xi2 + xa2 =                                                                 v
                               2 {( λ12 − λ32 )( λ21 + λ23 ) − λ22 ( λ11 − λ13 − λ31 + λ33 )} 
                                                                                              

The ratio of arbitrage trading through the dollar relative to the euro is equation (11)
divided by (14):


               {( λ21− λ23 )( λ12 − λ32 ) − λ22 ( λ11 − λ13 − λ31 + λ33 )} ( λ13 + λ23 − λ33 )  v 3 
(15)                                                                                            2
               {( λ
                  13 + λ23 )( λ31 + λ32 ) − λ33 ( λ11 + λ12 + λ21 + λ22 )} ( λ32 − λ12 − λ22 )  v 


This leads to the following proposition:


       Proposition 2: When λij = 0 ∀i ≠ j , vehicle trading through the dollar relative to the euro

                        is increasing in λ33 and decreasing in λ22 .


This follows from equation (15). In fact, when λij = 0 ∀i ≠ j equation (15) takes a particularly

simple form:
                                                            λ11 + λ33
                                              xi2 + xa2 =
                                                            λ11 + λ22


Again, the result is intuitive and appealing: the vehicle role of a currency is determined by the
relative price impact of its indirect trades. The lower that price impact, the more the currency will
be used as a vehicle. It is worth noting that our analysis allows for indirect trades to take place



23
     As an empirical matter, equations (12) and (13) are nearly equivalent—see section 3.


                                                        15
through all currencies.24       There is no one vehicle currency, just different degrees of
“vehicleness”. A natural definition of the relative vehicleness of the dollar vis-a vis the euro is:25

                                                λ11 + λ33
(16)
                                                λ11 + λ22

(iii) Does the choice between direct and indirect trade affect the informativeness of prices?
        This is an important question, one that never arose within the two traditional approaches
to currency competition. The answer boils down to whether direct and indirect trades reveal the
same amount of information.


     Proposition 3: Whether transactions are executed directly or indirectly affects the
                      equilibrium levels of the exchange rates.


In general a marketmaker facing order flow from indirect trading cannot recover the solution that
would have resulted if order flow contained only direct trade. The logic underlying this is clear:
the different markets involve different noise realizations, so there is no way to arrive at the same
inferences from direct and indirect trade.


(iv) What parameters determine whether one of the markets shuts down altogether?
        In the traditional market-size and marketmaker-risk approaches to international
currencies, the conditions under which one of the three markets in a currency triangle shuts down
are well known. (Krugman 1980 calls this total indirect exchange, i.e., no direct exchange
between a currency pair takes place.) For example, total indirect exchange is more likely in
Krugman’s analysis when: (1) the balance of real trade between the two missing-market countries
is closer to zero, (2) the balance of real trade between each of the two missing-market countries
and the third country is further from zero, and (3) the rate at which transaction costs fall with
market size is high (see, e.g., Krugman 1980, equations 9 and 10).
        The conditions under which the whole market shuts down in information models are quite
different. The essential parameters in information models, including ours, are those governing the
degree of information asymmetry (see Glosten and Milgrom 1985, Glosten 1989, and

24
   This is different from most existing theory. Exceptions include Krugman (1984) and Hartmann (1998),
both of whom consider more than one vehicle currency in a many-currency world (e.g., the legacy DM as a
regional European vehicle). Nevertheless, the concentrating force of market-size economies in their models
is quite different from the dispersing force—avoidance of price impact—identified here.
25
   We also compare equations (15) and (16) in the empirical section below.


                                                   16
Bhattacharya and Spiegel 1991). If information asymmetry in a given market becomes too high,
then it is no longer possible for the marketmaker to find a price at which the market clears and he
expects to earn zero profit. When the marketmaker exits, no liquidity is provided, and the market
shuts down. In terms of parameter values, the shutting down of a market—which in our model
corresponds to total indirect exchange—is more likely when: (1) the variance of liquidity-
motivated trade Σ c in the direct market is low, (2) the variance of fundamentals Σ v in the direct

market is high, and (3) the precision of the informed traders’ information in the direct market is
high.26 As a matter of policy, these conditions present a radically different view on what is
required to jump-start a moribund currency market. This ability to fundamentally shift perspective
is one of the approach’s strengths.


III. Empirical Analysis


Data
         The order flow data we use to estimate the matrix is from Electronic Broking Services
(EBS), the leading foreign-exchange broker.27 These data span a full twelve-month period, 1999,
and cover the world’s largest currency triangle consisting of the $/€, ¥/$, and ¥/€ markets. (There
are, in fact, remarkably few currency triangles for which all three markets trade at the inter-dealer
level.) Our daily exchange rate data are closing New York mid-prices: as indicated in footnote
11, they are provided by Olsen and Associates. This matches the EBS ‘day’ precisely which runs
for 24 hours from 9pm GMT the previous evening. Saturdays and Sundays were excluded.
         Our use of order flow data from an FX broker accords well with the auction-market
structure of our model. (For more detail on the trading mechanics of EBS, see, e.g., Killeen et al.
2001.) The are three basic types of order flow data from spot FX markets, representing the three
basic transaction types. These transaction types are brokered interdealer trades, direct interdealer
trades, and customer-dealer trades.28 In 1999, trading volume in the major spot FX markets was
split roughly evenly between these three categories. (Since then the brokered interdealer segment

26
   In our model, the third of these is not a parameter, as we assume the insider observes the fundamental
with no noise. It is not difficult to relax this assumption. Note too that in models with risk aversion, the
category of liquidity-motivated trades includes hedge trades.
27
   We measure order flow here as the cash value of buyer- minus seller-initiated trades. An alternative
would be to use the net number of buys minus sells. The latter choice of order flow measure has a long
tradition in empirical microstructure finance (e.g., Hasbrouck 1991). The results do not differ substantially
when the numbers measure is used.
28
   The word dealer in this literature is synonymous with marketmaker. Customers in the FX market include
all non-marketmaker participants, such as hedge funds, mutual funds, and various non-financial
corporations.


                                                     17
has taken market share from the direct interdealer segment and now represents 80 percent or more
of interdealer trading; see BIS 2002.) Our use of these data accords well with the auction-market
structure of our model because EBS is an auction-trading mechanism (specifically, a two-sided
limit order book). In contrast, both of the two other data types correspond to trading under a
dealership-market structure. Not surprisingly though, given how integrated the major spot FX
markets are, order flow measured from these three different sources is strongly positively
correlated. It is therefore unlikely that our use of data from only one of these sources introduces
obvious selection biases. (Data for the other two transaction types over our sample for all three
markets are not available.). On EBS the currency is defined so that its nominal value is typically
greater than unity. Hence dollar/yen is measured in yen per dollar and the volume of trades is
measured in (millions of) dollars. Similarly euro/yen is measured in yen per euro with volume
measured in (millions of) euro. Eurodollar almost defied this convention for much of its short life
as its value was less $1 for a sustained period. However at its launch date, it was valued
conventionally in dollars per euro and its volumes in (millions of) euro.
            Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the variables used in the estimation. These are
the order flows, $/€ Flow, ¥/$ Flow, ¥/€ Flow and the three spot returns, ∆p$/€, ∆p¥/$ and ∆p¥/€.

Results
            Table 2 presents the results of estimating equation (6). The coefficients are measured in
basis points, i.e. the price impact in basis points per trade.29 (The median size of a trade $/€ is
about $2 million, so a coefficient of 0.04 corresponds to a price impact of 20 basis points per
                                                                                              2
billion dollars.) Note that all the coefficients are highly significant. The R statistics are all
remarkably high relative to macro empirical models of log exchange rate changes (consistent with
Evans-Lyons 2002b). There is some evidence that the residuals in the dollar-euro equation are
negatively auto-correlated (consistent with evidence on that pair over the same period in Hau,
Killeen and Moore 2002). Hausman specification tests for endogeneity of order flow (using
lagged order flow as instruments) show that simultaneity is overwhelmingly rejected (not
reported).
            It is interesting that the matrix is obviously not symmetric. The last column measures the
price impact of euro-yen trades across all three markets: the coefficients are noticeably large. The
implication is that traders choosing to trade in this market are providing particularly informative
signals. Returning to Proposition 1, from these estimates we can assess the relative cost of
indirect to direct trading in the smallest of our triangle of markets, the ¥/€ market. The expression

29
     The figures in parentheses are t-tests of the hypothesis that the coefficient is zero.


                                                          18
λ11 + λ22 which measures the cost of indirect trade is estimated at 0.063. By contrast, the point
estimate of the cost of direct trade λ33 is 0.131. The relative cost of direct to indirect trading in

the euro/yen market is, using equation (13):




                                      λ33      0.131
(17)                                         =       = 2.09
                                   λ11 + λ22   0.063


That direct trading is so costly is consistent with the idea that traders route some of their trades
through this market only when their trading is particularly aggressive, which is when the signal-
to-noise ratio in their trades is particularly high (a point which is, of course, relying on a richer
model than that in section 1 in that it includes time-varying trading intensity). By contrast, the
relative cost of direct to indirect trading in the ¥/$ and €/$ markets is less than unity at 0.24 and
0.15 respectively. In these two markets, direct trading is the norm because it is less costly in
terms of price impact.
        Interestingly, though, our model does predict that some indirect trading will still occur in
equilibrium, even though intuition (and past modes of analyzing vehicle trading) would rule it
out. The reason is that price impact needs to be appreciated as a “system”: Indirect trading that
might appear too costly when evaluated in isolation may not be too costly at from the system
perspective.
        Proposition 2 suggests that the relative vehicle role of a currency is determined by the
relative price impact of its indirect trades. The measure of the relative vehicleness of the dollar
relative to the euro provided by our estimates is, using equation (16):



(18)
                                  ( λ11 + λ33 ) =   0.157
                                                            = 2.5
                                  ( λ11 + λ22 )     0.063



The euro was thus a good deal less attractive in 1999 as a vehicle than the dollar: the combined
price impact of euro trades is much higher. The analogous expression for the dollar relative to the
yen is 2.67 i.e. the dollar also has a greater vehicle role than the yen. The gap is slightly wider
than in the case of the euro. Overall, the estimates confirm that the vehicle role of the three
currencies is ranked as $, € and ¥, respectively. The surprising aspect is that the vehicle role of



                                                    19
the € was only marginally more important than that of the ¥. Both are still overshadowed by the
US dollar.


        We can use the model to further strengthen these insights.          Instead of using the
abbreviated measure in equation (13) for the relative cost of direct to indirect trading, we
calculate the complete measure provided by equation (12). This yields 0.8, 0.08 and 0.07 for the
€/¥, ¥/$ and €/$ markets respectively. The striking feature is that neither the ranking nor the
relationship between the measures for the three markets differs from the estimates in equation
(17) and the paragraph that follows it. A similar point can be made about the relative vehicleness
of the three currencies. Instead of using equations (16) and (18), we can appeal to the precise
measure provided by the theory in equation (15). This tells us that the $ is 2.61 times more likely
to be used as a vehicle than the € and 2.28 times more likely to be used than the yen. The overall
picture is unchanged: the dollar is dominant and there is little to choose between the euro and the
yen.




                                                20
IV. Conclusions
        It would be heroic of us to contend that transaction costs arise wholly due to adverse
selection, as they do in our information model. They do not. Our objective here is to provide a first
analysis of how the presence of dispersed information can affect international currency
competition and the pattern of cross-currency exchange. To isolate the new forces at work, our
analysis does not include pure market-size effects nor marketmaker-risk effects on transaction
costs. To the extent our information approach resonates, integration with these two earlier
approaches is a natural next stage.
        Our approach brings two fresh elements to existing work focusing on market size and
marketmaker risk. First, we recognize that transaction flows play an important role beyond
market size in that they also convey price-relevant information. Given these flows are empirically
a first-order driver of exchange rate adjustment, this element is surely important for analyzing
international currency competition. Second, our analysis shows that the operative flow concept
for understanding the information dimension is order flow, as opposed to the flow concept
stressed by the traditional analysis, namely real trade (or balance of payments) flows. Real trade
flows are but a small component of currency transaction flows. Put another way, the analysis
shows that it is not the gross amount of trading that matters but rather its composition. The mix
matters. This point is absent from the existing literature.
        Consider the following example of how neglecting this information role of transactions
can affect international currency competition. When the euro was launched, most people felt the
new currency would enjoy reduced transaction costs (relative to those for the DM), thereby
increasing the international role of the euro relative to that of the dollar. But Hau, Killeen, and
Moore (2002a,b) show that relative to those for the DM, euro transaction costs increased. The
explanation they offer turns on a structural shift relating to the information role of transactions.
Specifically, they argue that introduction of the euro caused higher spreads because it increased
the information content of order flow by eliminating a particular source uninformative trading
(the inventory management trades of marketmakers in the now-defunct Euro-zone cross-rate
markets like FF/DM). Thus, their model, too, stresses the transaction mix (versus total volume).
        Our analysis of vehicle currency determination leads to two powerful results. First,
exchange rate levels are actually affected by whether transactions are executed directly versus
indirectly; these trading methods simply do not reveal the same information. This possibility,
even if obvious given the information framework, was not considered in earlier work. Second, our
model provides a new understanding for why there are so few currency triangles for which a


                                                  21
significant market exists in all three legs (the dollar-euro-yen triangle we study here being a
notable exception). The conditions leading to the absence of direct trade in our model are of a
completely different nature than those outlined by Krugman. What are the welfare consequences
of having only two tradable legs to a currency triangle? And what role might policy play to
increase this likelihood of full triangle trading? These are promising directions for further
analytical work.
        Though our model’s predictions are rather strong, they are nevertheless borne out in the
data. Specifically, we find that transactions affect prices across markets, as the information
approach predicts. More strikingly, the estimated matrix of price-impact coefficients exhibits
precisely the linear dependence predicted by our model. As an empirical matter, we view this
latter result as remarkably improbable. Taken together, the results provide considerable support
for the general premises of the approach.
        One policy implication that derives from the premises of the approach is that what
matters is not the total amount of trading (as is the focus of the existing international-currency
literature), but the composition of trading. For example, one might ask whether the US dollar’s
current dominance as an international currency is structural. The answer from the model is that
dominance depends on three key parameters: (1) the uninformative-trade variances Σ c , (2) the

fundamental variances Σ v , and (3) the informed traders’ informational precisions. Knocking the

dollar from its dominant role would need to involve changes in one or more of these parameters.
Policy choices certainly affect the first two of these. (For example, sterilized intervention and
other officially directed trading will affect the uninformative-trade variances Σ c .) The third of

these has more to do with market-driven institutional realities than it does with policy (e.g., large
banks privately observing more order flow than small banks).
        Finally, to those who are concerned that the Kyle framework is inappropriate for the
foreign exchange market, we pose the following question: do you believe that the largest players
in this market (e.g., large commercial banks, hedge funds) trade strategically in order to minimize
their price impact? For anyone who has observed these markets, the answer is a clear yes. This is
precisely what the Kyle model is designed to capture. Of course, the model should be viewed as
metaphoric in that the better-informed players do not actually see fundamentals without noise.
But adding noise to the informational advantage of the better-informed players would not change
the model’s solution qualitatively. The model is, in fact, much more broadly applicable than the
reference to “insider” trading in the title of Kyle (1985) would suggest.




                                                 22
                                           References

Bahmani-Oskooee, M. and S. Das, 1985, Transaction costs and the interest parity theorem,
         Journal of Political Economy, 93: 793-799.
Bhattacharya, U., and M. Spiegel, 1991, Insiders, outsiders, and market breakdowns, Review of
         Financial Studies, 4: 255-282.
BIS (Bank for International Settlements), Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange
         and Derivative Market Activity, Preliminary Global Results, Table 4.
Bjønnes, G., and D. Rime, 2003, Dealer behavior and trading systems in the foreign exchange
         market, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming
Black, S., 1991, Transaction costs and vehicle currencies, Journal of International Money and
         Finance, 10: 512-527.
Callier, P., 1981, One way arbitrage, foreign exchange and securities markets: a note, Journal of
         Finance, 36: 1177-1186.
Chowdhry, B., and V. Nanda, 1991, Multimarket trading and market liquidity, Review of
         Financial Studies, 4: 483-511.
Clinton, K. (1988), Transactions costs and covered interest arbitrage: theory and evidence,
         Journal of Political Economy, 96: 358-370.
Copeland, T., and D. Galai, 1983, Information effects and the bid-ask spread, Journal of Finance,
         38: 1457-1469.
Covrig, V., and M. Melvin, 2002, Asymmetric information and price discovery in the FX market:
         Does Tokyo know more about the yen? Journal of Empirical Finance, 9: 271-285.
Danielsson, J., R. Payne, and J. Luo, 2002, Exchange Rate Determination and Inter-Market Order
         Flow Effects, typescript, London School of Economics (Financial Markets Group), July.
Deardorff, A.., 1979, One way arbitrage and its implications for the foreign exchange markets,
         Journal of Political Economy, 87: 351-364.
De Jong, F., R. Mahieu, and P. Schotman, 1998, Price discovery in the foreign exchange market:
         An empirical analysis of the yen/dmark rate, Journal of International Money and
         Finance, 17: 5-27.
Evans, M., 2002, FX trading and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of Finance, 57: 2405-2448.
Evans, M., and R. Lyons, 2002a, Order flow and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of Political
         Economy, 110: 170-180.
Evans, M., and R. Lyons, 2002b, Informational integration and FX trading, Journal of
         International Money and Finance, 21: 807-831.
Garman, M., 1976, Market microstructure, Journal of Financial Economics, 3: 257-275.
Glosten, L., and P. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist market with
         heterogeneously informed agents, Journal of Financial Economics, 14: 71-100.
Glosten, L. 1989, Insider trading, liquidity, and the role of the monopolist specialist, Journal of
         Business, 62: 211-235.
Hartmann, P., 1997, The currency denomination of international trade after European Monetary
         Union, typescript, European Central Bank.
Hartmann, P., 1998, Currency competition and foreign exchange markets: The dollar, the yen,
         and the euro, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Hartmann, P., 1999, Trading volumes and transaction costs in the foreign exchange market:
         Evidence from daily dollar-yen spot data, Journal of Banking and Finance, 23: 801-824.
Hasbrouck, J., 1991, Measuring the information content of stock trades, Journal of Finance, 46:
         179-207.
Hau, H., W. Killeen, and M. Moore, 2002a, The euro as an international currency: Explaining
         puzzling first evidence from the foreign exchange markets, Journal of International
         Money and Finance, 21: 351-383.


                                                23
Hau, H., W. Killeen, and M. Moore, 2002b, Euro’s forex role: How has the euro changed the
         foreign exchange market? Economic Policy, April, 151-191.
Hau, H., and H. Rey, 2002, Exchange rates, equity prices, and capital flows, NBER Working
         Paper 9398, December.
Kaul, A., and V. Mehrotra, 2002, Ticker or trade? How prices adjust in international markets,
         typescript, University of Alberta, June.
Killeen, W., R. Lyons, and M. Moore, 2001, Fixed versus flexible: Lessons from EMS order
         flow, NBER Working Paper 8491 September, Journal of International Money and
         Finance, forthcoming.
Krugman, P., 1980, Vehicle currencies and the structure of international exchange, Journal of
         Money, Credit, and Banking, 12: 503-526.
Krugman, P., 1984, The international role of the dollar: Theory and prospect, in J. Bilson and R.
         Marston (eds.), Exchange Rate Theory and Practice, Chicago: University of Chicago
         Press, 261-278.
Kyle, A., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315-1335.
Lyons, R., 1995, Tests of microstructural hypotheses in the foreign exchange market, Journal of
         Financial Economics, 39: 321-351.
Lyons, R., 2001, The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates, MIT Press, (chapters at
         faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/lyons/NewBook.html).
Matsuyama, K., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Matsui, 1993, Toward a theory of international currency,
         Review of Economic Studies, 60: 283-320.
Milgrom, P., and N. Stokey, 1982, Information, trade, and common knowledge, Journal of
         Economic Theory, 26: 17-27.
Payne, R., 2003, Informed trade in spot foreign exchange markets: An empirical analysis, Journal
         of International Economics, 61: 307-329.
Portes, R., and H. Rey, 1998, The emergence of the euro as an international currency, Economic
         Policy, 26: 307-332.
Rey, H., 2001, International Trade and Currency Exchange, Review of Economic Studies, 68: 443-
         464.
Rime, D., 2001, Private or public information in foreign exchange markets? An empirical
         analysis, typescript, University of Oslo, March.
Stoll, H., 1978, The supply of dealer services in securities markets, Journal of Finance, 33: 1133-
         1151.
Zhou, R, 1997, Currency Exchange in a Random Search Model, Review of Economic Studies, 64:
         289-310.




                                                24
                                                 Table 1
                                             Summary Statistics
Variable         Unit               Mean                 Standard              AR(1)
                                                        Deviation            Coefficient
$/€ Flow      € millions              515                  1100                 0.264
¥/$ Flow      $ millions              904                  1351                 0.127
¥/€ Flow      € millions              153                   322                 0.133
   ∆p$/€           %                -0.062                 0.586               -0.124
        ¥/$
   ∆p              %                -0.035                 0.828               -0.043
   ∆p¥/€           %                -0.096                 0.913                0.013
For the period 5th January 1999 to 31st December 1999, we report for the order flows, $/€ Flow, ¥/$ Flow,
¥/€ Flow and the three spot returns, ∆p$/€, ∆p¥/$ and ∆p¥/€, the mean standard deviation and the first order
autocorrelation coefficient (AR(1) coefficient). There are 259 observations corresponding to all Mondays
to Fridays inclusive. The first observation is lost to differencing




                                                      25
                                             Table 2
                              The matrix of price impact coefficients




                                           Regressor                              Diagnostics


                        $/€ Flow            ¥/$ Flow            ¥/€ Flow         DW         R2
Dep. Variable
      ∆p$/€              0.026               –0.016              0.079           2.48      56%
                         (9.4)                (6.7)              (7.3)


                         –0.016              0.037               0.056           1.89      61%
      ∆p¥/$
                          (4.5)              (10.8)              (3.2)


                         0.011               0.022               0.131           1.96      56%
      ∆p¥/€
                         (3.2)               (5.3)               (6.0)


Notes: Newey-West heteroscedasticity and serial correlation adjusted t-statistics in parentheses (lag
window is 5). Estimated using Seemingly Unrelated Regressions. Sample: daily data for the year 1999.
Flow data are from EBS (Electronic Broking Systems). Exchange rate data are from Olsen & Associates.




                                                 26
                                    Figure1
                     DEVIATION FROM $/€/¥ TRIANGULAR PARITY


               40


               30


               20


               10
BASIS POINTS




                0


               -10


               -20


               -30


               -40
                             DAILY: JANUARY - DECEMBER 1999
                                                        Appendix




(1) Two-way arbitrage trading:
           Consider the case of a two-way (i.e., round trip) arbitrage trade in the euro-yen market.
Without loss of generality, suppose P € / ¥ > P $ / € P $ / ¥ . To effect two-way arbitrage, one would
want to:
           (1) Buy xa3 euro at price P $ / € in the euro-dollar market. This costs xa3 P $ / € dollars.

           (2) Fund this by selling yen for dollars in the dollar-yen market. To yield xa3 P $ / € dollars,

               one needs to exchange xa3 P $ / € P $ / ¥ yen.

           (3) Sell xa3 euro at price P € / ¥ in the euro-yen market. This yields xa3 P € / ¥ yen.



The profit is xa3 ( P € / ¥ − P $ / € P $ / ¥ ) yen. Now assume that in the previous period, triangular parity

obtained:
                                                   P €/ ¥ = P$/ € P$/ ¥
                                    Pi
Let us now define (1 + p i ) ≡         . The profit, measured as % change of yen per euro, is:
                                    Pi
                         P € / ¥ P$ / € P$ / ¥   
                    xa3  € / ¥ − $ / € $ / ¥      = xa (1 + p ) − (1 + p )(1 + p ) 
                                                       3         €/¥        $/ €    $/ ¥

                        P        P P             

                                                   = xa3  p € / ¥ − ( p $ / € + p $ / ¥ + p $ / ¥ p $ / € )  .

                                                   ≈ xa3  p € / ¥ − ( p $ / € + p $ / ¥ ) 


This is the implied expression in equation (7). In the opposite case with P € / ¥ < P $ / € P $ / ¥ , both
the direction of trade and the unit % profit have the opposite sign. Their product remains the
definition of profit.


(2) Scaling order flows in equation (6)
           Consider the following example where an incremental euro is purchased using yen, but
the trade is executed indirectly (through the dollar). Without loss of generality, assume that the
matrix in equation (6) is diagonal, i.e., that there are no cross-price effects from order flow. To
effect this indirect trade, one would:


    (1) Buy one euro, in the euro-dollar market, when previous dollar price of euro is P $ / € . This

                                                                                             (
        purchase causes price appreciation according to λ $ / € . The cost is P $ / € 1 + λ $ / € dollars. )
    (2) Fund this by buying dollars in the dollar-yen market, when the previous yen price of
        dollars is P $ / ¥ . Again, trading causes price appreciation according to λ $ / ¥ . A purchase

                                                            (
        of just one $ in that market costs P $ / ¥ 1 + λ $ / ¥       )   yen. Consequently, to purchase the

                          (          )                                    (          )(          )
        necessary P $ / € 1 + λ $ / € dollars, it will cost P $ / € P $ / ¥ 1 + λ $ / € 1 + λ $ / ¥ yen.



                                                                          (         )(           )
The gross cost measured as a % change of yen per euro is this 1 + λ $ / € 1 + λ $ / ¥ . Taking logs,

the approximate net cost is λ $ / € + λ $ / ¥ . This is the approximation implied by equation (6). Given
that the λ ' s are of the same order as returns, the approximation has negligible economic
significance.




                                                        1
