                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   PHARMACEUTICAL STOCK PRICE REACTIONS TO
            PRICE CONSTRAINT THREATS AND FIRM-LEVEL R&D SPENDING

                                              Joseph Golec
                                            Shantaram Hegde
                                              John Vernon

                                          Working Paper 11229
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11229


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




We are very grateful to a the following individuals for their very helpful comments and suggestions on earlier
versions of this paper: Ernest Berndt, Jean Paul Gagnon, Carmelo Giaccotto, Richard Manning, Sean
Nicholson, Rexford Santerre, John M. Vernon, Y. Richard Wang and participants at the 2005 AEA/PEPC
meetings in Philadelphia. We thank AstraZeneca and the Center for International Business & Education
Research at the University of Connecticut for financial support. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by Joseph Golec, Shantaram Hegde, and John Vernon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Pharmaceutical Stock Price Reactions to Price Constriant Threats and Firm-Level R&D Spending
Joseph Golec, Shantaram Hegde, and John Vernon
NBER Working Paper No. 11229
March 2005, Revised November 2005
JEL No. G31, O32, L65, I1, K2

                                          ABSTRACT

Political pressure in the United States is again building to constrain pharmaceutical prices either
directly or through legalized reimportation of lower-priced pharmaceuticals from foreign countries.
This study uses the Clinton Administration's Health Security Act (HSA) of 1993 as a natural
experiment to show how threats of price constraints affect firm-level R&D spending. We link events
surrounding the HSA to pharmaceutical company stock price changes and then examine the cross-
sectional relation between the stock price changes and subsequent unexpected R&D spending
changes. Results show that the HSA had significant negative effects on firm stock prices and R&D
spending. Conservatively, the HSA reduced R&D spending by $1.6 billion, even though it never
became law. If the HSA had passed, and had many small firms not raised capital just prior to the
HSA, the R&D effects could have been much larger.

Joseph Golec
University of Connecticut
Department of Finance
2100 Hillside Road
Storrs, CT 06269
jgolec@business.uconn.edu

Shantaram Hegde
University of Connecticut
Department of Finance
2100 Hillside Road
Storrs, CT 06269
shegde@business.uconn.edu

John Vernon
University of Connecticut
Department of Finance
2100 Hillside Road
Storrs, CT 06269
and NBER
jvernon@business.uconn.edu
        Can proposed government policy that significantly affects the stock prices of research

and development (R&D) intensive firms affect their R&D spending decisions? The Clinton

Administration’s Health Security Act (HSA) provides a natural experiment to study this issue

because it never passed Congress but nonetheless caused significant stock price declines for

pharmaceutical firms. This study investigates the effects that price constraints proposed in the

HSA had on pharmaceutical stock prices and subsequent firm-level R&D spending.

        The link from R&D to stock prices has been studied by Chan, Lakonishok, and

Sougiannis (2001) and Eberhart, Maxwell and Siddique (2004), but neither considers the link

from stock prices to subsequent R&D spending. Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004) find a link

from stock price changes to investment spending, so there could be a similar link from stock

prices to comparatively flexible R&D spending. If investors expected the HSA to reduce the

value of pharmaceutical R&D, then firms’ stock prices should fall, and managers could respond

by reducing R&D spending, at least in the short-run.

        Ellison and Mullin (2001) have linked the ferocious political debate on the HSA to the

extremely poor stock returns for pharmaceutical firms during 1992-1993. They find that their

sample of 18 large pharmaceutical company stocks suffered an average 38 percent loss during the

period (-52 percent risk-adjusted). We find similar negative returns, but for a wider variety of 111

pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies. More important, we show that the higher the R&D

intensity, the larger the loss, with top quartile firms losing 60 percent on average (93 percent risk

adjusted).

        After illustrating how the HSA had significant effects on pharmaceutical stock prices,

particularly those of R&D intensive firms, we consider whether pharmaceutical firms responded

by reducing their subsequent R&D spending. To study this issue, we need to link the HSA more

closely to firms’ stock price declines and then link those declines to their R&D spending. We do

not claim that the HSA caused all of the cumulative declines in pharmaceutical stock prices

during 1992-1993. Nevertheless, industry executives claim that the HSA marked the start of


                                                 3
constant political pressure to monitor and contain average drug prices,1 and since then,

pharmaceutical price inflation has received much attention2. Therefore, although the total effect

of the HSA alone may be uncertain, we show that a few surprise events closely associated with it

had significant negative effects on pharmaceutical stock prices. Furthermore, we show that firms’

abnormal returns surrounding the events are positively related to their subsequent R&D spending

changes.

         The notion that product pricing or profitability is positively related to R&D spending

seems straightforward. In one of the few precise studies of this issue, Finkelstein (2004) shows

that exogenous government policies used to boost particular vaccines’ profitability led to greater

R&D spending on those vaccines. Acemolgu and Linn (2005) suggest that pharmaceutical R&D

responds to the exogenous demographic changes driving revenues. But a positive relation

between R&D spending and profit is not a foregone conclusion. Ellison and Mullin (2001)

suggest that the HSA caused a pure wealth transfer from pharmaceutical firms to consumers, and

that stock price declines might not lead to reduced R&D spending.

         At the industry level, studies by Scherer (2001), Vernon (2005, 2003), and Giaccotto,

Santerre, and Vernon (2005) show that policies designed to lower average pharmaceutical prices

lead to lower R&D spending. At the company level, Lichtenberg (2004) uses a sample of 46

pharmaceutical firms to identify a time series cross-sectional link between pharmaceutical stock

price changes and R&D spending during 1953-1996. He conjectures that the HSA could have

caused the significant pharmaceutical stock price declines in 1993, and the subsequent industry-


1
  We thank Jean Paul Gagnon of Aventis, Y. Richard Wang of AstraZeneca, and Richard Manning of
Pfizer for this insight. After the HSA, examples or indirect pressure on pharmaceutical prices includes
discounts required on pharmaceuticals supplied to Medicaid and Veterans Administration and
reimportation of pharmaceuticals from price regulated countries. Tessoriero (2004) suggests that political
pressure can be observed in the year before presidential elections when pharmaceutical price increases tend
to be subdued.
2
  A search of the Wall Street Journal confirms this. Average drug price inflation is discussed in only three
articles from 1984 until 1992. During the HSA event period of 1992-1993, 12 such articles appeared, and
from 1994 through 2005, 42 articles appeared. Therefore, the 1992-1993 HSA event period can be viewed
generally as the time when the industry, and stock investors, realized that pharmaceutical pricing would be
more politicized if not federally regulated.


                                                     4
level R&D spending growth declines in 1994 and 1995. But he does not measure firm-specific

HSA-related returns, nor does he isolate the relation between those returns and firm-level R&D

spending during these years.

        Our study focuses on this cross-sectional relation during 1993-1995. It attempts to

account for the differential effects that an exogenous government policy (the HSA) could have on

firms’ R&D portfolio values, and consequently, their stock prices. We expect the most vulnerable

firms to have large R&D portfolios as a proportion of firm value, but also those with more

marginal R&D projects. To measure firms’ marginal R&D projects, we employ the real options

perspective. Marginal projects are equivalent to leveraged assets, hence, we measure R&D

leverage using firms’ betas. Results show that beta levels and HSA-induced changes help to

explain changes in firms’ stock prices and R&D spending.

        Ellison and Mullin (2001) claim that the HSA should not affect R&D spending because

most drug prices include large economic rents. The HSA simply reallocated rents. This is

equivalent to assuming that drug R&D options are mostly low-risk and deep in-the-money. But

our analysis shows that R&D intensive, high risk firms experience relatively large negative

returns. Many of them are biotech firms. A sharp drop in external financing available to biotech

firms after the HSA, documented by Lerner, Shane, and Tsai (2003), is consistent with the sharp

declines in their stock prices. It is also consistent with our finding that risk effects are driven by

firm liquidity. Firms that have accumulated significant liquidity are likely to be planning more

projects, and could continue to spend on R&D, even in the face of price regulation. Consequently,

they are particularly vulnerable to the HSA and their stock prices could fall more.

        Overall, we find that firms responded to declines in their stock prices by reducing their

R&D expenditures below expected levels. R&D spending was lower by 5.3 percent in 1994,

which is equivalent to a drop of $508 million ($1.02 billion) measured in 1983 (2004) dollars. If

the HSA had passed, and had many biotech firms not raised significant amounts of capital just

before the HSA, the change in R&D spending could have been much greater.


                                                  5
        This paper is organized as follows. Section I briefly discusses the HSA and how it could

affect the R&D spending behavior of a range of firms distinguished by R&D intensity, risk, and

liquidity. Testable hypotheses are proposed. Section II describes the data and presents a graphical

view of the HSA’s effects on stock prices. Section III presents a model of expected R&D

spending intensity, and tests the relation between HSA-related abnormal returns and firm-level

R&D intensity and risk. It also tests the relation between subsequent unexpected R&D spending

intensity and HSA-related abnormal returns and risk changes. Section IV concludes the paper.



I. The HSA and Its Potential Effects on Pharmaceutical Stock Prices and R&D Spending



        To more precisely link the HSA to changes in firm value and risk, Section A discusses

the particular parts of the act that were most relevant to pharmaceutical firms. Section B

characterizes pharmaceutical firms in ways that help guide the empirical analysis that follows.



A. HSA Price Control Threats

        Ellison and Mullin (2001) provide a detailed analysis of the events surrounding the HSA

and describe its major provisions. Proposed universal coverage for outpatient drugs was a positive

for pharmaceutical firms, but proposed purchasing groups, restrictive formularies, drug utilization

reviews, and generic substitution would likely offset the benefits of universal coverage. They

contend that the most important provision for pharmaceutical firms, also modeled by Abbott

(1995), was price limits on new breakthrough drugs.

        Grabowski and Vernon (1990) show that breakthrough drugs must earn large profits in

order to cover the combined R&D costs of many drugs that are never marketed. For the purposes

of our study, this means that the proposed price limits on breakthrough drugs would likely cut the

value of firms’ R&D assets. In particular, firms with high R&D exposures (e.g., small




                                                6
biotechnology firms) could be expected to experience relatively large stock price changes and

R&D spending changes.

        Ellison and Mullin (2001) argue convincingly that the HSA was a serious threat to the

pharmaceutical industry, and that it accounted for the large negative returns experienced by the

industry during 1992-1993. The industry believed that the HSA could be so ruinous that 21 large

firms pledged to keep their price increases below consumer inflation in order to convince

Congress that the legislation was not necessary3. But these large firms are not the most R&D

intensive and the bulk of our sample of firms did not pledge to stifle their price increases.

        Price controls can affect more than just expected future profitability. They can reduce

expected future return volatility, as is common for price-regulated utilities. Of course, because the

HSA was not enacted, the events surrounding it could have simply created greater uncertainty

about future pharmaceutical prices, increasing firm risk. Therefore, we also study the cross-

sectional effects of the HSA on firm risk; both systematic and total risk. We study how the levels

(and changes) of firm risk during the period are related to stock price changes and subsequent

R&D spending changes.



B. Expected Effects of the HSA on Stock Returns and Risk

        The firms in the pharmaceutical industry are traditionally characterized as generic, brand-

name, or biotech (pure research). This study, however, characterizes firms by the relative sizes of

the market values of their component parts. We assume that the total market value of a firm, VT, is

composed of three parts; the value of its marketed drugs, VD (assets in place), the value of its

R&D portfolio, VR (growth opportunities), and the value of its net liquid assets, VL. The

systematic risk (βT) of the firm is a weighted average of the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)

betas of the three assets:


3
  The Department of Justice ruled that the pledge was illegal and the Federal Trade Commission claimed
that the firms were fixing prices.


                                                   7
        βT = WL βL + WD βD + WR βR,                                                        (1)

where βL,, βD, and βR are betas of the three assets and the weights are WL = VL/VT , WD = VD/VT ,

and WR = VR/VT. In this formulation, the R&D exposure of a firm is given by the product of its

R&D intensity, WR, and sensitivity, βR. (For a more formal presentation, see Appendix A.)

        Because the proposed HSA mostly affected the pricing of future drug discoveries, the

HSA should have primarily affected firms’ R&D portfolio values, VR. And those values can be

described as real options. Schwartz (2004) models an R&D project as a call option, and shows

how government regulation can affect its value. The expected HSA effects can be described by

how price limits for future drugs affect the expected return and risk of a call option.

        The underlying asset price, S, of an R&D option is the present value of expected future

cash flows from a new drug. Drug price constraints will reduce a drug’s future cash flows, but not

the expected production and marketing costs, X. This will reduce the in-the-moneyness (S – X),

and hence the value of, an R&D call option. Further, the final passage of price regulation could

lower asset return volatility, although the intervening legislative debate and uncertainty about the

passage of the proposed reforms would have the opposite effect on short-run return volatility. The

more R&D options a firm holds as a proportion of its total assets, the higher the R&D intensity

and the greater the HSA’s expected affect. This leads to our first hypothesis.



        Hypothesis 1: All else equal, the stock price response to HSA-related news releases will

        be negatively related to a pharmaceutical firm’s R&D intensity.



        Since the true R&D intensity, WR, is not observable, we will use an accounting

(historical) variable to capture the R&D intensity of pharmaceutical firms. Following Chan,

Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (2001), we will proxy for WR by capitalizing a firm’s R&D spending




                                                  8
over five years4. In addition, we will use two market-based measures that influence WR: the pre-

HSA stock return volatility, σi, and the change in volatility during the HSA event period, ∆σi. The

R&D option value is increasing in both σi and ∆σi. Because high-volatility increases the expected

in-the-moneyness of R&D options, we expect the price response of firms with high pre-event σi

to be less sensitive to the proposed HSA news. Therefore, we expect the stock price response to

be positively related to the pre-event stock volatility and the event-induced change in volatility.

           The second important component of R&D exposure is the beta of the R&D assets, βR. We

know that the values of R&D options that are well in-the-money (S >> X) will be less sensitive to

the HSA price threats. In contrast, marginal projects (i.e., those projects for which the R&D asset

value, S, is close to the cost of production facilities, X) will be more sensitive to proposed price

constraints. A firm composed of mostly at-the-money or out-of-the-money R&D projects should

have a relatively high βT, and be more vulnerable to the HSA price threats. Galai and Masulis

(1976) show how option beta is affected by changes in the underlying asset price. Notice that the

level of firm βR (and in turn βT) measures its R&D leverage and should be negatively associated

with S. Although the moneyness and βR of a firm’s R&D options are not observable, the R&D

sensitivity can be partly inferred from a firm’s pre-event stock beta, βi, and the change in beta

during the HSA event period, ∆βi. Essentially, the HSA price threats reduce moneyness and

increase beta of the R&D call option. This leads to the following hypothesis.



           Hypothesis 2: All else equal, the stock price response to HSA price regulation threats will

           be negatively related to a firm’s pre-event equity beta and the event-induced beta change.




4
    Their specification for capitalized R&D (CRD) for company i in year t is

           CRDi,t = RDi,t + 0.8*RDi,t-1 + 0.6*RDi,t-2 + 0.4*RDi,t-3 + 0.2*RDi,t-4 ,

where RDi,t-i is R&D expense for year t-i , i = 0 to 4.


                                                          9
        Hypothesis 2 simply observes that marginal R&D projects, like out-of-the-money

options, are more levered, making them riskier and more sensitive to the negative HSA effects.

        Our first empirical model tests these hypotheses using cross-sectional data measured

around the HSA.



        CARi = b0 + bi(CRDTAi) + b2(βi) + b3(∆βi) + b4(σi) + b5(∆σi) + εi.                  (2)



        CARi (cumulative abnormal return) measures firm i’s stock market value reaction to

surprise announcements associated with the HSA. R&D intensity (CRDTAi) is the capitalized

value of firm i’s R&D spending divided by its total assets (following Chan, Lakonishok, and

Sougiannis (2001)). βi and σi are firm i’s beta and return volatility, respectively, measured before

the HSA. ∆βi and ∆σi are changes in these variables during the HSA event period. Hypothesis 1

implies bi < 0, b4 > 0 and b5 > 0. Hypothesis 2 implies b2 < 0 and b3 < 0.

        There are a number of potentially confounding issues to consider. The most important of

these is that R&D beta is unobservable, so that it has been assumed that equity beta mirrors R&D

beta. This is a reasonable assumption if firm value is largely composed of marketed drugs and

R&D projects. But when the ratio of liquid assets, L, to total assets varies significantly across

firms, the cross-section of equity betas and beta changes is less likely to accurately reflect R&D

betas and beta changes. The same is true for volatility and volatility changes. Fixing R&D beta

and R&D return volatility, greater liquid assets imply smaller equity beta, volatility, beta changes,

and volatility changes. To account for these effects, βi, σi, ∆βi, and ∆σi are interacted with liquid

assets, L, and the interaction variables are added to (2).

        Moreover, pharmaceutical firms with long and deep R&D pipelines tend to accumulate

(excessive) liquid resources to fund those projects in the future. In a sense, liquid assets reflect

future R&D expenditures (and intensity) of the firm. High values of the interaction terms (βi x L)




                                                  10
and (∆βi x L) represent firms that have proportionally more marginal future R&D projects. Since

such projects are particularly vulnerable to the proposed HSA price caps, we expect the

coefficients associated with these interaction terms to have negatives signs. On the other hand,

high values of the interaction terms (σi x L) and (∆σi x L) represent firms that have more volatile

future R&D projects. So we expect their coefficients to be positive.

        Liquidity can have behavioral effects as well as purely technical effects. In particular,

managers could blunt the measured effects of the HSA if they cut back on R&D spending since

many R&D projects will require much future spending. But Jensen (1986) suggests that firm

managers with freely available cash may not act in the firm’s best interest, and Guedji and

Scharfstein (2004) show that high-cash biotech firms often overspend on R&D. With respect to

the HSA, liquidity provides managers with the financial slack to continue R&D spending even if

threatened price regulation makes the expected value of some R&D spending negative. Therefore,

liquidity could enhance the negative (positive) effects of βi and ∆βi (σi and ∆σi) on CAR.

        Other confounding issues are possible, but we believe less likely. The HSA proposed

extended prescription coverage, hence, R&D intensive firms could benefit from greater expected

unit sales. But Coulson and Stuart (1995) show that the demand for pharmaceuticals is price

inelastic, making it unlikely that the decrease in profit per unit could be made up in larger

volumes. Heavy lobbying by pharmaceutical firms against the HSA implies that they expected

significant negative effects.

        Cross-sectional variation in firm financial leverage could also account for variation in

CAR. We consider this possibility by adding a leverage (control) variable to (2).

        Finally, we also consider whether the brand-name drug firms that voluntarily constrained

their price increases prior to the HSA suffered relatively large stock price declines. HSA passage

could have forced them to make their pledge more permanent than the market expected. In this

case, CAR and a binary variable identifying price constrained firms should be negatively related.




                                                11
Alternatively, because the firms constrained prices before the HSA events, the effect of those

events on them could be diluted.

        Model (2) establishes the drivers of firms’ stock price reactions to the HSA. Our second

model tests whether firm managers, in turn, changed their R&D spending in response to HSA-

induced changes in stock prices (CAR) and risk (∆βi and ∆σi). Negative CARs imply that investors

believed that a firm’s R&D options values were more likely to fall below their R&D expenses.

Managers should react by cutting R&D spending, either because they also believe some marginal

projects are no longer worthwhile, or because they respond to signals sent by investors through

stock prices. Similarly, managers could react to changes in their stocks’ risk levels. A large ∆βi

implies that a firm has more marginal R&D projects, so that managers should cut R&D spending

more. Conversely, a large ∆σi implies larger R&D options values, and managers should increase

spending. These arguments lead to:



Hypothesis 3: All else equal, unexpected R&D spending is positively related to CAR and ∆σi, but

negatively related to ∆βi.



        The second empirical model tests this hypothesis.



                   URDTAi,t+1 = b0 + b1(CARi,t) + b2(∆βi,t) + b3(∆σi,t ) + εi,t+1.       (3)



        Unexpected R&D (URDTAi) is firm i’s unexpected R&D spending in the post-HSA

period as a proportion of its total assets. It is a residual from a model that estimates normal or

expected R&D spending intensity (discussed in the next section). Hypothesis 3 implies b1 > 0, b2

< 0, and b3 > 0.




                                                    12
        There are again some potentially confounding issues to consider. As in (2), ∆βi and ∆σi

proxy for changes in R&D beta and volatility, respectively. Cross-sectional variation in the

proportion of liquid assets causes beta change (volatility change) to deviate from R&D beta

change (volatility change). The issue is handled by interacting liquidity with beta change

(volatility change) and adding interaction variables to (3).

        The free cash flow problem discussed in Jensen (1986), and empirically supported by

Guedji and Scharfstein (2004) for biotech firms, is potentially more problematic in model (3) than

in model (2). Model (3) purports to explain managers’ R&D spending reactions to the HSA.

Liquid assets provide managers with financial slack at a time when Lerner, Shane, and Tsai

(2003) show that external financing for biotech firms had dropped sharply. They also show that

some firms raised funds just before the HSA. This means that financial slack could vary cross-

sectionally. Managers with adequate funds may not change their R&D spending, even if their

firm’s stock price, beta, and volatility change significantly. As a consequence, the relations

posited in (3) may not hold.

        Finally, we again account for the brand-name drug firms that voluntarily constrained

price increases around the HSA. These firms may have cut R&D more than other firms in

response to the HSA. Therefore, a variable identifying price constrained firms should be

negatively related to URDTAi. Alternatively, because the firms pledged to constrain their prices

before the HSA-related events, the effect on post HSA R&D could be negligible.



II. The Data, the Sample, and a Graphical Illustration of HSA Effects

A. The data and the sample

        The study employs financial accounting data and stock market data for each sample firm

around the period of 1992-1993, when the events associated with the HSA occurred. The

accounting data, such as annual R&D expenditures, are obtained from Standard and Poor’s

Compustat database. The stock market data, such as daily firm stock returns, are obtained from


                                                 13
the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). This limits the potential sample because both

Compustat and CRSP cover few foreign firms. Nevertheless, some of the largest foreign

pharmaceutical firms with significant operations in the U.S. are covered in our sample.

        The sample selection process is structured to be inclusive. Unlike earlier studies, we do

not focus solely on large firms. The process starts with all firms on Compustat with a North

American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code of either 325412 (Pharmaceutical

Preparation Manufacturing) or 325414 (Biological Product Manufacturing). Included firms must

have data available for at least the years 1991-1995. This selection process results in 176 firms.

Of these 176 firms, 113 also have stock returns on the CRSP database covering the period.

Finally, of these 113, only two have less then eight years of accounting data on Compustat. We

eliminate these firms because they do not have enough data to allow us to reliably estimate their

expected R&D spending using the model discussed below. Of the remaining 111, only one has

eight years, two have nine years, and all of the others have at least 10 years of data, including the

1991-1995 period.

        The study revolves around the effects of the HSA on companies’ R&D spending

decisions. This requires a standardized measure of R&D spending that allows comparisons across

time and across firms of different sizes. We considered the ratio of R&D spending to a firm’s

total assets (RDTA) and the ratio of R&D spending to a firm’s total sales (RDS). We selected

RDTA because it gives more reasonable figures for the firms in our sample. RDS gives extreme

values for those firms with little revenue. We rejected excluding these firms because this would

bias the sample toward more established, low R&D-intensive firms.

        Appendix B lists the 111 firms in our sample sorted by RDTA from lowest to highest and

separated into quartiles. R&D, assets, and sales figures are adjusted for consumer price inflation

(All Urban Consumers-All Items, Base Period 1982-84=100). The figures for each firm are

calculated as an average over 1989-1991, the three-year period prior to the HSA-related events.

Therefore, the RDTA figure for each company characterizes its intensity of R&D spending before


                                                 14
the price regulation debate started. The problem of extreme RDS ratios is clear, particularly in

quartiles 3 and 4. The RDTA ratios are consistently more reasonable. The Appendix also shows

that not all biotech firms are high R&D-intensive, although most are. All of the generic firms are

in the lowest RDTA quartile, with the brand-name pharmaceutical firms mostly in quartiles 1 and

2.

        There are surprisingly few generic firms. Of course, some of the firms that we have

labeled “pharmaceutical” also produce some generics, but these are few and their primary profit

generators are brand-name pharmaceuticals. Clearly, investors are willing to fund many R&D-

intensive firms but few generic firms. There are 64 biotech firms; more than ten times the number

of generics.

        To get a better feel for the data and the sample, consider the descriptive statistics for the

study variables reported in Table I. Statistics are computed for the full sample and sub-samples of

firms grouped by R&D-to-asset quartiles. Note that the accounting variables such as R&D and

Total Assets are measured for each firm with annual data averaged over 1989-1991. The returns-

based variables are measured using daily stock returns. Beta is measured using the market model

with the CRSP value-weighted index. Beta and return volatility for each firm are measured over

the pre-event period covering April 24, 1990 to January 10, 1992. The pre-event period directly

precedes the event period (January 13, 1992 to September 29, 1993), and is selected so that it has

the same number of trading days as the event period. The event period consists of 434 trading

days starting five trading days before the first HSA-related event (see Table II), and ends five

trading days after the last HSA-related event. Beta change (volatility change) is measured as the

difference between the event period beta (volatility) and the pre-event period beta (volatility).

        Because the large pharmaceutical firms mostly fall into R&D-to-assets quartile 2, that

quartile has the largest average dollar amount of R&D spending and assets, followed by quartiles

1, 3, and 4. In deference to the wide variation in firm size, the portfolio returns in the figures

below are value-weighted.


                                                 15
                                           [Table I here]

        In the model section, we discussed how R&D is equivalent to a leveraged investment and

that R&D intensive firms could have relatively large betas. Indeed, the average pre-event betas

increase across R&D intensity quartiles. Quartile 4 firms are about 50 percent more risky than the

lowest R&D intensive firms in quartile 1. The difference in average betas between quartiles 1 and

2 is statistically significant (t-statistic = 2.08, not reported in Table I). Differences between

quartile 1 and the others are more highly significant. Average betas for quartiles 2 and 3 also

differ (t-statistic = 1.74), but the average betas for quartiles 3 and 4 are not significantly different

at conventional levels.

        A similar monotonic pattern is observed for average pre-event return volatilities,

however, quartiles 1 and 2 (and quartiles 3 and 4) have almost the same average volatilities. Not

surprisingly, F-tests (not reported in Table I) of the difference in average volatility between

quartiles 1 and 2, and between quartiles 3 and 4, show no statistically significant differences.

However, F-tests show that the average volatilities of the first two quartiles differ from the second

two quartiles beyond the 1 percent significance level.

        The average beta changes are not statistically different across quartiles, mostly because of

the relatively large variation in beta changes within each quartile. This could indicate that there is

large variation in firms’ R&D sensitivity to the HSA within quartile. Nevertheless, it is surprising

that the first quartile has the largest average increase in beta and the fourth quartile has the

smallest. The small change in beta for the high-intensity R&D firms that make up quartile 4 can

be rationalized from our discussion of model (2). These firms have relatively large liquid asset

weights, which we measure as the ratio of net working capital to total assets.

        Average return volatility does not change much around the HSA, except for quartile 3.

Furthermore, the differences between average quartile changes are statistically insignificant,

except for the difference between quartile 1 and quartile 3. One surprise is that the average

volatility falls for each quartile. The volatility decrease is consistent with the possibility that the


                                                  16
market expected price regulation to reduce future cash flow volatility, even while reducing

average cash flows.

        The quartiles also do not differ much with respect to capital expenditure intensity,

measured by the ratio of capital expense to assets. The one exception is that the average capital

expenditure intensity of quartile 2 is significantly larger than those of the other three quartiles.

This can be explained by the fact that the second quartile contains many large pharmaceutical

firms that must spend heavily on production and office facilities. The same pattern appears for

advertising intensity, where large brand-name pharmaceutical firms must spend to promote their

products.

        Finally, financial leverage, measured by the ratio of debt to assets, shows that the firms in

the first two quartiles are more leveraged than the firms in the second two quartiles. Leverage for

quartile 1 and quartile 2 does not differ significantly. The same is true for quartiles 3 and 4.

However, differences in average leverage between the first two quartiles and the second two

quartiles are all significant at the 5 percent level. This reflects the fact that firms in quartiles 1 and

2 typically have significant cash flows that can be used to service debt. But, overall, none of the

quartiles show high average leverage.



B. A graphical illustration of the effects of the HSA on firm stock prices

         To get a general idea of the magnitude of the possible effects of the HSA on our sample

firms’ stock prices, we present a graphical view of the cumulative total returns one would have

earned on the stocks in our sample during the period when President Clinton’s healthcare and

pharmaceutical reform proposals became known to investors.

        Table II lists the major events that we believe were at least partial surprises to investors

and that can be tied to President Clinton. Ellison and Mullin (2001) provide a more detailed

description of these events in their chronology of healthcare reform. We include eleven events,

starting with Clinton’s January 19, 1992 announcement of a vague healthcare plan just prior to


                                                   17
the New Hampshire primary, and ending with his official release of the specific plan on

September 22, 1993. One can argue about which events to include. We searched for significant

events Ellison and Mullin (2001) might have missed and found none. But they include Clinton’s

July 16, 1992 acceptance of the Democratic presidential nomination and the October 3, 1993

presentation of the plan to Congress. Because neither was a surprise, we exclude them.

         We do not exclude events based on realized cumulative abnormal return. For example,

we include Clinton’s New York primary win because we believe investors could have been

surprised by it, even though our 111 stock portfolios increased in value around that event when

one might have expected a decrease.

                                               [Table II here]

         The event period starts January 10, 1992, five trading days before Clinton first announced

his healthcare reform plan. We include five days before the announcement because there is often

leakage of news before a formal announcement, especially with regard to political proposals. The

event period ends on September 29, 1993, five trading days after Clinton publicly announced the

specific health plan to be sent to Congress.

         Figure 1 shows the raw stock return performance of a value-weighted portfolio of our 111

sample firms during the full event period. During the period, the portfolio value fell by about 32

percent while the overall value-weighted market portfolio increased by about 18 percent. We

know from Table II that the average sample firm is riskier than the market, hence,

underperforming the market by 50 percent represents unusually poor performance. After

adjusting for risk using the market model5, the value-weighted portfolio of 111 stocks had a

cumulative abnormal return (CAR) of -62 percent during the full event period.


5
  The market model is
          Rit = αi + βiRmt + εit
where Rit is firm i’s daily stock return on day t, Rmt is the market return on day t represented by the CRSP
value-weighted index, αi and βi are ordinary least squares coefficients for firm i, and εit in the error term for
firm i at time t. The coefficients are estimated over the 255 trading days before the event period and used to
calculate, Ait, the risk-adjusted return on a particular day t for firm i as,


                                                       18
                                    [Figure 1 here]

         Table II reports 11-day value-weighted CARs, covering five days before, and five days

after, each of the eleven major events. The sum of the CARs over the 11 events is -45.50 percent,

significant at the one percent level after accounting for cross-sectional correlation. Ellison and

Mullin (2001) argue that news about the probability of price control legislation leaked out

gradually over the full period, which could account for the difference between the 11 event CAR

and the full period CAR (-62 percent). They attribute the negative returns during the full period to

the effects of the political events leading to the HSA. This may well be the case, especially if one

views the HSA as the focal point of an emerging political consensus that pharmaceutical prices

should be constrained either directly or indirectly. Nevertheless, with such a long event period,

accurately measuring the total effect of the HSA is problematic.

         But our empirical tests do not require an accurate measure of the full effect of the HSA.

We require a reasonable measure of the relative cross-sectional effects of the HSA on our sample

of firms. Therefore, we use only the last four events, which are more closely tied to the HSA and

occur in 1993, when Clinton is president. The sum of the four events’ CARs is 19.01 percent.

         To illustrate the potential relations proposed in our hypotheses, Figure 2 plots value-

weighted CARs for the 111 firms stratified by RDTA into quartiles. Quartile 1 CARs are plotted

as the first thin line on the graph, quartile 2 CARs are plotted as the first thick line, quartile 3

CARs are plotted as the second thin line, and quartile 4 CARs are plotted as the second thick line.

The figure shows that quartiles 1 and 2 experience similar CARs over the period. Quartiles 3 and

4 start out similar but diverge somewhat later on. This is consistent with the descriptive statistics

in Table II, which show that these quartile pairs are comprised of firms with some similar

characteristics.

                    ^    ^
         Ait = Rit − α i − β i Rmt .
We calculate the compound sum of risk-adjusted daily returns during the event period for each firm, and
weight that sum by each firm’s total market value as a proportion of the total market value of all 111 firms.
The risk-adjusted portfolio return is the sum of the 111 weighted returns.


                                                      19
                                 [Figure 2 here]

        By the end of the event period, CARs in quartiles 1 through 4 are -64.31, -58.49, -75.51,

and -92.63 percent, respectively. Except for the fact that quartile 2 CARs slightly exceed quartile

1 CARs, higher R&D intensity is associated with lower CARs across the quartiles. This is a

simple illustration of the negative relation predicted in hypothesis 1. One reason why quartile 2

CARs could exceed quartile 1 CARs is given by hypothesis 2. Quartile 2 firms experience an

average beta increase of 0.09 compared to 0.15 for quartile 1. The larger beta change could

indicate that quartile 1 firms’ R&D projects were more marginal, and hence, more negatively

affected by the HSA.



III. Expected R&D Spending Intensity and Statistical Tests



        The graphs illustrate the magnitude of the effects that the healthcare reform debate and

the HSA appeared to have had on pharmaceutical firms’ stock prices. The relatively large effects

on the most R&D intensive firms are consistent with the HSA’s proposed price restrictions on

new drugs. This section presents statistical tests of the hypotheses discussed in Section I. Section

A models a pharmaceutical firm’s normal (expected) R&D spending behavior, excluding the

effects of stock prices. Section B reports hypotheses test results including the relation between

CAR and firm R&D assets and the relation between firms’ R&D spending and CAR. The potential

effects of liquidity, self-imposed price constraints, and financial leverage also are considered.

Section C discusses how the HSA might have indirectly affected firms’ capital expenditure and

advertising because these items could be complements or substitutes for R&D. The section ends

with a discussion of the effect of the reaction of firms’ stock prices after the HSA was defeated.




                                                   20
A. A model of expected and unexpected R&D intensity

    To decide whether the HSA had a significant effect on firm-level pharmaceutical R&D

spending behavior, we need measures of expected R&D spending and unexpected R&D

spending. As previously discussed, we use R&D-to-Assets (RDTA) as a measure of R&D

spending intensity. This standardized measure is better behaved for our sample than R&D-to-

sales, and is more comparable across time and across firms of different sizes, than raw dollars of

R&D spending. Eberhart, Maxwell and Siddique (2004) also use RDTA to identify significant

R&D changes. Henceforth, we use RDTA and “R&D spending” interchangeably. The HSA may

not reduce the total dollar amount of R&D spending, but firms may increase spending at a slower

rate relative to asset growth. RDTA should capture such behavioral changes.

    We follow earlier studies to model expected and unexpected RDTA. Because the HSA did not

become law, it did not directly reduce firms’ product prices, sales, cash flows, etc. Therefore,

these financial accounting variables can be used to estimate a firm’s expected RDTA in a

particular year in the absence of the HSA. Grabowski (1968), Lichtenberg (2004), and

Himmelberg (1994) used sales, cash flows, or assets. Large firms may rely on sales and cash

flows, but Hall (2002) shows that small firms rely on investor financing. As they raise capital in a

particular year, their current assets and working capital, and also their R&D, increase in that year.

Mikkelson and Partch (2003) document the positive contemporaneous relation between cash

holdings and R&D expenditures. Therefore, we use the following model that combines these

major drivers of R&D spending.



RDTAi,t = a0 + ai,1(Salesi,t) + ai,2(Assetsi,t) + ai,3(Cash Flowi,t) + ai,4(Current Assetsi,t) +

ai,5(Working Capitali,t) + µi,t.                                                            (4)



         Regression model (4) relates firm i’s RDTA to its sales, assets, cash flow, current assets,

and working capital, all measured at time t. The fitted values from the regression measure a firm’s


                                                 21
expected RDTA. Unexpected RDTA (URDTA) for each firm i in year t is measured as the error

term (µi,t) from (4). The purpose of the model is to get an accurate prediction of R&D based on

accounting variables but not stock price changes6. If firms react to stock price changes by

changing RDTA, then this change in behavior should be captured in µi,t.

        We want to capture each firm’s R&D spending behavior around the HSA, therefore, we

estimate the regression separately for each firm over the years for which it has annual Compustat

data during 1980-2000. Most firms have at least ten years of data during this period (one firm has

eight and two have nine years). Only 22 firms have data before 1980 and 25 firms have no data

after 2000.

        Table III illustrates how these variables were changing for the average firm in our sample

around the time of the HSA. The variables are in real terms, where dollar figures have been

adjusted for consumer price inflation (All Urban Consumers-All Items, Base Period 1982-

84=100). The means of the variables in each year between 1989 and 1996 are presented for the

full sample and for RDTA quartiles.

                                  [Table III here]

        Clearly, the industry experienced strong growth during the period. For the average firm

between 1989 and 1996, R&D increased from $64 to $108 million, assets increased from $729 to

$1166 million, sales increased from $712 to $959 million, cash flow increased from $120 to $184

million, and current assets increased from $381 to $487 million. But working capital actually

decreased from $165 to $138 million. Somewhat surprising is the negative return on assets in

each year. This is true for each quartile, with very poor returns for quartiles 3 and 4, which have

many small, low-revenue firms. Average cash flow is negative in each year for quartiles 3 and 4.

But these quartiles still have much higher growth in the other variables than quartiles 1 and 2.



6
  This model provides relatively good explanatory power. The average R-Squared from this regression for
the 111 firms in our sample is 0.66.



                                                  22
        Firms in quartiles 3 and 4 rely heavily on external financing sources to fund R&D. This

can be seen in the large jump in current assets and working capital from 1990 to 1991 for both

quartiles. Lerner, Shane, and Tsai (2003) document a large spike in initial public offerings and

follow-on offerings for biotech firms during this period. They suggest that the subsequent sharp

drop-off in external financing was due at least partly to the HSA.

        Consider URDTA figures for the full sample and the quartiles. If firms reduced R&D

spending intensity in response to HSA-related stock prices declines, we should expect to see

negative URDTA in 1993, or perhaps 1994 or even 1995. For the full sample, average URDTA is

negative in 1993 but it is positive in 1994 and 1995. But the averages vary by quartile. Quartiles 1

and 4 have negative average URDTA in 1994 and 1995, but quartiles 2 and 3 have negative

average URDTA in 1993. This illustrates how the effect could vary across different firms.

Furthermore, some firms could be positively affected by the HSA and increase their RDTA in

response. Indeed, 21 of the 111 firms had positive HSA-related CARs.

        The final component required to test our hypotheses is a measure of HSA-related CARs.

Our approach uses a conservative measure of the HSA effects on stock prices. We consider only

the four events from Table II that occurred after Clinton became president in 19937. The first

event is the appointment of Hillary Clinton to head the group charged with writing the HSA. She

was known to be predisposed to pharmaceutical price constraints. The second event is a speech

by Clinton in which he directly stated that pharmaceutical prices were too high. The third event is

the New York Times story reporting specific regulations from a leaked preliminary copy of the

HSA. The fourth event is the formal release of the plan.

        The combined CARs for each firm around these events measures its HSA-related CAR.

CARs are estimated using the market model, with the CRSP value-weighted index return as the

market return. The CAR for each event includes five trading days before and five trading days


7
 Using CARs measured over all 11 events listed in Table II or the full event period in the empirical models
produces qualitatively similar results.


                                                    23
after the event. Each firm’s model parameters are estimated over the 255 day trading period

following the end of the event period (September 29, 1993)8. The average firm’s HSA-related

CAR is -17.81 percent.



B. Empirical model test results

        Empirical model (2) tests hypotheses 1 and 2, which posit that HSA-related CAR can be

explained by the vulnerability of firms’ R&D assets to price regulation. Empirical model (3) tests

hypothesis 3, which posits that firms reacted to the negative effects of the HSA by reducing their

R&D spending.



B.1. The relation between HSA-related CARs and firms’ R&D exposures

        Table IV reports the results for the regression tests of the relations between HSA-related

CAR and pre-event capitalized R&D intensity (CRDTA), pre-event equity beta (βi), beta change

(∆βi), pre-event volatility (σi), and volatility change (∆σi). The first regression shows that CARs

and CRDTA are significantly negatively related. This supports hypothesis 1 as well as Figure 2,

which showed that the more R&D-intensive firms experienced larger negative HSA-related

CARs. The regression also shows that both βi and ∆βi are significantly negatively related to CARs

as predicted by hypothesis 2. Assuming that βi and ∆βi measure R&D leverage, this means that

firm’s with more marginal R&D assets experienced larger negative HSA-related returns. For

example, the first and fourth RDTA quartile firms have average betas of 0.99 and 1.49,

respectively. The -0.20 estimate on βi implies that fourth quartile firms’ stocks declined by 10

percent more than first quartile firms’ stocks on average, all else equal.

        Finally, consistent with hypothesis 1, CARs and σi and ∆σi are positively related,

although only the relation between CAR and σi is statistically significant. Given that first and

8
  We do not use the trading period before the events because this would entail using data from 1992, when
the other seven events occurred and during which Table I shows that firm betas were changing. Using the
pre-event period betas give qualitatively similar results, however.


                                                   24
fourth RDTA quartile firms have average σi of 0.035 and 0.051, respectively, the 7.22 estimate on

σi implies that fourth quartile firms’ stocks declined by about 12 percent less than first quartile

firms’ stock on average, all else equal. These results imply that the stock price of a firm with a

1.49 beta and a 0.035 volatility would decline by about 22 percent in response to the HSA, all

else equal.

                                  [Table IV here]

        As discussed in Section I, subsection B, the relations between CARs and βi, ∆βi, σi and

∆σi could be affected by the variation in liquid asset intensity across firms. To consider this

possibility, we interact a liquid asset intensity variable (L) with these variables, and add the

interaction variables to the regression. L is measured as the ratio of working capital to total assets.

        The second regression shows that the relations between CAR and βi, ∆βi, σ i and ∆σ i are

all statistically insignificant after accounting for cross-sectional liquidity differences. But all of

the estimates on the interacted variables are significant. The negative estimates on (βi x L) and

(∆βi x L) imply that investors believed that high-liquidity-high-beta (or beta change) firms would

be most negatively affected by the HSA. Conversely, they believed high-liquidity-high-volatility

(or volatility change) firms would be least negatively affected or actually positively affected. This

could simply be because the interacted variables better represent firms’ R&D asset betas and

volatilities. Alternatively, it could reflect investor concerns about R&D spending by managers in

the face of potential price constraints.

        These results can be interpreted from a real options perspective. βi and ∆βi (σi and ∆σi)

measure the potential negative leverage (volatility) effects of the HSA. Those effects are more

apparent once liquidity is considered. Ample liquidity allows managers of high βi firms to fund

R&D that investors find unattractive due to the HSA, hence, high-liquidity high-beta firms’ stock

prices fall considerably. Conversely, a liquidity constraint could actually have a positive effect on

these firms’ stocks. The reverse is true for firms with high-volatility R&D projects, where



                                                  25
financial slack allows those valuable projects to be funded, even if external financing dries up due

to the HSA.

        The third regression includes a leverage variable, where firm leverage is measured by the

ratio of total debt to total assets. The estimate on leverage is statistically insignificant.

Furthermore, none of the other estimates change much. This means that none of the other

variables in the regression are picking up the effects of financial leverage as opposed to R&D

leverage.

        Finally, the last regression includes a variable to test whether firms that pledged to keep

price increases low experienced relatively low returns. Twenty-one established firms pledged by

mid-1993 to keep their drug price increases below the general consumer price inflation. Of the 21

firms listed in Ellison and Wolfram (2001), ten are part of our sample9. The price constraint

dummy (PCDi) variable equals 1 if firm i pledged to keep its price increases below the inflation

rate, and equals zero otherwise. The point estimate on PCD is negative but it is not statistically

significant.



B.2. The relation between firms’ subsequent R&D spending and the HSA price threats

        Hypothesis 3 posits that the HSA’s effects on firms’ stock prices and risks will affect

their subsequent R&D spending. Table V reports the regression tests of empirical model (3) for

the relations between unexpected R&D intensity (URDTA) and CAR, ∆βi, and ∆σi. Because CAR

is measured in 1993, and managers might not respond immediately by changing current R&D

budgets, results are presented for 1993, 1994, and 1995. Results for the first three regressions

show that URDTA and CAR are positively related, although only the 1994 effect is statistically




9
  Our sample includes Abbott Labs, Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Eli Lilly, Glaxo, Johnson & Johnson, Merck,
Pfizer, SmithKline Beecham, Warner-Lamber and Wyeth-Ayerst (American Home Products). The other
firms are Ciba-Geigy, Dupont-Merck, G.D. Searle, Genentech, Hoechst-Roussel, Hoffmann-La Roche,
Knoll, Marion Merrell Dow, Syntex, Upjon, and Zeneca. These 11 firms do not have the necessary data.


                                                  26
significant. Given that most firms had negative CARs, this implies that the HSA induced firms to

cut their R&D intensity in the year following the HSA-related events.

        URDTA and ∆βi also are positively related, with both the 1993 and 1994 estimates

statistically significant. But hypothesis 3 predicts a negative relation because, from an options

perspective, the average increase in βi for the sample firms implies increased R&D leverage, i.e.,

more marginal projects. And Table IV shows that the larger the ∆βi, the greater the decline in a

firm’s stock price. The optimal response by managers should be to reduce R&D spending. But the

positive estimate implies that high ∆βi firms actually increased their R&D spending (or decreased

it less than expected).

        The weakly-significant positive relation between URDTA and ∆σi for the 1995 regression

is consistent with our hypothesis. Because σi decreased on average, firms’ R&D option values

should have decreased, all else equal. In response, managers should reduce R&D spending, which

is consistent with the positive estimate.

        The effects of firm liquidity on managers’ R&D spending decisions can help explain

these mixed results. The fourth regression in Table V shows that firm liquidity had a significant

effect on how managers responded to the HSA. Again, L is interacted with the risk change

variables and these new variables are added to the regression. The relations between URDTA and

∆βi and ∆σi are now insignificant.

        The positive estimate on (∆βi x L) is significant. This implies that high-liquidity-high-

beta-change firms tended to increase R&D spending in response to the HSA rather than decrease

it as predicted. This could reflect suboptimal behavior on the part of managers of liquid firms

whose R&D asset values were relatively sensitive to the HSA. The effect is not purely liquidity

driven because if L is included separately in the regression, it is not statistically significant,

although the point estimate is positive. It is the combination of high-liquidity and high-beta that

drives the result. Of course, Table IV shows that high-liquidity-high-beta firms also suffered




                                                27
greater stock price losses. Investors could have expected suboptimal R&D spending behavior

from liquid high-beta firms, hence, they cut their stock prices. The positive estimate on (∆σi x L)

is insignificant.

           The last regression in Table V includes the price constraint dummy (PCD) variable to test

whether firms that pledged to constrain price increases reduced R&D spending relative to the

other firms in the sample. The PCD estimate is positive but insignificant. But this is because

pricing constraints likely reduced these firms’ sales, cash flows, etc. Because (4) strips the

influence of these variables from URDTA, it is not surprising that URDTA and PCD are unrelated.

           A better regression test of whether self-imposed price constraints affected firms’ R&D

spending uses the predicted values (ERDTA) from (4) instead of URDTA. When we re-estimate

the last regression in Table V using ERDTA as the dependent variable, the estimate on PCD is

negative and significant at the five percent level10. The estimate is also significant if we use

ERDTA measured in 1993 or 1995. But using 1994 data produces the largest negative estimate.

This is consistent with Ellison and Wolfram (2001) who show that the firms’ self-imposed price

restrictions were most evident in their 1994 drug prices.

           We also considered whether financial leverage had any impact on the results. High-

leverage could have constrained managers’ R&D spending flexibility. We added a total-debt-to-

assets variable to each regression but none of the leverage estimates were significant (not shown).

This is not surprising given the low debt levels of the sample (see Table I) and results from Table

IV that show no significant relation between leverage and CAR.

           Finally, we estimate the magnitude of the effect that the HSA had on firm R&D. From

Table II, the average firm experienced a -17.81 percent HSA-related return. Given the 1994

estimate of 0.09 for the relation between URDTA and CAR, the average firm decreased their

RDTA by about 0.016 below its expected level. With the average RDTA of about 0.30 in 1994

(see Table III), this is about a 5.3 percent decline. This is equivalent to about $508 million ($1.02

10
     These results are available upon request.


                                                  28
billion) in 1983 (2004) dollars. This probably underestimates the effect because it assumes that

only 1994 R&D was affected and excludes the effects of self-imposed price constraints.



C. The HSA effects on capital expenditures and advertising

        The HSA apparently affected firms’ R&D spending decisions. Spending on related items

could also be affected by the HSA if the items are complements or substitutes for R&D. Two

relevant items are capital expenditure and advertising. We reran the regressions in Table V above

using unexpected capital expenditure intensity (UCAPEXTA) and unexpected advertising

intensity (UADVTA) in place of URDTA. UCAPEXTA and UADVTA were estimated using the

same approach as URDTA. Given the limited statistical significance or sample sizes for these

regressions, we only summarize the results here (available upon request).

        All of the sample firms report capital expenditure in each year so the regression sample

size is 111 firms. Similar to what we find for URDTA, we find that UCAPEXTA is positively

related to CAR and ∆βi but the size and statistical significance of the estimates is smaller. This

makes sense if R&D and CAPEX are weak complements. With lower R&D spending, one would

expect less need for plant and equipment, but spending on these items is probably less flexible.

        Unlike CAPEX and R&D, firms are not required to report advertising as a separate item,

consequently, only 51 sample firms report advertising expense. Nevertheless, with the available

sample we find that UADVTA is negatively related to HSA-related returns. Although statistically

insignificant unless data for all three years are pooled, the negative relation between UADVTA

and CAR is intriguing. The results suggest that R&D and advertising are weak substitutes. This

means that firms may respond to prospective price regulation by reducing R&D and increasing

advertising. This strategy makes sense because advertising supports currently marketed drugs

whose prices are already set, while R&D supports future drugs whose prices could be

constrained.




                                                29
        Finally, consider Figure 3 which plots the cumulative value-weighted CARs of the stocks

in each RDTA quartile over a post-HSA period. Like the HSA event period, it includes 434

trading days, but starts on September 30, 1993 (the day after the HSA event period ends) and

ends on June 20, 1995. The CARs are based on the market model using the CRSP value-weighted

index return as the market return. Each firm’s model parameters are estimated over the 255 day

trading period following June 20, 1995.

        The figure illustrates an interesting dynamic. As Ellison and Mullin (2001) note, the HSA

lost political momentum shortly after it was released. The figure shows that each quartile of

stocks rallied as the HSA lost its support, outperforming the market through the beginning of

February 1994. But by the time Senator Bob Dole pronounced the HSA “dead” on March 2,

1994, all of the quartiles had lost their gains.

                                   [Figure 3 here]

         By the time Congress officially shelved the HSA on July 21, 1994, a clear dichotomy

had emerged in the industry. The high R&D intensity quartiles 3 and 4 plunged. Low R&D

intensity quartile 1 fell to a lesser extent. But quartile 2, that contains most of the brand-name

firms, regained its losses and started to outperform the market.

        A full explanation of this dichotomy is beyond the scope of this paper. But we conjecture

that the HSA did indeed have long-term effects on the pharmaceutical industry even though it

never passed Congress. Giaccotto, Santerre, and Vernon (2005) illustrate how the real price of

pharmaceuticals increased steadily from 1980 through 1992, but remained constant from 1993

through 1997. Large brand-name firms could fair comparatively well under these conditions as

they increased advertising to support the value of their marketed drugs. But generic firms relying

on price competition, and biotech firms relying their R&D project values, could fair poorly. If the

HSA marked the beginning of implicit pricing limitations, brand names could have become more

valuable while R&D became less valuable.




                                                     30
IV. Conclusion



        Recent research shows that R&D spending creates R&D assets that investors impound

into stock prices. This study considers whether managers respond to large decreases in stock

prices (and presumably R&D asset values) by cutting back R&D spending. We use the Clinton

Administration’s Health Security Act (HSA) as a natural experiment to show that pharmaceutical

firms, threatened by regulations that would reduce R&D values, cut their R&D spending by about

five percent ($1 billion in current dollar terms).

        Events leading up to the formal presentation of the HSA to Congress in late 1993 could

be traced as far back as the Democratic primaries in early 1992. We show graphically that

pharmaceutical company stocks sustained significant price declines from then until late 1993. The

average firm experienced a -38 percent return during the period (-62 percent risk-adjusted) while

the market index earned 18 percent. But relatively R&D intensive firms suffered much larger

losses on average. After the HSA was defeated in Congress, the industry as a whole rallied for a

few months, but soon after, the R&D intensive firms again suffered large stock price losses. Only

brand-name firms enjoyed risk-adjusted gains.

        Although the HSA appeared to have a substantial negative impact on stock prices, the

relatively small R&D decrease could reflect the fact that the HSA never became law. Also, many

R&D leveraged firms happen to have raised much of their capital just before the HSA-related

events began, hence, they could maintain R&D spending even as their stock prices sank and

external funding dried up.

        Finally, we find that firms reduced their capital expenditures in response to stock price

declines, but the effects are smaller and less statistically significant than for R&D spending.

Based upon limited data, we find the opposite for advertising spending although the effects are

usually statistically insignificant. This suggests that some firms may have responded to the HSA




                                                     31
by reallocating resources from R&D to advertising. This strategy supports current products with

known prices over future products with potentially constrained prices.




                                               32
                                         References



Abbott, Thomas A., 1995, Price regulation in the pharmaceutical industry: Prescription or

placebo?, Journal of Health Economics 14, 551- 565.



Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Linn, 2004, Market Size in innovation: Theory and evidence from

the pharmaceutical industry, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1049-1090.



Brown, Stephen J. and Jerold B. Warner, 1980, Measuring security price performance, Journal of

Financial Economics 8, 205-258.



Chan, Louis K. C., Josef Lakonishok, and Theodore Sougiannis, 2001, The stock market

valuation of research and development spending, Journal of Finance 56, 2431-2456.



Coulson, E. N. and Stuart, B. C., 1995, Insurance choice and the demand for prescription drugs,

Southern Economic Journal 61, 1146-1157.



Durnev, Art, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, 2004, Value-enhancing capital budgeting and

firm-specific stock return variation, Journal of Finance 59, 65-106.



Eberhart, Allan C., William F. Maxwell, and Akhtar Siddique, 2004, An examination of long-

term stock returns and operating performance following R&D increases, Journal of Finance 59,

623-650.




                                                33
Ellison, Sara F. and Catherine Wolfram, 2001, Pharmaceutical prices and political activity,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology Working Paper.



Ellison, Sara Fisher, and Wallace P. Mullin, 2001, Gradual incorporation of information:

Pharmaceutical stocks and the evolution of President Clinton’s health care reform, Journal of Law

and Economics 44, 89-130.



Finkelstein, A., 2004, Static and dynamic effects of health policy: evidence from the vaccine

industry, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 527-564.



Galai, D., and R.W. Masulis, 1976, The option pricing model and the risk factor of stock, Journal

of Financial Economics 3, 53-82.



Giaccotto, Carmelo, Rexford Santerre, and John Vernon, 2005, Drug prices and research and

development investment behavior in the pharmaceutical industry, Journal of Law and Economics

48, 195-214.



Guedj, Ilan and David Scharfstein, 2004, Organizational scope and investment: Evidence from

drug development strategies and performance of biopharmaceutical firms, MIT working paper.



Grabowski, Henry, 1969, The determinants of research and development: A study of chemical,

drug, and petroleum industries, Journal of Political Economy 76, 292-306.



Grabowski, Henry and John Vernon, 1990, A new look at the returns and risks to pharmaceutical

R&D, Management Science 36, 804-821.




                                               34
Hall, Bronwyn, 2002, The financing of research and development, Oxford Review of Economic

Policy 18, 35-51.



Himmelberg, Charles P., and Bruce C. Petersen, 1994, R&D and internal finance: A panel study

of small firms in high-tech industries, Review of Economics and Statistics 76, 38-51.



Hovey, Hollister, 2004, Big pharma courts rivals of generic drugs, Wall Street Journal, August

11.



Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers,

American Economic Review 76, 323-330.



Lerner, Josh, Hilary Shane, and Alexander Tsai, 2003, Do equity financing cycles matter?

evidence from biotechnology alliances, Journal of Financial Economics 67, 411-446.



Lichtenberg, Frank R., 2004, Public policy and innovation in the U.S. pharmaceutical industry, in

Public policy and the Economics of Entrepreneurship, eds. Douglas Holtz-Eakin and Harvey S.

Rosen, MIT Press, Boston.



Mikkelson, Wayne H. and M. Megan Partch, 2003, Do persistent large cash reserves hinder

performance?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 275-294.



Schwartz, Eduardo S., 2004, Patents and R&D as real options, Economic Notes 33, 23-41.



Tessoriero, Heather, 2004, Torrid drug price increases pause, Wall Street Journal, December 6,

A3.


                                               35
Vernon, John, 2005, Examining the link between price regulation and pharmaceutical R&D

investment, Health Economics 14, 1-16.



Vernon, John, 2003, Simulating the impact of price regulation on R&D innovation,

Pharmaceutical Development and Regulation 1, 55-65.




                                            36
                                           Appendix A



        A firm’s total market value, VT, is composed of its net liquid assets, VL, which are raised

from investors or generated and retained from past drug sales, the present value of its marketed

drugs, VD, and the value of its R&D portfolio, VR.



        VT = VL + VD + VR .                                                                    (1a)



        For simplicity, assume that the firm’s R&D portfolio is a single project, which can be

described as a call option. If it chooses to, the firm can spend E dollars on R&D and receive a call

option on the production of a new drug. The value of the project, VR, is



        VR = c(S, σs, X, T, r) – E,                                                            (2a)



where c(•) is a function defining the value of a call option on a new drug with an expected net

present value of future cash flows of S, a percent volatility for S of σs, and a fixed investment cost

to build a production plant of X at time T in the future. The risk-free rate of return is r.

        The firm’s expected stock return (ignoring debt) is,



        kT = WL kL + WD kD + WR kR ,                                                           (3a)



where WL = VL/VT , WD = VD/VT , WR = VR/VT, and kL, kD, and kR are the expected returns on liquid

assets, marketed drug assets, and R&D assets, respectively.




                                                  37
         The systematic risk (βT) of the firm is a weighted average of the Capital Asset Pricing

Model (CAPM) betas of the three assets;



         βT = WL βL + WD βD + WR βR .                                                               (4a)



We assume that βL = 0. βD is likely to be smaller than βR because the R&D drug involves a future

payment for fixed costs of production facilities and product launch. This future payment is

equivalent to financial leverage, which increases beta. Assuming that the firm’s capital structure

is constant over time, then βD < βR. But βD and βR could be similar except that βR is a leveraged

version of βD. Firms often specialize, developing and producing drugs in relatively narrow

therapeutic areas. Therefore, both the marketed drug and R&D drug could have similar cash flow

properties.

         Because the HSA sought to regulate new drug prices, R&D-intensive firms (large WR)

should be most affected, all else equal11. But this assumes a homogeneous distribution of R&D

project characteristics across firms. In reality, some firms will have more marginal R&D projects

that are more sensitive to the HSA.

         One way to measure a particular firm’s R&D sensitivity is to consider their stock risk and

volatility from a real options perspective. First, marginal projects can be defined by the difference

between the R&D asset value and the cost of production facilities, (S – X), that is, how far a

project is “in-the-money.” (S – X) should be negatively associated with βR. Recall that the level of

firm βR (and in turn βT) measures its R&D leverage. A firm composed of mostly at-the-money or

out-of-the-money R&D projects should have a relatively high βT, and be relatively sensitive to the



11
  VR and WR probably decline because a call option value declines with the underlying asset’s value (S). S
declines because expected drug revenues fall assuming inelastic demand (see Coulson and Stuart, 1995),
while production costs stay constant. A capped price could be less volatile than a free-market price, leading
to a less volatile underlying asset value. This reduced volatility also decreases the R&D call option value.


                                                     38
effects of the HSA. Conversely, the level of asset volatility, measured by σs, implies larger R&D

option values and less sensitivity to the HSA, all else equal (see Galai and Masulis (1976)).

        The changes in risk and volatility can also help identify the most sensitive firms.

Consider first how βT should change due to the HSA. Using (4a) and denoting the HSA price

regulation effect as “p”, the change in the holding company’s beta is:



         ∂βT     ∂β   ∂WL         ∂β   ∂WD         ∂β   ∂WR
             = WL L +     β L + WD D +     β D + WR R +     βR .                         (5a)
          ∂p      ∂p   ∂p          ∂p   ∂p          ∂p   ∂p



        Because βL = 0 and does not change, the first two terms on the right-hand-side of (5a)

disappear. Similarly, the HSA should have little effect on βD because currently marketed drug

prices would not be regulated; therefore, the third term disappears. The fourth and sixth terms

represent the effects on βT when the relative values of the marketed drugs and R&D change. Their

combined effects on βT are likely to be negative on net. To see this, recall that βR > βD. Because

the regulation will negatively affect R&D value, but have little effect on the marketed drug’s

value, the weight on the marketed drug will increase and the weight on R&D will decrease,

             ∂WD      ∂WR
therefore,       βD +     β R < 0 . That is, the marketed drug’s (R&D) smaller (larger) beta is
              ∂p       ∂p

weighted more (less) so that the firm’s weighted average beta is smaller.

        The fifth term in (5a) represents the HSA’s effect on the risk of R&D. There are two

relevant effects derived for call options in Galai and Masulis (1976). First, price constraints will

reduce R&D asset value (S), and this will decrease the call value and increase βR. More

important, for those firms where (S – X) is small, βR should change the most. That is, the betas of

the firms with the greatest R&D leverage (more marginal projects) should also have the largest βR

changes. The value of their R&D projects should fall the most, all else equal, and their R&D

spending should fall the most (assuming that management responds to stock price changes).


                                                39
        Variation in WL complicates a cross-sectional analysis. Two otherwise identical firms

with significantly different WL will have different βT changes. The firm with the larger WL will

have a smaller βT change and stock price change because a larger WL implies a smaller WR, all

else equal. That is, large liquid asset holdings cushion the effects of the HSA on firm risk and

stock price. Hence, our analysis controls for cross-sectional variation in WL.

        An analysis of the HSA-induced change in σs proceeds in the same way but has opposite

implications. If the HSA increases σs, the R&D asset value increases, all else equal. However,

price regulation, such as that for electric utilities, usually leads to lower but less volatile prices. In

any case, HSA-induced stock price change and R&D change should be positively related to the

change in σs.




                                                   40
Appendix B. Sample of 111 Pharmaceutical and Biotech Companies Sorted by R&D-to-Assets With Descriptive Variables Measured as
Averages over 1989-1991.
The sample includes all companies in the NAICS categories 325412 (Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing) and 325414 (Biological Product
Manufacturing) that have Compustat financial data and CRSP stock return data covering at least 1991-1995. Company type is defined as either
brand-name pharmaceutical (Pharmaceutical), generic pharmaceutical (Generic), or biotechnology (Biotech). Dollar figures are adjusted for
consumer price inflation (All Urban Consumers-All Items, Base Period 1982-84=100). Figures are averages for each firm using annual Compustat
data over 1989-1991, the three years preceding the HSA event period.
                                                                         R&D-to-       R&D-to-        R&D             Assets       Sales
 Company Name                                Company Type                Assets       Sales         (millions)      (millions)  (millions)

 Quartile 1

 Akorn Inc                                 Pharmaceutical                   0.00027        0.0003         0.003        11.59          9.68
 Jones Medical Industries Inc              Pharmaceutical                   0.00127        0.0021         0.031        18.84         13.30
 Quest Biotechnology Inc                   Biotech                          0.00551        0.0199         0.012         1.97          0.37
 Natures Sunshine Products Inc             Pharmaceutical                   0.01450        0.0055         0.251        17.31         46.03
 Deprenyl Research Limited                 Pharmaceutical                   0.01725        0.0853         0.319        17.77          5.68
 Chattem Inc                               Pharmaceutical                   0.01911        0.0123         0.839        43.81         67.78
 Alza Corpa                                Pharmaceutical                   0.02380        0.0997         7.751       347.05         79.73
 Bausch & Lomb Inc                         Pharmaceutical                   0.02842        0.0337        34.544      1216.44       1025.12
 A L Labs Inca                             Pharmaceutical                   0.02992        0.0353         7.338       243.75        208.02
 Theragenics Corp                          Biotech                          0.03238        0.1175         0.075         2.28          1.02
 North American Vaccine Inc                Biotech                          0.03380        0.7256         0.658        20.58          1.64
 Balchem Corp                              Pharmaceutical                   0.03482        0.0201         0.167         4.76          8.25
 Halsey Drug Inc                           Generic                          0.03490        0.0253         0.521        15.45         21.26
 Forest Labs Inc                           Biotech                          0.03859        0.0686         9.625       248.60        139.06
 Mylan Labs Inc                            Generic                          0.03868        0.0642         5.050       132.69         79.37
 Atrix Laboratories Inc                    Pharmaceutical                   0.03903        0.1269         0.182         4.46          1.86
 United Guardian Inc                       Pharmaceutical                   0.04123        0.0480         0.167         4.04          3.51
 Teva Pharmaceutical Inds Ltd              Generic                          0.04355        0.0467        10.320       237.24        220.82
 Pharmaceutical Resources Inc              Generic                          0.04648        0.0582         2.864        56.64         47.22
 Ivax Corp                                 Generic                          0.04860        0.0607         5.649       157.21         95.39
 I G I Inc                                 Pharmaceutical                   0.05972        0.0606         0.914        15.45         15.07
Medicis Pharmaceutical Corpa       Pharmaceutical   0.05981   18.8538     0.324      6.56      1.19
Elan Corp Plc                      Biotech          0.06312    0.1293     6.985    107.99     53.13
American Home Products Corp        Pharmaceutical   0.06627    0.0555   285.742   4315.99   5151.94
Barr Laboratories Inc              Generic          0.06682    0.0622     3.625     54.77     58.17
Monsanto Co                        Pharmaceutical   0.06791    0.0692   459.362   6765.58   6638.42
Pfizer Inc                         Pharmaceutical   0.07102    0.1008   480.173   6745.34   4747.87
T Cell Sciences Inc                Biotech          0.07378    0.1230     0.926     13.87      7.55

Quartile 2

Clinical Technologies Assoc Inc    Pharmaceutical   0.07605    0.2709     0.226      3.44      0.94
Taro Vit Chemical Industries Ltd   Pharmaceutical   0.07651    0.0577     0.665      8.44     11.21
Moleculon Inc                      Pharmaceutical   0.07736    0.2935     1.965     25.32     20.09
Immunex Corp                       Biotech          0.07925    0.3307     9.054    114.25     26.44
Allergan Inc                       Pharmaceutical   0.08172    0.0875    55.311    680.68    632.60
I C O S Corp                       Pharmaceutical   0.08565   25.3941     3.325     33.86      0.30
Rhone Poulenc Rorer Inc            Pharmaceutical   0.08724    0.1127   225.880   2473.79   1962.79
Novo Nordisk A S                   Pharmaceutical   0.08956    0.1371   145.368   1620.37   1056.17
Johnson & Johnson                  Pharmaceutical   0.09058    0.0756   631.203   6963.62   8338.77
Glaxo Holdings Plc                 Pharmaceutical   0.09318    0.1351   516.322   5533.69   3797.18
Life Technologies Inc              Biotech          0.09362    0.0808     9.191     99.73    114.10
Schering Plough Corp               Pharmaceutical   0.09633    0.1118   282.233   2930.24   2521.85
Bristol Myers Squibb Co            Pharmaceutical   0.09797    0.0868   664.295   6778.00   7648.47
Lilly Eli & Co                     Pharmaceutical   0.09810    0.1381   517.528   5302.03   3760.22
Polydex Pharmaceuticals Ltd        Pharmaceutical   0.10308    0.1772     0.291      2.77      1.91
Smithkline Beecham Plc             Pharmaceutical   0.10348    0.0848   547.775   5295.22   6460.37
Abbott Labs                        Pharmaceutical   0.10396    0.0941   432.538   4156.94   4592.56
Merck & Co Inc                     Pharmaceutical   0.10714    0.1136   646.280   6049.07   5690.16
Columbia Laboratories Inc          Pharmaceutical   0.11276    0.1623     1.109     10.02      7.10
Warner Lambert Co                  Pharmaceutical   0.11392    0.0794   276.876   2425.32   3479.60
Amgen Inc                          Biotech          0.13146    0.1862    53.964    416.81    308.85
Cephalon Inc                       Biotech          0.13608    9.6600     3.388     26.37      1.85
I D E X X Laboratories Inc         Pharmaceutical   0.14342    0.1340     2.689     20.75     20.13
U S Bioscience Inc                Biotech          0.15256   100.118    4.414    37.57    0.88
M G I Pharma Inc                  Pharmaceutical   0.15619     7.285    4.570    29.54    2.47
Centocor Inc                      Biotech          0.15762     0.742   33.400   228.77   47.67
Neurogen Corp                     Pharmaceutical   0.16884   167.146    1.671    10.33    0.01
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc     Biotech          0.17963     1.694    6.964    50.72    4.07

Quartile 3

Ribi Immunochem Resh Inc          Biotech          0.18167     2.368    1.523     8.63    0.64
Biogen Inc                        Biotech          0.18933     0.766   25.899   138.33   34.67
Immune Response Corp              Biotech          0.19340     1.252    3.718    37.16    2.95
Enzon Inc                         Biotech          0.19442     2.335    4.318    23.78    1.90
Immulogic Pharmaceutical Corp     Biotech          0.19489     1.899    4.440    24.88    2.35
Pharmatec Inc                     Pharmaceutical   0.20725     0.354    0.232     1.17    0.74
Royce Laboratories Inc            Biotech          0.21019     0.209    0.228     1.45    1.18
Chiron Corp                       Biotech          0.21614     1.138   43.658   314.36   38.82
Celtrix Pharmaceuticals Inc       Biotech          0.21703    13.835    5.396    28.68    0.42
Techne Corp                       Biotech          0.22203     0.110    1.302     5.87   11.81
Medco Research Inc                Pharmaceutical   0.22792    21.336    0.391     1.81    0.90
Advanced Tissue Sciences Inca     Biotech          0.22844    30.983    2.047     9.73    0.17
Xoma Corp                         Biotech          0.23996     1.871   21.040    90.17   11.93
Immucell Corp                     Biotech          0.24184     0.312    0.532     2.41    1.73
Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc   Biotech          0.24860    18.555    1.414     4.66    0.05
Cel Sci Corp                      Biotech          0.27146    11.654    0.116     0.63    0.01
Sepracor Inc                      Biotech          0.27595     0.986    6.785    32.81    7.27
Celgene Corp                      Biotech          0.29924     8.253    4.594    17.83    0.67
Repligen Corp                     Biotech          0.30153     1.364    8.971    30.48    6.81
I M R E Corp                      Biotech          0.30689     0.370    0.587     3.66    1.59
Procyte Corp                      Biotech          0.30985    11.015    2.309     8.28    0.66
Carrington Laboratories Inc       Biotech          0.31620     0.269    2.247     7.12    8.71
Belmac Corp                       Biotech          0.31722    43.056    0.492     1.66    0.01
Alkermes Inc                      Biotech          0.31878    17.764    3.462    21.97    0.33
Cygnus Therapeutic Systems        Biotech          0.32492     1.042    4.031    12.39    3.51
Quadra Logic Technologies Inc   Biotech          0.33672   242.253    7.254   22.76   0.22
D D I Pharmaceuticals           Biotech          0.35194     0.426    1.248    3.55   3.17

Quartile 4

Cytogen Corp                    Biotech          0.35428     4.469   12.644   36.62   3.67
Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc        Biotech          0.35651     1.063    2.335   28.25   2.94
Unimed Inc                      Biotech          0.35819     0.506    1.736    4.92   3.57
Somatix Therapy Corp            Biotech          0.36300     1.647    4.828   13.83   3.18
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc      Biotech          0.36777     2.515    4.834   24.08   1.94
Genelabs Technologies Inc       Biotech          0.37524     1.945    7.299   19.27   4.85
Cor Therapeutics Inc            Biotech          0.37652     5.834    3.866   24.55   1.05
Medimmune Inc                   Biotech          0.37870     1.015     4.59   26.44   6.26
Somatogen Inc                   Biotech          0.37919    12.915    3.607   10.08   0.67
Interferon Sciences Inc         Biotech          0.40603     8.879    3.305   10.81   0.82
Immunogen Inc                   Biotech          0.43367   199.635    5.788   16.84   0.59
Liposome Technology Inc         Biotech          0.44257    11.866    5.371   16.52   0.64
Cortex Pharmaceuticals Inc      Biotech          0.49866    75.746    1.032    2.11   0.01
Liposome Company Inc            Biotech          0.50112     2.311    6.483   18.89   3.11
Roberts Pharmaceutical Corp     Biotech          0.50463     1.193    2.547   14.55   4.98
Agouron Pharmaceuticals Inc     Biotech          0.51026     3.243    5.867   11.90   1.90
Aphton Corp                     Biotech          0.51749    81.370    0.995   3.064   0.03
Noven Pharmaceuticals Inc       Pharmaceutical   0.51754    13.158    1.324    2.55   0.10
Gensia Pharmaceuticals Inc      Biotech          0.54223   592.961   11.559   45.78   2.09
Applied Microbiology Inc        Biotech          0.62631     1.239    0.702    1.21   0.57
Organogenesis Inc               Biotech          0.69109     1.798    4.470   12.83   2.50
Lidak Pharmaceuticalsa          Biotech          0.73479     4.858    0.675    1.13   0.17
Medarex Inc                     Biotech          0.74791     0.793    0.837    4.55   1.04
Biomatrix Inc                   Biotech          0.77681     1.070    2.060   11.22   1.92
Greenwich Pharmaceuticals Inc   Pharmaceutical   0.88906     2.738    8.300   10.12   3.16
Cytrx Corp                      Biotech          0.92669     1.702    1.005    6.43   1.55
Chantal Pharmaceutical Corp     Biotech          1.18779     4.638    2.337    2.11   1.11
Cambridge Neuroscience Inc      Biotech          1.78620     6.279    4.879   15.04   0.77
Table I. Descriptive Statistics for Study Variables for the Full Sample and By R&D-to-Assets Quartiles.

Each firm observation for R&D, R&D-to-Assets, Total Assets, Capital Expense-to-Assets, Advertising-to-
Assets, and Debt-to-Assets is measured as an average using annual Compustat data over 1989-1991, the three
year period preceding the HSA event period. Dollar figures are adjusted for consumer price inflation (All Urban
Consumers-All Items, Base Period 1982-84=100). Beta and return volatility for each firm is measured using
daily CRSP returns over the pre-event period covering April 24, 1990 to January 10, 1992. Beta change and
volatility change are measured as differences between betas and volatilities measured over the event period
(January 13, 1992 to September 29, 1993) and the pre-event period. The event period consists of 434 trading
days starting five trading days before the first HSA-related event (see Table II) and ends five trading days after
the last HSA-related event. The pre-event period consists of the 434 trading days preceding the event period.
Firms are ranked by R&D-to-Assets and grouped into quartiles. Except for the advertising, the full sample
includes 111 firms, and quartiles 1, 2, and 4 include 28 firms. Quartile 3 includes 27 firms. For advertising-to-
assets the sample is limited to 51 firms, with quartiles 1, 2, 3, and 4 having 17, 20, 11, and 3 firms, respectively.
Variable                         Mean        Std. Dev              Variable                    Mean        Std. Dev

R&D (millions)                                                   R&D-to-Assets
      Full Sample           60.1482        154.9833                    Full Sample        0.2494        0.2664
      Quartile 1            47.3005        130.8406                    Quartile 1         0.0393        0.0212
      Quartile 2            181.3749       242.9518                    Quartile 2         0.1104        0.0303
      Quartile 3             5.8609          9.6579                    Quartile 3         0.2571        0.0533
      Quartile 4             4.1176          3.1115                    Quartile 4         0.5910        0.3133

Total Assets (millions)                                          Work Cap.-to-Assets
       Full Sample           661.3324      1711.8500                   Full Sample        0.4391        0.2970
       Quartile 1           743.8590       1888.0700                   Quartile 1         0.3324        0.1960
       Quartile 2           1833.1300      2471.4700                   Quartile 2         0.3669        0.2692
       Quartile 3             31.7168       63.9066                    Quartile 3         0.6004        0.3100
       Quartile 4             14.1359       11.0630                    Quartile 4         0.4626        0.3349

Pre-event Period Beta                                            Cap. Exp.-to-Assets
       Full Sample          1.2763         0.6128                       Full Sample       0.0682        0.0632
       Quartile 1           0.9883         0.3281                       Quartile 1        0.0568        0.0599
       Quartile 2           1.2667         0.5391                       Quartile 2        0.0938        0.0627
       Quartile 3           1.3697         0.6578                       Quartile 3        0.0521        0.0605
       Quartile 4           1.4841         0.7584                       Quartile 4        0.0694        0.0643

Beta Change                                                      Advert.-to-Assets
       Full Sample          0.1003         0.6167                        Full Sample      0.0451        0.0777
       Quartile 1           0.1527         0.5051                        Quartile 1       0.0534        0.0954
       Quartile 2           0.0916         0.5454                        Quartile 2       0.0938        0.0627
       Quartile 3           0.1190         0.7201                        Quartile 3       0.0115        0.0143
       Quartile 4           0.0388         0.7002                        Quartile 4       0.0132        0.0107

Pre-event Period                                                 Debt-to-Assets
Return Volatility
       Full Sample          0.0420         0.0167                        Full Sample      0.1583        0.1833
       Quartile 1           0.0347         0.0138                        Quartile 1       0.2180        0.1527
       Quartile 2           0.0325         0.0186                        Quartile 2       0.1744        0.1426
       Quartile 3           0.0500         0.0121                        Quartile 3       0.0900        0.1476
       Quartile 4           0.0512         0.0127                        Quartile 4       0.1120        0.1280
Return Volatility Change
       Full Sample         -0.0016   0.0124
       Quartile 1          -0.0001   0.0093
       Quartile 2          -0.0005   0.0120
       Quartile 3          -0.0056   0.0108
       Quartile 4          -0.0014   0.0164
Table II. Value-Weighted Cumulative Abnormal Returns for a Portfolio of 111
Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Companies

Cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) for each of the following events are calculated using the
market model with the CRSP value-weighted index return as the market return. CARs cover 11
trading days; five trading days before the event, the event day, and five trading days after the
event. Each of these events was considered to be a potentially important political event that could
have made pharmaceutical price controls more likely. HSA-related return, used in the study tests,
includes only the CARs for the last four events. These events are most closely linked to the HSA
and occurred after Clinton was elected president. The t-statistic is based on a time series standard
deviation of the portfolio mean abnormal returns during the market model estimation, as
suggested in Brown and Warner (1980) to avoid bias from cross-sectional correlation of returns.
Date of Event           Description of HSA-Related Event                    Cumulative t-statistic
                                                                            Abnormal
                                                                            Return (%)
January 19, 1992       Clinton issues health care reform proposals
                       before New Hampshire primary.                        -8.41          -4.49*

February 18, 1992      Clinton unexpectedly finishes second in the
                       New Hampshire primary.                               -3.79         -2.02*

March 10, 1992         Clinton does well in the Super Tuesday
                       primaries.                                           -3.04         -1.62**

April 7, 1992          Clinton wins New York primary and becomes
                       the favorite to win the Democratic Nomination.       1.01           0.54

June 4, 1992           Republicans in the House of Representatives
                       offer their health care reform proposal.             -5.10         -2.72*

September 24, 1992     Clinton speaks at Merck on health care reform.       -6.31         -3.37*

November 3, 1992       Clinton wins presidential election.                  -0.85         -0.45

January 25, 1993       Clinton names Hillary Clinton to head his Health
                       Care Task Force.                                     -8.35         -4.45*

February 12, 1993      Clinton says drug prices are too high.               -7.70         -4.10**

September 11, 1993     New York Times describes probable regulations
                       based upon a leaked copy of the plan.                0.31           0.17

September 22, 1993     Clinton officially announces his health care
                       reform plan.                                         -3.27         -1.74**
                       Total for the 11 events.                             -45.50        -5.19*

                       Total for the four events in 1993.                   -19.01        -8.14*

* (**) Cumulative abnormal return is significant at the 1% (10%) level in a one-tailed test.
Table III. Time Series of the Means of the R&D-to-Assets Regression Model Variables and Other Variables of Interest Around the HSA
Event Period of 1992-1993 for a Sample of 111 Pharmaceutical and Biotech Companies

The sample includes all companies in the NAICS categories 325412 (Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing) and 325414 (Biological Product
Manufacturing) that have Compustat financial data and CRSP stock return data covering at least 1991-1995. Data is obtained from the annual
Compustat database, except for unexpected R&D-to-assets. Dollar figures are adjusted for consumer price inflation (All Urban Consumers-All
Items, Base Period 1982-84=100). Return on assets (ROA) is measured as income before extraordinary items divided by assets. Extreme negative
ROA observations are set equal to -1. All 111 sample firms have at least eight years of data including 1991-1995. Unexpected R&D-to-Assets
(URDTA) for each firm i in time t, is measured as the error term (µi,t) from the following regression estimated separately for each firm over the
years for which it has annual Compustat data during 1980-2000.

RDTAi,t = a0 + a1(Salesi,t) + a2(Assetsi,t) + a3(Cash Flowi,t) + a4(Current Assetsi,t) + a5(Working Capitali,t) + µi,t.

     Sample                       R&D-            Unexpected                                                           Current      Working      Return
                                  to-             R&D-to-    R&D                Assets        Sales         Cashflow Assets         Capital      on
                    Year    #Obs. Assets          Assets     (Millions)         (Millions)    (Millions)    (Millions) (Millions)   (Millions)   Assets

     Full
     Sample         1989        90      0.266           -0.005       64.630      729.070        712.120      120.090      381.980    165.864     -0.214
                    1990       108      0.291            0.006       61.331      683.560        646.620      115.075      351.090    125.718     -0.242
                    1991       110      0.176           -0.018       68.293      729.740        675.190      117.764      380.850    154.771     -0.174
                    1992       109      0.189           -0.014       78.567      777.450        712.110      124.972      401.920    160.603     -0.157
                    1993       111      0.251           -0.002       84.433      842.900        717.540      120.489      399.920    147.664     -0.211
                    1994       111      0.303            0.005       86.385     1039.440        775.400      138.467      446.800    113.787     -0.245
                    1995       111      0.304            0.021      102.092     1125.950        886.940      154.647      478.780    129.883     -0.204
                    1996       111      0.235            0.008      108.034     1166.210        959.620      184.886      487.980    138.271     -0.185

     Quartile 1     1989         25     0.040           -0.020       49.789      809.070        741.060      118.910      406.490    196.481      0.028
                    1990         27     0.041           -0.017       48.166      767.070        689.630      112.730      383.680    181.338      0.007
                    1991         27     0.040           -0.016       52.841      795.150        703.960      102.130      409.470    193.958     -0.029
                    1992         27     0.055           -0.005       59.018      817.750        703.860      102.280      443.380    223.862      0.032
                    1993         28     0.069            0.001       63.393      792.080        697.940      103.300      410.240    190.734     -0.016
                    1994         28     0.064           -0.015       68.680     1181.400        747.280      127.280      508.010    187.517     -0.013
             1995   28   0.071   -0.001    88.419   1249.330    900.290   152.430    533.790   195.554    0.007
             1996   28   0.063   -0.007    96.554   1287.710    930.970   140.060    534.020   180.963   -0.066

Quartile 2   1989   24   0.102   -0.022   182.849   1867.540   1893.140   331.380    990.140   393.941   -0.001
             1990   27   0.114   -0.036   187.772   1936.580   1889.940   352.770    997.570   301.926   -0.078
             1991   28   0.111   -0.014   205.676   2025.620   1964.870   383.210   1043.010   369.932   -0.031
             1992   28   0.154   -0.011   231.239   2159.350   2077.800   402.660   1082.440   363.464   -0.030
             1993   28   0.232   -0.002   250.741   2460.160   2126.290   386.400   1119.240   349.167   -0.083
             1994   28   0.222    0.020   250.540   2855.830   2301.540   435.450   1213.170   225.508   -0.095
             1995   28   0.218    0.026   289.148   3115.260   2574.420   483.380   1304.860   278.467   -0.028
             1996   28   0.204    0.024   305.459   3218.550   2822.020   602.650   1326.930   315.537   -0.037


Quartile 3   1989   23   0.274   -0.017     4.912     19.480      4.470    -2.180     15.930    14.317   -0.348
             1990   27   0.293   -0.012     5.517     22.350      5.420    -2.040     16.680    14.502   -0.360
             1991   27   0.208   -0.023     7.138     52.200      6.320   -14.920     39.730    34.310   -0.265
             1992   27   0.254   -0.028    11.598     50.680     12.290    -8.400     34.070    28.253   -0.314
             1993   27   0.295   -0.012    12.254     55.720     14.650    -4.070     33.070    26.948   -0.331
             1994   27   0.449    0.036    13.818     54.050     18.270    -5.200     31.030    23.490   -0.400
             1995   27   0.405    0.069    16.781     68.570     33.340   -15.020     39.160    25.982   -0.385
             1996   27   0.341   -0.031    16.806     80.990     41.280    -0.970     47.940    31.437   -0.296

Quartile 4   1989   18   0.790    0.054     3.921      6.690      1.472    -3.755      4.800     3.880   -0.662
             1990   27   0.716    0.089     3.868      8.244      1.508    -3.163      6.411     5.107   -0.537
             1991   28   0.340   -0.019     4.782     24.135      2.753    -4.657     20.040    17.981   -0.369
             1992   28   0.293   -0.012     6.759     30.825      3.928    -6.944     22.589    19.322   -0.321
             1993   28   0.410    0.003     8.767     35.522      6.179    -8.116     24.015    19.494   -0.419
             1994   28   0.484   -0.021     9.909     31.289      7.455    -8.791     20.126    15.411   -0.476
             1995   28   0.527   -0.005    10.975     32.884      9.205    -8.256     21.603    15.819   -0.418
             1996   28   0.337    0.045    10.060     38.831     11.427    -8.838     27.330    21.334   -0.343
Table IV. Regression Estimates for the Cross-sectional Relation between HSA-Related Returns and R&D Assets, Beta, Beta Change,
Return Volatility, and Return Volatility Change

The basic regression is
CARi = b0 + b1(CRDAi) + b2(βi) + b3(∆βi) + b4(σi) + b5(∆σi) + εi,.
HSA-related stock return for firm i (CAR) is the firm’s cumulative abnormal return for the four 1993 HSA-related events listed in Table II. The
sample includes 111 brand-name pharmaceutical, generic, and biotech firms. Capitalized R&D assets (CRDA) are measured by capitalized
research and development spending over the five years preceding 1993, divided by total assets at year-end 1992. Beta (βi) and return volatility (σi)
are measured for each sample firm i over the pre-event period (April 24, 1990 to January 10, 1992). Beta change (∆βi) and return volatility change
(∆σi) are measured as differences for firm betas or return volatilities between the event period (January 13, 1992 to September 29, 1993) and the
pre-event period. The event period consists of 434 trading days starting five trading days before the first HSA-related event (see Table II) and ends
five trading days after the last HSA-related event. The pre-event period consists of the 434 trading days preceding the event period. Extended
versions of the model include liquidity interaction effects, leverage, and a variable to identify firms that voluntarily constrained their drug prices.
Liquid asset intensity (L) is measured as net working capital divided by total assets. Leverage is measured as the ratio of total debt to total assets.
Price constraint dummyi (PCD) equals 1 if firm i pledged to keep its price increases below the inflation rate and equals zero otherwise.
Regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares with t-statistics in parentheses
Intercept   CRDA          β         ∆β         σ              ∆σ        βxL       ∆β x L       σxL        ∆σ x L       Leverage     PCD       R2      F-stat

 -0.01       -0.13*     -0.20*     -0.12*       7.22*         3.15                                                                            0.19    4.78*
(-0.06)     (-2.66)    (-3.57)    (-2.22)      (3.39)        (1.20)

 -0.21       -0.13*     0.14       0.13         1.52          -5.50      -0.61*     -0.40*     18.35*       23.94*                            0.31    4.91*
(-1.67)     (-2.85)    (1.20)     (1.24)       (0.51)        (-1.16)    (-3.46)    (-2.48)     (3.51)       (3.04)

 -0.22       -0.13*     0.13       0.13         1.46          -6.03      -0.59*     -0.39*     18.54*       24.65*      0.09                  0.31    4.40*
(-1.71)     (-2.85)    (1.10)     (1.15)       (0.49)        (-1.22)    (-3.34)    (-2.36)     (3.51)       (3.04)     (0.41)

 -0.22       -0.13*     0.13       0.13         1.38          -6.05      -0.60*     -0.39*     18.58*       24.63*      0.09        -0.01     0.31    3.96*
(-1.56)     (-2.82)    (1.09)     (1.14)       (0.41)        (-1.22)    (-3.25)    (-2.33)     (3.45)       (3.02)     (0.40)      (-0.05)


*,**, and *** denote estimate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively, in a two-tailed test.
Table V. Regression Estimates for the Cross-sectional Relation between Unexpected R&D-to-Assets, and HSA-Related
Return, Beta Change, and Return Volatility Change
The basic regression is
URDTAi,t+1 = b0 + b1(CARi,t) + b2(∆βi,t) + b3(∆σi,t ) + εi,t+1.
Unexpected R&D-to-Assets (URDTA) is measured for years 1993-1995 as the residual values from the regression in equation
(4) for each firm estimated over the years for which it has annual Compustat data during 1980-2000. All 111 sample firms
have at least eight years of data including 1991-1995. HSA-related stock return for firm i (CARi) is the firm’s cumulative
abnormal return for the four 1993 HSA-related events listed in Table II. Beta change (∆βi) and return volatility change (∆σi)
are measured as differences for firm betas or return volatilities between the event period (January 13, 1992 to September 29,
1993) and the pre-event period (April 24, 1990 to January 10, 1992). The event period consists of 434 trading days starting
five trading days before the first HSA-related event (see Table II) and ends five trading days after the last HSA-related event.
The pre-event period consists of the 434 trading days preceding the event period. Extended versions of the model include
liquidity interaction effects, leverage, and a variable to identify firms that voluntarily constrained their drug prices. Liquid
asset intensity (L) is measured as net working capital divided by total assets. Price constraint dummyi (PCD) equals 1 if firm i
pledged to keep its price increases below the inflation rate and equals zero otherwise. Regressions are estimated using
ordinary least squares with t-statistics in parentheses.
Sample Intercept CAR                  ∆β          ∆σ          ∆β x L     ∆σ x L       PCD       R2     F-stat

1993        -0.01       0.03        0.04*       -0.60                                            0.09     3.41**
           (-0.40)     (1.14)      (2.81)      (-0.86)

1994        0.01        0.09*       0.05*       -0.89                                            0.15     6.26*
           (0.19)      (2.65)      (3.13)      (-1.12)

1995        0.03**      0.06        0.01        1.53***                                          0.05     1.78
           (2.17)      (1.58)      (0.44)      (1.70)

1994        0.01        0.09*      -0.01        -1.54         0.13**       2.06                  0.19     5.14*
           (0.44)      (2.75)     (-0.19)      (-0.98)       (2.43)       (0.71)

1994        0.01       0.09*      -0.01       -1.56          0.13**      2.07         0.01       0.19    4.26*
           (0.34)     (2.75)     (-0.18)     (-0.99)        (2.42)      (0.71)       (0.26)
*,**, and *** denote estimate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively, in a two-tail test.
                                       30%


                                       20%
                                                                                                                             Market Index (CRSP)


                                       10%


                                        0%


                                       -10%


                                       -20%                                                                                  Full Sample (Raw)


                                       -30%


                                       -40%




   Cumulative Raw or Abnormal Return
                                                                                                                             Full Sample (Abnormal)
                                       -50%


                                       -60%


                                       -70%
                                          920113   920228   920415   920603   920721   920904   921022   921209   930127   930316   930503       930618   930805   930922




Figure 1. A Comparison of the Value-Weighted Raw or Abnormal Returns during the HSA Event Period from January 13, 1992 to
September 29, 1993 for the Stock Market and a Sample of 111 Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Stocks
                                20%




                                 0%




                               -20%




                               -40%
                                                                                                                                      Quartile 2



                               -60%




  Cumulative Abnormal Return
                                                                                                                                      Quartile 1



                                                                                                                                      Quartile 3
                               -80%



                                                                                                                                      Quartile 4
                               -100%
                                   920113   920228   920415   920603   920721   920904   921022   921209   930127   930316   930503      930618    930805   930922




Figure 2. – Value-weighted Cumulative Abnormal Returns during the HSA Event Period from January 13, 1992 to September 29,
       1993 for 111 Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Stocks Sorted by R&D-to-Assets into Quartiles
                               30%


                               20%
                                                                                                                                Quartile 2
                               10%


                                0%

                                                                                                                                Quartile 1
                               -10%


                               -20%


                               -30%                                                                                              Quartile 3


                               -40%




  Cumulative Abnormal Return
                               -50%


                               -60%


                               -70%                                                                                                  Quartile 4


                               -80%
                                  930930   931116   940104   940218   940408   940526   940714   940830   941017   941202   950120       950309   950426   950613




Figure 3. Value-weighted Cumulative Abnormal Returns after the HSA Event Period from September 30, 1993 to June 20, 1995 for
the Stock Market and a Sample of 111 Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Stocks Sorted by R&D-to-Assets into Quartiles
