                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        BARGAINING POWER IN MARRIAGE:
                EARNINGS, WAGE RATES AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTION

                                             Robert A. Pollak

                                          Working Paper 11239
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11239


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the session on Bargaining in Families at the AEA meetings
in Philadelphia, 7-9 January 2005. An even earlier version of this material, together with an analysis of the
role of joint taxation in family bargaining, was presented at the CESifo workshop on Taxation and the Family
in Venice, 24-26 July 2003, and will be published as Pollak [2005]. I am grateful to Saku Aura, Paula
England, Elisabeth Gugl, and Joanne Spitz for helpful comments and to the John D. and Catherine T.
MacArthur Foundation for their support. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Robert A. Pollak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bargaining Power in Marriage: Earnings, Wage Rates and Household Production
Robert A. Pollak
NBER Working Paper No. 11239
March 2005
JEL No. D1, J1, J2

                                           ABSTRACT

What determines bargaining power in marriage? This paper argues that wage rates, not earnings,
determine well-being at the threat point and, hence, determine bargaining power. Observed earnings
at the bargaining equilibrium may differ from earnings at the threat point because hours allocated
to market work at the bargaining solution may differ from hours allocated to market work at the
threat point. In the divorce threat model, for example, a wife who does not work for pay while
married might do so following a divorce; hence, her bargaining power would be related to her wage
rate, not to her earnings while married. More generally, a spouse whose earnings are high because
he or she chooses to allocate more hours to market work, and correspondingly less to household
production and leisure, does not have more bargaining power. But a spouse whose earnings are high
because of a high wage rate does have more bargaining power. Household production has received
little attention in the family bargaining literature. The output of household production is analogous
to earnings, and a spouse's productivity in household production is analogous to his or her wage rate.
Thus, in a bargaining model with household production, a spouse's productivity in home production
is a source of bargaining power.

Robert A. Pollak
Department of Economics
Washington University
205 Eliot Hall
Campus Box 1208
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pollak@wustl.edu
                                          1. Introduction

       What determines bargaining power in marriage?           This paper examines the roles of

nonlabor income, earnings, wage rates, household production, and productivity in household

production.

       Nonlabor income has played a crucial role in testing the traditional "unitary model" of the

family and, for this reason, has received more attention in the bargaining literature than

warranted by its importance in family budgets. In the unitary model, married couples maximize

a family utility function subject to a family budget constraint. The unitary model implies that

husbands and wives "pool" their nonlabor income: that is, a couple's expenditure pattern depends

on their total nonlabor income, but not on the fractions of this total controlled by the wife and by

the husband. This implication is testable. Empirical evidence shows that couples' expenditure

patterns depend not only on their total nonlabor income but also on the fractions controlled by

each spouse. This evidence has been crucial in undermining economists' commitment to the

traditional unitary model.

       Bargaining models explain why control over nonlabor income affects couples'

expenditure patterns. Consider a cooperative Nash bargaining model, which is the dominant

model in the family bargaining literature. In a Nash bargaining model each spouse's well-being

in the cooperative equilibrium is an increasing function of his or her well-being at the "threat

point." In virtually all bargaining models of marriage, an increase in a spouse's nonlabor income

increases his or her well-being at the threat point and, hence, increases that spouse's well-being at

the cooperative equilibrium. Thus, we can identify a spouse's "bargaining power" with his or her

well-being at the threat point.


                                                                                                   3
       The specification of the threat point differs from one bargaining model to another. For

example, in divorce threat models the threat point is the well-being of the spouses in the event of

divorce, while in separate spheres models the threat point is the spouses' well-being in a

noncooperative equilibrium within marriage. In both divorce threat and separate spheres models,

however, an increase in nonlabor income implies an increase in well-being at the threat point

and, hence, an increase in bargaining power.

       Unlike the connection between nonlabor income and bargaining power, which is clear

and certain, the connection between earnings and bargaining power is opaque and ambiguous.

Those who treat earnings as an indicator of bargaining power typically make two mistakes.

First, they assume that earnings at the observed cooperative equilibrium are a good proxy for

earnings at the unobserved threat point. Second, they assume that earnings at the threat point are

an indicator of well-being at the threat point.

       Wage rates, not earnings, determine well-being at the threat point and, hence, determine

bargaining power. A spouse whose earnings are high because he or she chooses to allocate more

hours to market work, and correspondingly less hours to household production and leisure, does

not have more bargaining power. But a spouse whose earnings are high because of a high wage

rate does have more bargaining power.

       The logic of this analysis applies to household production as well. The household

production model postulates that households "combine time and market goods to produce more

basic commodities that directly enter their utility functions" (Becker [1965]). The commodities

that are produced within the household are analogous to earnings, while a spouse's productivity




                                                                                                 4
in household production is analogous to a wage rate.1 Thus, a spouse who produces more

commodities because he or she allocates more hours to home production, and correspondingly

less hours to market work and leisure, does not have more bargaining power. But a spouse who

produces more commodities because he or she is highly productive does have more bargaining

power.

         Section 2 discusses both unitary and bargaining models of intrafamily allocation. I begin

with the Nash bargaining model, which is the solidly-entrenched incumbent in the family

bargaining literature. The tractability of the Nash bargaining model is an important advantage,

but its assumption that bargaining necessarily leads to a Pareto-efficient outcome is a serious

drawback. Some alternative models drawn from noncooperative game theory do not impose

Pareto efficiency. Section 3 discusses the meaning of "bargaining power" in Nash bargaining

models and in other models of intrafamily allocation. Section 4 is a brief conclusion.

                                            2. Intrafamily Allocation

         Economists' traditional models of family behavior are "unitary" -- families are assumed to

maximize a utility function subject to a budget constraint. Samuelson [1956], in a throw-away

section in his classic paper on "Social Indifference Curves," identified the problem with unitary

models. The "Dr. Jekyll and Mrs. Jekyll" problem, as Samuelson called it, arises because

individuals within families have preferences, and aggregating individuals' preferences into

family preferences is a social choice problem subject to the difficulties identified and analyzed

by Arrow [1950, 1951].



1
  As I explain in section 3.3, this analogy is imperfect because productivity in household production is typically a
function of time and other inputs allocated to household production, while the wage rate is typically assumed to be
independent of the time allocated to market work.
                                                                                                                       5
        Intrafamily allocation models can be grouped into four classes, some containing

numerous subclasses. The first class consists of three models proposed by Gary Becker, two of

which imply that families behave as if they were maximizing a family utility function subject to

a family budget constraint. The second class contains Chiappori's "collective model" and its

generalizations. Chiappori assumes that family behavior is efficient, but he does not assume that

the family maximizes a utility function, nor does he specify a particular model of family

bargaining. The third class consists of cooperative bargaining models. Following the pioneering

work of Manser and Brown [1980] and of McElroy and Horney [1981] in the early 1980s,

cooperative bargaining models have come to play a central role in the analysis of family

behavior. The fourth and final class, noncooperative bargaining models, are playing an

increasing role in family economics; unlike cooperative bargaining models, noncooperative

bargaining models accommodate the possibility that at least some families sometimes behave

inefficiently.

                          2.1. Becker's Models of Intrafamily Allocation

        Becker's Treatise on the Family [1981; enlarged ed, 1991] offers three distinct models of

intrafamily allocation; I provide an abbreviated discussion here and an extended discussion in

Pollak [2003]. In Becker's altruist model, one family member -- characterized in Pollak [1988]

as the "husband-father-dictator-patriarch" -- maximizes his utility subject to the family's resource

constraint and to the participation constraint that no family member be worse off than he or she

would be outside the family. Becker assumes that the altruist derives some utility from the

utility of other family members, so maximizing the altruist's utility need not drive other family

members to their reservation utility levels. The altruist model is observationally equivalent to an


                                                                                                    6
"ultimatum game" in which the altruist is the proposer who can confront other family members

with take-it-or-leave-it choices.

       Becker's analysis of the marriage market rests on an entirely different model of

intrafamily allocation. Becker's marriage market model assumes that prospective spouses can

make binding agreements regarding allocation within marriage. Thus, allocation within marriage

implements agreements made in the marriage market, leaving no scope for bargaining within

marriage. The standard "individual rationality" assumption implies that no prospective spouse

would agree to accept less than he or she would receive in the next best marriage. These two

assumptions rule out bargaining within marriage, and imply that allocation within marriage is

determined in the marriage market, either by competition or by bargaining between prospective

spouses. If Becker's marriage market contains a large number of men and women; if men and

women meet prospective spouses with high frequency; and if the marriage market is dense in the

sense that (i) for each man, there are many similar men and (ii) for each woman, there are many

similar women; then competition rather than bargaining in the marriage market determines

intrafamily allocation.

       Becker's third model assumes that intrafamily allocation is efficient but does not specify a

particular model of intrafamily allocation. This Coasian efficiency assumption is especially

powerful in conjunction with additional assumptions (e.g., transferrable utility) that allow the

separation of household production from consumption. Together, these assumptions enable

Becker to analyze household production independently of intrafamily allocation.




                                                                                                   7
                                 2.2. Chiappori's Collective Model

       Chiappori's collective model, Chiappori [1988, 1992], characterizes intrafamily allocation

by a single-valued, Pareto-efficient "sharing rule" that is assumed to satisfy certain regularity

conditions. The sharing rule can be regarded as the reduced form of an unspecified bargaining

model. As such, it provides a convenient device for bracketing the discussion of intrafamily

allocation in order to focus on other issues. For example, Lundberg and Pollak [2003] use the

sharing rule in this way in their discussion of the two-earner couple location problem and Pezzin,

Pollak, and Schone [2004] use it in their discussion of the provision of long-term care by adult

children for disabled elderly parents. In both cases, intrafamily allocation is modeled as a two-

stage game in which the second-stage subgame is not specified, but whose solution is described

by a single-valued Pareto-efficient sharing rule.

       The assumption that family behavior can be characterized by a Pareto-efficient sharing

rule, although it has important advantages, has two significant limitations. First, because the

collective model does not specify a particular bargaining model or class of bargaining models, it

offers no guidance for choosing which variables to include in the sharing rule as determinants of

bargaining power. Second, as Lundberg and Pollak [2003] argue, unless family members can

make binding agreements, the assumption that bargaining outcomes are efficient is implausible

for major decisions that affect future bargaining power.

                               2.3. Cooperative Bargaining Models

       Cooperative bargaining models in general, and the Nash bargaining model in particular,

have become the standard tool for analyzing intrafamily allocation. I begin with a version of the

Nash bargaining model with three components: (i) a feasible set in the utility space, (ii)


                                                                                                    8
reservation utilities for each family member, and (iii) a "threat point" that reflects family

members' bargaining power. In the original Nash bargaining model, Nash [1950], the

reservation utilities and the threat point coincide. In virtually all bargaining models of marriage,

reservation utilities are assumed to correspond to divorce. If the reservation utility constraints

are not binding, then modified Nash bargaining implies an allocation that maximizes the product

of the gains to cooperation, measured in utility, subject to the family's resource constraint. More

precisely, the Nash product function is given by: N = (Uh - U*h) (Uw - U*w), where Uh and Uw

denote the utilities of the husband and wife and (U*h, U*w) is the threat point. Figure 1

illustrates the Nash bargaining model when the reservation utility constraints are not binding.

                                    FIGURE 1 GOES ABOUT HERE

        In the bargaining models of marriage originally proposed by Manser and Brown [1980]

and by McElroy and Horney [1981] the threat point and the reservation utilities coincide with

each other and correspond to the utility of divorce. Thus, the threat point in these models is

external to the marriage. In contrast, in the "separate spheres" model of Lundberg and Pollak

[1993], the threat point is internal to the marriage and corresponds to a "noncooperative

marriage." Lundberg and Pollak model the noncooperative marriage as a voluntary contribution

game in which spouses allocate some of their resources to provide household public goods.2

Bergstrom [1996] characterizes the noncooperative marriage as "harsh words and burnt toast."

        Compared with divorce threat models, separate spheres models have two advantages.

First, even in societies that allow divorce, the threat of divorce may not be credible: everyday

issues such as which television program to watch and what to have for dinner seem unlikely to


2
  Woolley [1988] appears to have been first to use a noncooperative Cournot-Nash equilibrium within marriage as
the threat point in a bargaining model.
                                                                                                                  9
be resolved by divorce threat bargaining. Second, in some societies that allow divorce, it is so

rare that it is implausible that the threat of divorce is a primary determinant of allocation within

marriage. For example, according to Stone [1990, Table 13.1], even after the 1857 Divorce Act

which substantially liberalized divorce law in England and Wales, the number of divorces per

year remained under 1000 until the First World War.3

        In a society that forbids divorce, the divorce threat model provides no insight into

allocation in marriage. In a society in which couples have limited access to divorce, such as

England and Wales before the First World War, the divorce threat model provides very limited

insight into allocation in marriage. Even in a society in which divorce is readily available and

the divorce threat model describes allocation in many marriages, alternative models may provide

a better description of allocation in other marriages.

        Bargaining models of marriage have emphasized Nash bargaining and neglected other

cooperative bargaining models and solution concepts. For example, although Manser and Brown

considered both the Nash and the Kalai-Smorodinsky [1975] bargaining solutions, subsequent

work on bargaining in families has virtually ignored Kalai-Smorodinsky. Gugl [2004] provides

an interesting exception, considering both the Nash and Kalai-Smorodinsky bargaining solutions.

Her work suggests that the difficulty of doing comparative statics with Kalai-Smorodinsky may

account for its eclipse by the Nash bargaining solution. The generalized Nash bargaining

solution -- a solution concept that does not impose Nash's symmetry axiom -- has also received




3
The population of England and Wales in 1911, three years before the First World War, was approximately 36
million.

                                                                                                            10
little attention.4 The core, despite its prominence in game theory, has received almost no

attention as a solution concept in the economics of the family, perhaps because it does not yield a

unique solution in two-person games.5

                                 2.4. Noncooperative Bargaining Models

        Noncooperative bargaining models assume that family members are restricted to self-

enforcing agreements -- agreements that self-interested family members would choose to

implement. Cooperative bargaining models, in contrast, assume that all agreements are

enforceable and thus place no restrictions on the agreements that family members can reach.

Cooperative models assume that bargaining always leads to Pareto-efficient outcomes and,

hence, cooperative models can shed no light on the conditions that lead to efficiency. Indeed, the

most serious drawback of cooperative bargaining models is their inability to investigate the

conditions that determine whether bargaining will lead to efficient outcomes. Noncooperative

bargaining models, because they can generate inefficient as well as efficient outcomes, enable us

to investigate efficiency.

        The threshold difficulty in using noncooperative game theory to model family

interactions is the absence of formal rules. In contrast to tightly-structured interactions such as

auctions or alternating-offer games, family bargaining exemplifies the class of "...complex,

loosely-structured social interaction," a phrase I have borrowed from Shubik [1989]. Shubik's

concern is the general problem of using noncooperative game theory to model interactions that



4
  Nash's axioms are Pareto efficiency, invariance to linear transformation of individuals' von Neumann-Morgenstern
utility functions, symmetry (i.e., interchanging the labels on the players has no effect on the solution), and a
contraction consistency condition.
5
  A further difficulty with the core is that in games with more than two players it may be empty.


                                                                                                               11
lack formal structure, not the specific problem of modeling family interactions. Shubik's point is

that we can avoid the need to specify the rules by modeling complex, loosely-structured social

interactions as cooperative games. A major objection to using cooperative game theory to

sidestep the difficulty of specifying the rules of the game -- an objection Shubik ignores -- is that

cooperative game theory assumes Pareto efficiency.

       Noncooperative game theory also leads to difficulties. The threshold difficulty is

specifying family interactions as a particular game from the lengthy menu offered by

noncooperative game theory. One-shot games are familiar and easy to analyze: some have only

inefficient equilibria, others have only efficient equilibria, and still others have both inefficient

and efficient equilibria. Multiple equilibria raise the issue of equilibrium selection. But apart

from illustrating these well-known possibilities, one-shot games teach us little about ongoing

family interactions.

       Repeated games -- games in which the same "stage game" is played over and over again -

- are more promising. The folk theorem asserts that if the players are sufficiently patient, then all

feasible, individually-rational allocations are subgame perfect equilibria of the repeated game.

That is, repeated games typically have very large solution sets and, if players are sufficiently

patient, such games have many Pareto-efficient equilibria as well as many Pareto-inefficient

equilibria. Thus, unless we are willing to tolerate very large solution sets, equilibrium selection

becomes the crucial issue. If we accept the Coasian assumption that bargaining leads to Pareto-

efficient outcomes and if we assume that the Pareto-efficient equilibrium is unique, we are close

to Chiappori's single-valued, Pareto-efficient sharing rule. Alternatively, we might argue that

cooperative bargaining models provide a framework for analyzing which efficient outcome will


                                                                                                        12
be selected. But even this does not argue for a particular solution concept such as the Nash

bargaining solution. In the context of bargaining in marriage, Lundberg and Pollak [1994]

consider a repeated game in a stationary environment -- the voluntary contribution game is the

stage game which is played over and over. For many everyday issues -- which television

program to watch, what to have for dinner -- repeated games provide plausible models.

Repeated games, however, do not provide satisfactory models for major issues whose resolution

will affect future bargaining power.

       For big, up-front decisions that affect future bargaining power, two-stage models are both

plausible and tractable. For example, Lundberg and Pollak [2003] analyze the "two-earner

couple location game." The first stage determines whether the couple remains together and, if

they do, determines their location; the second stage determines allocation within marriage. This

second-stage allocation is assumed to be "conditionally efficient," that is, efficient given the

location determined in the first stage. Distribution in the second stage depends on bargaining

power, and bargaining power depends on the location chosen in the first stage. The crucial

assumption is that at the first stage family members cannot commit themselves to refrain from

exploiting bargaining advantages they gain from the first-stage decision. Lundberg and Pollak

show that, when the spouses cannot make binding commitments, the first-stage decision may be

an inefficient location or an inefficient divorce.

       Two-stage games are not necessarily two period games. For example, the two-earner

couple location game analyzed by Lundberg and Pollak consists of a first-stage noncooperative

game that, for some first-stage moves, leads to a repeated game. More specifically, the repeated

game arises if the husband and wife decide to remain together, either at the original location or at


                                                                                                   13
a new location. Although the second-stage game can be interpreted as the reduced form of a

repeated game, Lundberg and Pollak finesse the specification of the second-stage game by

assuming that it has a unique, Pareto-efficient solution and invoking a Chiappori sharing rule.

       Two-stage games are also analyzed by Konrad and Lommerud [2000], by Lundberg

[2002], and by Pezzin, Pollak, and Schone [2004]. In Konrad and Lommerud, potential spouses

overinvest in education at first stage to gain a bargaining advantage in the second stage.

Lundberg [2002] analyzes a game in which earnings in the first stage determine bargaining

power in the second. In the context of bargaining in families, in contrast to bargaining in

marriage, Pezzin, Pollak, and Schone [2004] model interactions among adult children who

bargain about caring for a disabled elderly parent. The first stage determines living

arrangements (e.g., which child coresides with the parent, or whether the parent lives in a nursing

home). The second stage determines intrafamily transfers. Pezzin, Pollak, and Schone assume it

is common knowledge that the second-stage allocation is conditionally Pareto efficient (i.e.,

Pareto efficient given the living arrangement determined in the first stage). Even with this

assumption, however, the equilibrium of the two-stage game need not be Pareto efficient: the

living arrangement is a big up-front decision that affects future bargaining power (e.g., of the

child who lives with the parent vis-à-vis the other children), and the children cannot (or will not)

make binding agreements. For example, if the child who coresides with the disabled elderly

parent will be disadvantaged in future bargaining with her siblings, then no child may be willing

to co-reside with the parent. As a result, the parent may move into a nursing home, even though

she and all of the children would prefer that she live with one of the children with all of the other

children making side payments to support that living arrangement. In the absence of binding


                                                                                                   14
agreements, however, coresidence with an adult child may not be an equilibrium -- indeed, the

nursing home may be the unique equilibrium of the two-stage game even though it is Pareto

inefficient.

           Three examples illustrate the wide range of potential applications of two-stage games

when binding agreements are not feasible and big up-front decisions affect future bargaining

power. (i) Human capital investments, whether made before or during marriage, increase wage

rates and thus affect bargaining power within marriage. Under a wide range of assumptions, this

can lead to inefficient investment in human capital. (ii) Marriage itself is a big, up-front decision

that affects future bargaining power. Unless we follow Becker's marriage market model and

assume that prospective spouses can make binding agreements regarding allocation within

marriage, inefficient matching or inefficient nonmatching may occur in the marriage market

equilibrium. Lundberg and Pollak [1993] analyze a simple marriage-market model that

illustrates this possibility. (iii) Fertility is also a big, up-front decision that affects future

bargaining power. A husband's promise to share equally in child care is unenforceable and,

recognizing this, a couple may have fewer children than both spouses would prefer.

           In dynamic games, actions in each period affect bargaining power in subsequent periods.6

Thus, two-stage games are the simplest dynamic games.7 In repeated games, actions in one

period have no effect on bargaining power in subsequent periods, so repeated games are not

dynamic games. A human capital example clarifies the distinction between two-stage games and

other dynamic games. A dynamic game is required to model the continuing effect of on-the-job

skill accumulation on wage rates and future bargaining power. A two-stage game adequately


6
    Aura [2003] and Lich-Tyler [2003] analyze family bargaining as a dynamic game.
7
    We treat games that take the form of a noncooperative game followed by a repeated game as two-stage games.
                                                                                                                 15
models the once-and-for-all "sheepskin" effect of a college degree on future wage rates and

bargaining power.

                                       3. Bargaining Power

       To operationalize bargaining models requires specifying the empirical counterpart of

"bargaining power." For example, in the Nash bargaining model we must specify the variables

that determine the threat point. This section discusses three important components of bargaining

power: exogenous nonlabor income, wage rates, and productivity in household production.

                                    3.1. Exogenous Nonlabor Income

       The family bargaining literature has emphasized nonlabor income far beyond its

importance in family budgets because of its importance in testing the unitary model. The key

insight is that maximizing a family utility function subject to a family budget constraint implies

that all family nonlabor income is pooled: lump-sum transfers between spouses that leave a

couple's total nonlabor income unchanged have no effect on expenditure patterns or, more

generally, on behavior. Tests of the hypothesis that married couples pool their nonlabor income

have provided compelling evidence against the unitary model.

       The earliest attempts to test the unitary model were not based on pooling, but emerged

from traditional demand analysis and were based on the Slutsky conditions. Because the Slutsky

conditions are restrictions on the partial derivatives of demand functions, tests based on Slutsky

conditions depend critically on functional form specification. Hence, any rejection of the unitary

model can be attributed to misspecification of the functional form of the demand system rather

than to the failure of the unitary model. Revealed preference tests avoid this difficulty because

they do not require the specification of a particular functional form, but revealed preference tests


                                                                                                 16
lack statistical power.

       Recent attempts to test the unitary model have focused on the pooling of nonlabor

income. For example, using Brazilian data, Thomas [1990] found that children did better in

terms of mortality and morbidity when their mothers controlled a larger fraction of the couple's

nonlabor income. Schultz [1990] found that female labor supply in Malaysia was sensitive to

which spouse controlled nonlabor income. Both of these studies provide evidence that control

over nonlabor income affects behavior -- that is, both studies reject pooling and, hence, reject the

unitary model. The Achilles heel of these studies and others that use observed differences across

couples in control of nonlabor income is the assumption that nonlabor income is exogenous. For

example, if brighter or more energetic wives or wives with a greater labor force attachment are

likely to control a larger fraction of the couple's nonlabor income, then the test is confounded. A

controlled experiment providing additional resources to husbands in some families and to wives

in others would avoid these difficulties. In the absence of controlled experiments, we turn first to

a thought experiment and then to a natural experiment.

       Lundberg and Pollak [1993] describe a thought experiment that highlights the pooling

implications of the unitary model. They consider a child allowance -- a government transfer

payment to families with children that is independent of family earnings and income. The

thought experiment begins by assuming that initially the child allowance is paid to fathers in

two-parent families, and then considers the effect of a policy change that switches the payment to

mothers. The child allowance provides a transparent example of an exogenous change in control

over resources.

       Changes in the British child allowance program in the late 1970s provide a natural


                                                                                                 17
experiment.   The changes, introduced in stages over a two year period, had the effect of

transferring substantial resources from husbands to wives in two-parent families. Lundberg,

Pollak, and Wales [1997] analyze the effects of these changes on the expenditure patterns of

British households, and find that the changes caused a substantial and significant increase in

expenditure on children's clothing relative to men's clothing, and on women's clothing relative to

men's clothing. Ward-Batts [2003], using disaggregated expenditure data, found that the changes

caused a substantial and significant change in the composition of tobacco expenditure: an

increase in expenditure on cigarettes, and a decrease in expenditure on cigars and pipe tobacco,

which she calls "men's tobacco." The results of the changes in the British child allowance

provide evidence against the unitary model by providing convincing evidence against what

economists have come to call the "pooling hypothesis."

       Because the meaning of "pooling" differs across disciplines, economists, sociologists,

and taxation experts sometimes misunderstand one another.          For economists pooling is a

property of demand functions or demand systems. In nonunitary models, we can write a couple's

demand for a particular good as a function of the nonlabor income of the husband, the nonlabor

income of the wife, and a vector of wages and other prices. Unitary models are a special case of

nonunitary models in which the husband's nonlabor income and the wife's nonlabor income enter

only as a sum, so that a transfer of a dollar from the husband to the wife does not alter the

couple's expenditure pattern. Economists describe such couples as "pooling" their nonlabor

income.

       For sociologists pooling refers to the way couples manage their money -- for example,

whether a couple has one bank account (theirs), two bank accounts (his and hers), or three bank


                                                                                               18
accounts (his, hers, and theirs). Sociologists such as Pahl [1983], Treas [1993] and Zelizer

[1989, 1994] find considerable heterogeneity in families' money management practices. It is

unclear, however, whether economists should regard such practices as independent variables that

can be used to explain differences in expenditure patterns, or as dependent variables that require

explanation. Woolley [2003] discusses money management practices and related issues and

provides references to the literature.

       For academic lawyers who study taxation, pooling refers to the equitable sharing of

resources within marriage.      McIntyre [1980, 1997] uses the assumption that spouses pool

resources in this sense as a rationale for joint taxation (i.e., taxing couples on their total earnings

rather than taxing the husband on his earnings and the wife on her earnings). McIntyre's

argument appears to require interpreting pooling to mean equal sharing of money income and

ignoring leisure, household production, and economies of scale in consumption. Under these

assumptions, horizonal equity requires equal taxes for a two-earner couple in which both spouses

earn $X and a one-earner couple in which one spouse earns $2X and the other $0.

       Nonlabor income provides a good starting point for discussing the components of

bargaining power, but earnings is a far larger fraction of the resources of most couples.

Nonlabor income and earnings play very different roles in family bargaining, and the differences

are not econometric quibbles. I now turn to the roles of earnings and wage rates.

                                         3.2. Earnings and Wage Rates

       Although some researchers have attempted to test the pooling hypothesis using measures




                                                                                                    19
of income that include earnings, such tests are inappropriate for two reasons.8 Both reasons are

best illustrated in a Nash bargaining framework where the threat point is a noncooperative

equilibrium, either divorce or a noncooperative equilibrium within marriage. First, observed

earnings -- that is, earnings at the observed cooperative equilibrium -- are a poor proxy for

earnings at the unobserved noncooperative equilibrium. The difficulty is exemplified by the

stay-at-home spouse.          Suppose, for example, a wife does not work in the market at the

cooperative equilibrium, but would work in the market at the noncooperative equilibrium; her

lack of earnings at the cooperative equilibrium fails to predict her earnings at the noncooperative

equilibrium. Hence, even if bargaining power depended on earnings at the noncooperative

equilibrium, the wife's earnings at the cooperative equilibrium would fail to predict her

bargaining power.9

         Second, bargaining power does not depend on earnings at the noncooperative

equilibrium. In the standard neoclassical model, earnings are the product of hours worked and

an individual's wage rate. A decision to allocate more hours to market work (as opposed to

leisure) at the noncooperative equilibrium has no determinate effect on bargaining power, but a

higher wage rate does translate into greater bargaining power.

         Two further complications require acknowledgment. First, if an individual's hourly wage

rate depends on the number of hours worked, then well-being at the threat point and, hence,

bargaining power, depend on the entire wage schedule. That is, suppose an individual's earnings,

Y, are a function of hours worked in the market, tm: Y = Y(tm). If the earnings function shifts


8
 Lundberg and Pollak [1996] discuss some of these attempts and provide references to the literature.
9
 Instead of using the hourly wage rate, we could equally well use "full-time earnings" -- that is, the hourly wage rate
multiplied by a standard number of hours (e.g., 40). But using full earnings is essentially equivalent to using the
hourly wage rate and very different from using actual earnings.
                                                                                                                    20
out, so that earnings are greater for every choice of hours worked, Y*(tm) $ Y(tm), for all tm > 0,

then well-being at the threat point and, hence, bargaining power will be greater.10 Second, if

workers acquire human capital on the job, so that hours worked today affect the wage rate

tomorrow or, more generally, affect the wage schedule tomorrow, then these human capital

effects require a dynamic model. Both of these complications have analogues in the context of

household production.

         The original divorce threat models of Manser-Brown and McElroy-Horney emphasized

the role of market wage rates.               The more recent literature on intrafamily allocation has

emphasized nonlabor income and child allowances, both as expositional devices and because

they lead to empirical tests of the unitary model. An unintended and unfortunate byproduct of

this emphasis on nonlabor income and child allowances has been neglect of wage rates and

confusion about their role. Having dispelled that confusion, I now consider a richer class of

household models in which individuals allocate their time among market work, leisure, and

household production.

                                            3.3. Household Production

         Household production affects the threat point in divorce threat and separate spheres

bargaining through different mechanisms. In both divorce threat and separate spheres bargaining

models, however, once the threat point is specified the calculation of the cooperative equilibrium

and the corresponding allocation of goods and time is conceptually straightforward.




10
  Neoclassical economics focuses on the special case in which Y(tm) = w tm, where the individual's market wage
rate, w, is independent of hours worked. In the neoclassical case, the market wage rate is a sufficient statistic for the
earnings function and an increase in w implies that Y*(tm) $ Y(tm) for all tm > 0.
                                                                                                                      21
       In divorce threat bargaining, the threat point depends on the technologies available to the

spouses individually following divorce. Thus, a spouse who has low productivity in household

production (e.g., because he or she lacks the requisite human capital) will be disadvantaged in

bargaining within marriage unless (a) the goods market offers satisfactory substitutes for the

outputs of household production or (b) the economic and psychological costs of divorce are

small, and remarriage offers the prospect of readily finding a new spouse whose household

production skills replace those of the previous spouse.

       In separate spheres bargaining, the threat point depends on the technologies available to

the spouses in a noncooperative marriage. Separate spheres bargaining is more complicated than

the divorce threat bargaining in two respects. First, in separate spheres bargaining to calculate

the threat point requires specifying not only the technology available to the couple in a

noncooperative marriage but also specifying the noncooperative game they play.             In that

noncooperative game, each spouse presumably allocates his or her own time among three

activities, {market labor, household production, and leisure}, and allocates his or her own

resources, {nonlabor income + earnings}, between private consumption and expenditures on

inputs into household production. Second, in separate spheres bargaining the reservation utilities

and the threat point are distinct.    The reservation utilities require no additional discussion

because they coincide with the threat point in divorce threat bargaining.

       Greater productivity in household production gives an individual greater bargaining

power. More precisely, an outward shift in the production frontier, indicating that greater output

is obtainable from every combination of inputs, implies greater bargaining power. An outward


                                                                                                22
shift in the production frontier is analogous to an outward shift in the earnings function.

       The repeated game in which spouse play a one-shot household production game over and

over as a stage game allows punishment much as the repeated voluntary contribution game of

Lundberg and Pollak [1994] allows punishment. Embedding household production in a repeated

game provides a Coasian rationale for the belief that family bargaining leads to efficient

outcomes. The folk theorem guarantees that, provided family members are sufficiently patient,

every individually-rational allocation is a subgame perfect equilibrium.         The folk theorem,

however, does not address the problem of equilibrium selection or imply that the equilibrium

will be Pareto efficient. The assumption that the stage game remains unchanged from one period

to the next is also problematic. Time allocation in one period may affect human capital in

subsequent periods: just as the wage rate may depend on past labor supply, productivity in

household production may depend on past household production.

       Punishment always raises issues of credibility. At the threat point in separate spheres

bargaining with household production, each spouse is likely to hold back inputs into the

production of household public goods and private goods that enter the utility function of the

other spouse. Such behavior is analogous to holding back voluntary contributions to the

purchase of household public goods in separate spheres bargaining without household

production. The scope for a "slow down" or "strike" in the production of private goods that enter

the utility function of the other spouse may be greater than in the production of household public

goods because the spouse producing the public goods also consumes them. That is, withholding

private goods that benefit only the other spouse (e.g., toast) is more credible than withholding

public goods (e.g., neglecting the child). Nancy Folbre [2001], in her book, The Invisible Heart,


                                                                                                   23
makes this point, suggesting that a spouse who engages in "caring labor" may become a

"prisoner of love" unwilling to withhold household production.11

                                                   4. Conclusion

         The recent family bargaining literature has emphasized exogenous nonlabor income (e.g.,

child allowances) because it provides a straightforward test of the unitary model. But that

literature has deemphasized, indeed virtually ignored, earnings and wage rates. In this paper I

have argued that bargaining power depends not on earnings but on wage rates. I have also

argued that, in a bargaining model with household production, bargaining power depends on a

spouse's productivity in household production.

         To illustrate why wages affect bargaining power and earnings do not, consider a

cooperative Nash bargaining model such as the divorce threat or separate spheres model. There

are two difficulties with earnings. First, earnings at the observed cooperative equilibrium may be

a poor indicator of earnings at the unobserved threat point. Earnings, after all, are the product of

hours allocated to market work and a wage rate, and hours allocated to market work at the threat

point may differ from hours allocated to market work at the cooperative equilibrium. For

example, in the divorce threat model, a stay-at-home spouse may seek market work. Second,

earnings at the threat point may be a poor indicator of well-being at the threat point which, after

all, is the basis of bargaining power.

         Behavioral economics does provide a rationale for recognizing a role for actual earnings

in family bargaining, either instead of or in addition to wage rates. Perhaps spouses maintain

"mental accounts" that relate consumption by each spouse to that spouse's actual earnings. Such

11
   Medea, to revenge herself on her husband Jason, killed their joint children, but she is generally regarded as a poor
role model.
                                                                                                                   24
mental accounts might be associated with and reinforced by money management systems in

which spouses maintain separate credit cards or bank accounts.12 If actual earnings affect

bargaining power, then the allocation of time to market work presumably reflects the effect of

earnings on bargaining power as well as the familiar trade-offs among market work, leisure, and

household production.        Thus, whatever the behavioral economics case for treating actual

earnings as a determinant of bargaining power, analytical simplicity is not among them.

         The role of household production in family bargaining has received little attention. I

have argued that household production is analogous to earnings, and a spouse's productivity in

household production is analogous to a wage rate. In separate spheres bargaining, household

production raises one additional complication: the credibility of the threat to refuse to engage in

household production. As Folbre [2001] suggests, spouses who are "prisoners of love" may be

unwilling to withhold the household public and private goods they produce from a spouse or a

child.




12
 On behavioral economics, see Kahneman [2003]; on mental accounting, see Thaler [1985, 1999]; on money
management, see Woolley [2003].
                                                                                                         25
References

Arrow, Kenneth J., "A Difficulty in the Concept of Social Welfare," Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 58, No. 4, (August 1950), 328-346.

Arrow, Kenneth J., Social Choice and Individual Values, Cowles Foundation for Research in
Economics, New York: Wiley, 1st ed., 1951, 2nd ed., 1963.

Aura, Saku, "Uncommitted Couples: Some Efficiency and Policy Implications of Marital
Bargaining," paper presented at ASSA Meetings, January 2003.

Becker, Gary S., "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal, Vol. 75, No. 299,
(September 1965), 493-517.

Becker, Gary S., Treatise on the Family, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981; Enlarged
edition, 1991.

Bergstrom, Theodore C., "Economics in a Family Way," Journal of Economic Literature," Vol.
XXIV, No. 4, (December 1996), 1903-1934.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, "Rational Household Labor Supply," Econometrica, Vol. 56, No. 1,
(January 1988), 63-89.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, "Collective Labor Supply and Welfare," Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 100, No. 3, (June 1992), 437-467.

Folbre, Nancy, The Invisible Heart: Economics and Family Values, New York: The New Press,
2001.

Gugl, Elisabeth, "Joint vs. Individual Taxation and Intrafamily Distribution," University of
Victoria Working Paper, January 2004.

Kahneman, Daniel, "Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral Economics,"
American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 5, (December 2003), 1449-1475.

Kalai, Ehud and Meir Smorodinsky, "Other Solutions to Nash's Bargaining Problem,"
Econometrica, Vol. 43, No. 3, (May 1975), 513-518.

Konrad, Kai A. and Kjell Erik Lommerud, "The Bargaining Family Revisited," Canadian
Journal of Economics, Vol. 33, No. 2, (May 2000), 471-487.

Lich-Tyler, Stephen, "Negotiations and Love Songs: The Dynamics of Bargained Household
Decisions," paper presented at ASSA Meetings, January 2003.


                                                                                               26
Lundberg, Shelly, "Limits to Specialization: Family Policy and Economic Efficiency," June
2002. IZA Conference

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage Market,"
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 101, No. 6, (December 1993), 988-1010.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Noncooperative Bargaining Models of Marriage,"
American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 2, (May 1994), 132-137.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Bargaining and Distribution in Marriage," Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 10, No. 4, (Fall 1996), 139-158.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Efficiency in Marriage," Review of Economics of the
Household, Vol. 1, No. 3, (September 2003), 153-168.

Lundberg, Shelly, Robert A. Pollak, and Terence J. Wales, "Do Husbands and Wives Pool Their
Resources? Evidence from the U.K. Child Benefit," Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 32, No.
3, (Summer 1997), 463-480.

Manser, Marilyn and Murray Brown, "Marriage and Household Decision-Making: A Bargaining
Analysis," International Economic Review, Vol. 21, No. 1, (February 1980), 31-44.

McElroy, Marjorie B. and Mary J. Horney, "Nash-Bargained Household Decisions: Toward a
Generalization of the Theory of Demand," International Economic Review, Vol. 22, No. 2, (June
1981), 333-349.

McIntyre, Michael J., "Individual Filing in the Personal Income Tax: Prolegomena to Future
Discussion," North Carolina Law Review, Vol. 58, No. 3, (1980), 469-489.

McIntyre, Michael J., Review of Taxing Women by Edward J. McCaffery, National Tax Journal,
Vol. 50, No. 4, (December 1997), 819-826.

Nash, John F., "The Bargaining Problem," Econometrica, Vol 18, No. 1, (April 1950), 155-162.

Pahl, Jan, "The Allocation of Money and the Structuring of Inequality within Marriage,"
Sociological Review, Vol 31, No. 2, (May 1983), 237-262.

Pezzin, Liliana, Robert A. Pollak, and Barbara Steinberg Schone, "Long-Term Care and Family
Decision Making," January, 2004.

Pollak, Robert A., "Tied Transfers and Paternalistic Preferences," American Economic Review,
Vol. 78, No. 2, (May, 1988), 240-244.



                                                                                               27
Pollak, Robert A., "Gary Becker's Contributions to Family and Household Economics," Review
of Economics of the Household, Vol. 1, No 1-2, (January-April 2003), 111-141.

Pollak, Robert A. "Family Bargaining and Taxes: A Prolegomenon to the Analysis of Joint
Taxation," January 2005. Forthcoming in Taxation and the Family, CESifo Economic Studies,
MIT Press.

Samuelson, Paul A., "Social Indifference Curves," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 70, No.
1, (February 1956), 1-22.

Schultz, T. Paul, "Testing the Neoclassical Model of Family Labor Supply and Fertility,"
Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 25, No. 4, (Fall 1990), 599-634.

Shubik, Martin, "Cooperative Games," in The New Palgrave, Game Theory, ed. by John Eatwell,
Murray Milgate, and Peter Newman, New York: W.W. Norton, 1989, 103-107.

Stone, Lawrence, Road to Divorce: England 1530-1987, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990.

Thaler, Richard H., "Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice," Marketing Science, Vol. 4, No.
3, (Summer 1985), 199-214.

Thaler, Richard H., "Mental Accounting Matters," Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, Vol.
12, No. 3, (September 1999), 183-206.

Thomas, Duncan, "Intra-Household Resource Allocation: An Inferential Approach," Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 25, No.4, (Fall 1990), 635-664.

Treas, Judith, "Money in the Bank: Transaction Costs and the Economic Organization of
Marriage," American Sociological Review, 58, No. 5, (October 1993), 723-734.

Ward-Batts, Jennifer, "Out of the Wallet and into the Purse: Using Micro Data to Test Income
Pooling," Claremont Colleges Working Paper 2003-10, May 2003.

Woolley, Frances, "A Non-cooperative Model of Family Decision Making," Manuscript.
London: London School of Economics, 1988.

Woolley, Frances, "Control over Money in Marriage," in Marriage and the Economy: Theory
and Evidence from Advanced Industrial Societies, ed. by Shoshana Grossbard-Shechtman,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003, 105-128.

Zelizer, Viviana A., "The Social Meaning of Money: 'Special Monies'," American Journal of
Sociology, Vol. 95, No. 2, (September 1989), 342-377.

Zelizer, Viviana A. The Social Meaning of Money, New York: Basic Books, 1994.

                                                                                               28
               Figure 1

      The Nash Bargaining Solution



Uw




A




U*w



      U*h                    B       Uh
