NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHOOSING ELECTORAL RULES:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM US CITIES
Philippe Aghion
Alberto Alesina
Francesco Trebbi
Working Paper 11236
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11236
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

We thank Matilde Bombardini, Gary Chamberlain, John Friedman, Edward Glaeser, Richard Holden,
Caroline Hoxby, David Lucca, James Robinson, and John Wallis for useful comments and suggestions. We
are grateful to participants of the CIAR meetings in Toronto and seminars at Harvard University. Dilyan
Donchev, Laura Serban, and Radu Tatucu provided excellent research assistance. Trebbi acknowledges
financial support from the Social Sciences Research Council. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Philppe Aghion, Alberto Alesina, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Choosing Electoral Rules: Theory and Evidence from US Cities
Philppe Aghion, Alberto Alesina, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 11236
March 2005
JEL No. H0
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the choice of electoral rules, in particular, the question of minority representation.
Majorities tend to disenfranchise minorities through strategic manipulation of electoral rules. With
the aim of explaining changes in electoral rules adopted by US cities (particularly in the South), we
show why majorities tend to adopt "winner-take-all" city-wide rules (at-large elections) in response
to an increase in the size of the minority when the minority they are facing is relatively small. In this
case, for the majority it is more effective to leverage on its sheer size instead of risking to concede
representation to voters from minority-elected districts. However, as the minority becomes larger
(closer to a fifty-fifty split), the possibility of losing the whole city induces the majority to prefer
minority votes to be confined in minority-packed districts. Single-member district rules serve this
purpose. We show empirical results consistent with these implications of the model.
Philippe Aghion
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street
London, WC1 6BT
and NBER
p_aghion@harvard.edu
Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Francesco Trebbi
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
trebbi@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

One of the key questions in political economy is how diﬀerent electoral laws aﬀect
policy outcomes. In order to provide an answer several authors take electoral
rules as exogenous or predetermined and use them as explanatory variables for
various policies1 . However, the rules of government are themselves endogenous
variables chosen at constitutional tables. Ideally, rules should be chosen behind
a ”veil of ignorance”, that is decisions should be taken as if one ignored the
identity of those benefiting from the choices themselves. In reality, however, in
most constitutional tables the veil of ignorance is ”see-through”, in the sense
that there is some knowledge of who would benefit under alternative rules and
of what policy outcomes those rules would produce. Therefore the ”exogeneity”
of constitutions can be called into question.
Our focus is on the question of minority representation, with special reference to the nature of electoral districts and alternative rules for the choice of
representatives. We have two goals in mind, one more general and one more
specific. The first and more general point is to make progress in modeling institutional choice as endogenous. On the first point, most of the literature is
normative, i.e. it discusses how electoral laws should be chosen, starting from
the work of Hayek (1960) and Buchanan and Tullock (1962)2 . A normative
approach usually characterizes works in Political Science, with some notable exception such as Riker (1986) and several essays in Colomer (2004).Economists
have only recently began to pay attention to the endogeneity of political insti1A

classic study is Lijphart (1994). The most recent contributions on the eﬀects of insti-

tutions (taken as exogenous or prestermined) on economic policies are Persson and Tabellini
(2003) for a sample of democratic countries and Baqir (2003) for a cross-section of US cities.
They build upon a vast literature on the eﬀects of alternative forms of government on policies,
a literature that we do not review here. We refer the reader to Persson and Tabellini (2003) for
a survey of the cross-country literature. On US states see in particular Alt and Lowry (1994),
Poterba (1994), and Bohn and Inman (1996) amongst others. Mulligan and Sala I Martin
(2004) oﬀer a dissenting view, namely that policies are determined by lobbying pressure that
are not much aﬀected by institutional forms of government.
2 For a survey of the literature on Constitutional Theory, see Voigt (1997).

2

tutions from a positive, as opposed to a normative perspective. Alesina and
Glaeser (2004) for instance discuss how the choice of alternative electoral rules,
which are themselves associated with diﬀerent policy choices over the welfare
state, are indeed the result of strategic constitutional choices. The present paper is a study in ”positive constitutional theory”, with a special emphasis on
the question of how majorities select electoral rules to partially disenfranchise
minorities.
The second and more specific goal of our paper is to analyze the evolution
of minority representation in American cities. We examine empirical evidence
drawn from US municipalities, that adopt two types of electoral rules: either a
single-member district (also called single-district) or at-large rules (or a combination of the two). Councilmen elected by district compete for one or, more
rarely, multiple seats in each geographic subdivision (district or ward) of the
city. Diﬀerently, in at-large elections, oﬃcials are elected in multi-member plurality districts, voters have as many votes as there are council seats, and the
only multi-member district is identified by the city itself. The basic ”winnertake-all” logic holds for both rules. For given council size, the diﬀerence between
single-district and at-large rules is due to geographic clustering of groups of voters with homogeneous preferences3 . We show why majorities at the constitution
design stage tend to adopt at-large electoral rules in response to an increase in
the size of the minority when the minority they are facing is relatively small.
In this case, as the size of the minority increases, for the majority it becomes
more eﬀective to leverage on its sheer size instead of risking to concede representation to voters from minority-elected districts. However, as the minority
becomes larger (closer to a fifty-fifty split), the possibility of losing the whole
city induces the majority to prefer minority votes to be confined in minoritypacked districts. Single-member district electoral rules serve this purpose. This
shift in the preferences of the (constitutional) majority, first towards an at-large
3 See

Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor (1999) for a detailed account of racial segregation patterns

in the United States. The assumption of geographic clustering will be maintained throughout
the paper.

3

electoral rule, and then towards a single-district rule as the size of the minority
increases, is precisely what the data show.
When discussing local politics in the US, one is immediately thrown into the
area of race relations.4 In fact, it is quite compelling to identify the ”majority”
with the whites and the ”minority” with racial ”minorities” (perfect choice of
words!). The evolution of voting rights, especially in the South, allows us to
test implications of the model regarding the endogenous institutional choice.
Until the mid-sixties, before the civil right movement and the Voting Rights
Act of 1965, racial minorities (mainly blacks) in the South were essentially
disenfranchised by a battery of regulations that, although color-blind on paper,
were in practice directed to severely limit black vote. In this context the choice
of electoral rules and forms of governments had not much to do with a white
majorities’ attempt at controlling black influence on city governments, since
blacks did not vote. After the mid-sixties, due to novel federal Voting Rights
legislation, black influence increased substantially in terms of their ability to
elect representatives. Indeed, after the Voting Rights Act of 1965, we show that
decisions about electoral rules reflected changes in the relative size of the white
and black populations in a way consistent with our model.
Manipulation of electoral rules is not a prerogative exclusive of American
cities. Alexander (2005, p.211) describes in detail the 1947 Gaullist manipulations of electoral rules in France. In the Paris area where the Gaullist alliance
was weak they introduced proportional representation, in rural areas where the
alliance was strong, they introduced plurality rule. Krenzer (2005, p.229) describes strategic manipulation in Germany. One could go on.
Our empirical results on (within-)US cities variation are quite consistent
with previous findings on the cross-country evidence in Alesina, Aghion, and
Trebbi (2004). In both cases constitutional choices do not seem to occur behind
4 For

discussion of the importance of race in American local politics, see for instance Hacker

(1992), Huckfeld and Kohfeld (1989) and Wilson (1996) amongst many others. Alesina, Baqir,
and Hoxby (2004) argue that even the design and number of local jurisdictions in the US
depends upon race relations.

4

a veil of ignorance in the sense that, as the minority increases its size and/or its
political rights, the majority tries to make constitutional changes that limit the
protection of minorities, while behind a veil of ignorance exactly the opposite
should happen (as one would take into account the likelihood of belonging to a
minority).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 illustrates the model. Section
3 describes the institutional context of US city government to which the model
is applied and our data. Section 4 illustrates our empirical results. The last
section concludes.

2

The model

The structure of the model is as follows. There are two groups of voters, whites
(W ) and blacks (B). We denote the initial relative size of group B as π > 0, so
that the size of group W is (1 − π). The whites are, initially at least, a majority
(we restrict π < 1/2) and they are those who choose the electoral rule for the
city (in short, we call the choice of the electoral rule: "constitution"). This is
because either the blacks are disenfranchised at the time of the constitutional
choice or they were outvoted at the constitutional table. The white choose
a constitution with an eye on maximizing their expected utility arising from
a policy outcome which will be decided by an elected council. In order to
make the problem interesting there is uncertainty in the relative share of the W
and B voters, so that the constitutional writers cannot be sure ex ante of the
composition of the council. In other words, there is a shock to the composition
of the electorate between the writing of the constitution and the choice of the
policy. Moreover, the composition of the council depends on the electoral rule
chosen. This modeling strategy builds upon the incomplete social contracts
ideas of Aghion and Bolton (2003). We now present the model more formally.

5

2.1

Agents and expected utility

We first present a basic version of the model. We discuss extensions later. The
population is equally spread over three electoral districts, numbered 1, 2, 3, and
with M individuals in each. Each district chooses a seat in the council. The
initial number of B and W voters in each district are given by Bi and Wi for
i = 1, 2, 3. We assume that:
W1

= M;

W2

1
= W3 = ( + z)M,
2

where z is a real number between −1/4 and 1/2. In other words, the parameter
z will allow us to make comparative statics on the initial number of B voters in
districts 2 and 3. Note that this range of variation for z insures that 0 < π < 1/2.
Thus, z parametrizes the size of the ex ante W majority. Indeed, we have:
X
i

Wi = (2 + 2z)M = 3(1 − π)M,

therefore:
z=

1 − 3π
.
2

(1)

Thus, initially the W voters have a majority and they can choose the electoral
rule (constitution). Given the electoral rule, a three-member council is elected.
The council decides the policy. After the constitution is chosen, there is a shock
to the composition of voters in the city, to which the electoral rule cannot be
made contingent upon.
More formally, we suppose that during the interim phase an exogenously
given mass LN of new B voters joins the polity5 , with LN = αM where α is a
random variable uniformly distributed between 0 and an upper bound α ∈ (1, 2).
Moreover, we assume that the newcomers are not evenly distributed across the
5 One

could assume that mobility across cities is aﬀected by the nature of charter rules,

electoral systems, and the identity of the mayor, an issue which we do not tackle in the model.
See Epple and Romer (1991) for a classic treatment of endogenous mobility in a political
economy model. However, empirical evidence of Tiebout sorting is scant. See Strumpf and
Oberholzer-Gee (2002). We discuss this eﬀect in Section 4.

6

three districts, but that instead one half of them joins district 2, whereas the
remaining half goes to district 3 (thus, no new B voter enters district 1).
Diﬀerent compositions of the council imply diﬀerent policies. We assume
that with no W representative and three B representatives the implemented
policy is most unfavorable to the W group which obtains a low utility level r.
With one W representative the W group ends up with the status quo utility
level u0 ; with two or three representatives the W group achieves its maximum
utility level r. (Think of r as being the result of the B group’s most favorable
policy being implemented, and of r as being the outcome of the W group’s most
favorable policy).
This last assumption is twofold. First, note that the W group is advantaged: with two W councilmen the W bliss point obtains and with only one
W councilman the status quo obtains. This may capture either one of two
empirical features, or both. One is some inherent advantage of W ; another,
more interestingly, may capture the functioning of a council in the presence of
a W mayor. For the moment we are ignoring the role of the mayor and the
specifics of the form of government, but we will return to this below. Second,
the assumption implies that the size of the B majority matters for the policy
outcome; a two-one B majority implies a diﬀerent policy from a three-zero B
majority6 . In any event the specifics of the policy outcome formulation do not
aﬀect the qualitative nature of the results, as we discuss below.
The ex ante expected utility of a W constitution writer is then equal to:
Uw = (1 − p0 − p1 )r + p1 u0 + p0 r,
where pj denotes the probability that j council representatives belong to the
W − group at the interim stage. The choice of electoral rules (the constitution)
chosen by the W voters will determine the value of p0 and p1 .
Summarizing, the timing of events is as follows:
1. Electoral rules are chosen by the W group.
6 See

Alesina and Rosenthal (1995) for an extensive discussion of this assumption and a

comparison with alternatives.

7

2. The interim distribution of preferences is realized, which translates into a
majority of the council.
3. Payoﬀs realize.

2.2

Electoral rules and ex ante expected utilities

With an eye to the case of American cities, we now study two alternative electoral rules. The first one, referred to as representation "at-large" (AL), allocates
all seats to the party that wins more than fifty percent of the votes. The second rule, referred to as ”single-member district rule” (SD), requires that each
candidate runs in a particular district and obtains a majority of votes within
the district in order to be elected.
Given our above assumptions as to the group composition of the three districts, we immediately have that p1 = 0 under the AL rule, whereas p0 = 0
under the SD rule. We now compute the expected ex ante utilities of constitution writers in the W − group, respectively under these two electoral rules.
2.2.1

Expected utility under the at-large rule

Under the AL rule all council seats will go to the B group if and only if:
B1 + B2 + B3 + LN > W1 + W2 + W3 .
Then, the ex ante expected utility of constitution writers in the W − group can
be simply expressed as
AL
= p0 r + (1 − p0 )r = r − p0 ∆,
UW

where ∆ = r − r is the constitution writers’ loss from losing the majority, and
p0 = Pr(B1 + B2 + B3 + LN > W1 + W2 + W3 ) = Pr(α > 1 + 4z)
is the probability of losing the majority. Substituting for z as a function of π
using (1), we have:

µ
¶
3
p0 = max 1 − (1 − 2π), 0 ,
α
8

(2)

so that the ex ante expected loss of constitution writers in the W − group under
the AL rule, is equal to:
LAL
W = p0 ∆ = (1 −

3
(1 − 2π))+ ∆,
α

where we use the notation
x+ = max{x, 0}.
2.2.2

Ex ante expected utility under the single-member district rule

Under the SD rule council seats are allocated at the district level. The probability of the B− group winning a majority of two seats is equal to the probability
that districts 2 and 3 be won by the B group. Given that the same fraction of
new B voters are allocated to these two districts, which already start with the
same fraction of B voters ex ante, and given that there is a fixed majority of W
voters in district 1, we immediately get that the B− group obtains a two-seat
majority with probability:
1
p1 = Pr(B3 + αM > W3 ) = p1 = Pr(α > 4z)
2
or, after substituting for z using (1):
p1 = (1 −

2
(1 − 3π)+ )+ .
α

(3)

We can then re-express the ex ante utility of constitution writers in the W −
group under the SD rule, as:
SD
UW
= p1 u0 + (1 − p1 )r = r − p1 δ,

where δ = r − u0 is the constitution writers’ loss from losing the majority, and
therefore
LSD
W = p1 δ = (1 −

1
(1 − 3π)+ )+ δ,
α(1 − f )

is the expected loss of constitution writers in the W − group under the SD rule.

9

2.3

The size of minorities and the choice of electoral rule

Ex ante at the constitutional stage, individuals in the W − group will simply
choose the electoral rule that minimizes the expected loss LW . Our main theoretical prediction can be summarized intuitively as follows. If initially the W
group commands a very large majority of votes, the constitution writers do not
fear they can lose the majority under either rule, thus they are indiﬀerent between the two rules. As the relative size of the B−group increases, however,
at some point it becomes preferable for constitution writers in the W −group
to move to AL in order to reduce the power of the B− voters in districts 2,
3 by confronting them with the whole pool of W − voters, including those in
district 1. Doing so allows the W −group to preserve its majority as long as
the fraction of B−individuals does not become too large. Finally, when the
fraction of B−voters becomes suﬃciently large that it becomes impossible to
prevent their becoming the new majority, moving back to the SD rule allows
the W −group to limit their losses: indeed, as π becomes suﬃciently close to
1/2 , the risk of losing all three districts and of thereby incurring the large loss
∆, makes the W −group prefer a SD system which guarantees them at least
1 seat in the council -and thereby limits their loss to δ << ∆- given that in
this case B−voters are restricted to commanding districts 2 and 3 only. Not
surprisingly, this latter motive from moving back from AL to SD disappears if
the loss incurred by the minority is independent of the size of the majority, that
is if ∆ = δ.
More formally, we can state:
Proposition 1 (a) Both rules AL and SD involve no utility loss to W −group
individuals when π ∈ (0, 13 − α6 ); (b) if

cut-oﬀ point π
b ∈ ( 13 − α6 , 13 ) such that
and

∆
δ

> (1 − α1 )−1 , then there exists a unique

1 α
SD
LAL
,π
b)
W < LW if π ∈ ( −
3
6
1
SD
π, );
LAL
W > LW if π ∈ (b
2
10

(c) if ∆ = δ, then for all π ∈ ( 13 − α6 , 12 ) the AL rule dominates the SD rule.
Proof. Part (a) is straightforward. Part (b) follows from the fact that: (i)
we have
1 α 1 α
SD
LAL
, − );
W = 0 < LW if π ∈ ( −
3
6 2
6
(ii) for π = 13 , we have:
LAL
W = (1 −

1
)∆ > LSD
W = δ;
α

1
α 1
SD
(iii) LAL
W and LW are both linear increasing in π for π ∈ ( 2 − 6 , 3 ); hence the

existence of a unique cut-oﬀ π
b ∈ ( 12 − α6 , 13 ) with the desired properties. Finally,

to establish part (c), let us reason by contradiction and suppose that for some
π between 0 and 12 , we have

AL
LSD
W < LW

or equivalently since here ∆ = δ,
(1 −

2
3
(1 − 3π)+ )+ < (1 − (1 − 2π))+ .
α
α

(4)

First, this cannot be the case for π ∈ ( 13 , 12 ) since in that case (4) becomes:
1 < (1 −

3
(1 − 2π))+ ,
α

which is impossible if π < 1/2. Second, suppose that (4) holds for some π < 1/3.
It cannot be the case that both expressions are positive, otherwise we would have
(1 −

3
2
(1 − 3π)) < (1 − (1 − 2π)),
α
α

or equivalently
2
3
<1−
α
α
which is impossible; and it cannot be the case that
1−

(1 −

2
3
(1 − 3π)) < 0 < (1 − (1 − 2π))
α
α

as this would imply that
1 α
1 α
− < − ,
2
6
3
6
again an impossibility. This establishes the proposition.
This proposition can be generalized to the case of N districts. We do so in
the following extensions.
11

3

Extensions

3.1

The N district case

Suppose the polity’s population is equally spread over the electoral districts, now
numbered 1, ..., N , and with M individuals in each. We maintain the assumption
that the same two types of (ex ante) districts exist:
W1
W2

= M;
1
= ( + z)M ;
2

where again W1 districts are ”all-W ” while W2 districts are an identical mix of
W and B. We also maintain the assumption that district design is exogenously
given as we focus on the electoral rule for given district design. There are N1
districts like W1 , therefore N2 = N − N1 . For N2 < N1 , it is clear that under
SD the W group cannot be blocked, no matter how large the group αM of B
voters is. We exclude this instance and focus on the more interesting case where
N2 > N1 .
Now consider the blocking probabilities under AL and under SD respectively. Blocking under AL will occur whenever the ex post total number of
W −voters, N M (1 − π) , is larger than the ex post total number of B−voters,
αM + N M π. Thus, nothing fundamental changes from the three-districts case,
and we now have:
p0 =

µ
¶+
N
1 − (1 − 2π)
.
α

Turning to the SD rule, let us first assume that each district j of the N2
districts receives a fraction

1
N2

of new comers, all of them belonging to the B−

group. In this case the probability that the B−group wins a majority of seats
on the council, is simply equal to the probability that the B−group acquire a
majority of votes in any of the W2 districts, namely
pN2 = Pr(

αM
1
1
+ ( − z)M > ( + z)M ),
N2
2
2

that is
pN2 = Pr(α > 2zN2 ),
12

where now
z=

1
N
.
−π
2
N2

We then obtain:
pN2 = (1 −

N2
N + +
) ) .
(1 − 2π
α
N2

Once again, the constitution writers will choose the electoral rule that involves the lowest ex ante expected loss, where
LAL
W = p0 ∆ = (1 −

N
(1 − 2π))+ ∆
α

and
LSD
W = (1 −

N2
N + +
) ) δ(N2 ),
(1 − 2π
α
N2

where it is reasonable to assume that the loss δ(N2 ) to the W −group if the
B−group acquires majority of seats on the council, is non-decreasing in the
number of seats N2 the B−group holds in that case.
Assume
α < N2 .
SD
Then for π very close to zero, both LAL
W and LW are equal to zero, so that

constitution writers are indiﬀerent between the two electoral rules. Next, note
that for all π < 1/2, we have
(1 −

N
N2
N
)),
(1 − 2π)) < (1 −
(1 − 2π
α
α
N2

(5)

AL
so that as π increases away from zero, LSD
W becomes positive before LW does;

this in turn implies that for intermediate values of π, constitution writers in
the W −group will prefer the AL rule to the SD rule, as the former dilutes the
B−votes among the whole W −population. Finally, as π becomes arbitrarily

close to 12 , the expected loss LAL
W under AL converges to ∆, whereas the expected
N−N2
loss LSD
W converges to (1 +
α )δ(N2 ). It then follows that the W −group will

choose the SD rule whenever(1 +

N −N2
α )δ(N2 )

< ∆.

We thus obtain a straightforward generalization of Proposition 1 to the more
general case where the number of districts N is arbitrary. Note however that
13

condition (5) becomes hard to satisfy when the number N2 of W2 districts
becomes arbitrarily close to N.

3.2

Uneven distribution of newcomers

In order to gain intuition in this and the following subsections, let us return
to the three-district model employed in Section 2.1. In our analysis so far we
assumed that equal numbers of new B− group voters would choose to locate
in districts 2 and 3. However, our reasoning and result extend to the case
where a fraction f > 1/2 of new comers choose say district 2 whereas the
remaining fraction (1 − f ) chooses district 3. This obviously does not aﬀect
the probability p0 of the B− group winning all seats under the AL rule since
that probability depends only upon the overall fraction of B− individuals in the
overall population. Thus, we still have:
p0 = (1 −

3
(1 − 2π))+ ,
α

so that the ex ante expected loss from the AL rule, is still equal to:
LAL
W = (1 −

3
(1 − 2π))+ ∆.
α

However, the B− group will only win a majority of seats on the council if it
wins a majority of votes in districts 2 and 3, which in turn requires that it win
a majority of votes in district 3, which, of the two districts, is the harder one to
win. Therefore,
p1 = Pr(B3 + (1 − f )αM > W3 ) = Pr(α >

2z
).
1−f

This yields:
p1 = (1 −

1
(1 − 3π)+ )+
α(1 − f )

with a corresponding ex ante expected loss under SD rule equal to:
LSD
W = (1 −

1
(1 − 3π)+ )+ δ.
α(1 − f )

Assume
α < min{3,
14

1
}
1−f

so that p0 = p1 = 0 for π suﬃciently small.
Then, it is easy to show that Proposition 1 continues to holds in its entirety
when
1−f ≥

1
3

(6)

since in that case,
1−

3
1
(1 − 2π) < 1 −
(1 − 3π)
α
α(1 − f )

which implies that, as π increases from zero, p1 becomes positive before p0 does.
On the other hand, one can easily show that when (6) is violated, then the AL
rule is always weakly dominated by the SD rule when

3.3

∆
δ

is suﬃciently large.

Gerrymandering

An important practical consideration is that the design of district may itself
be endogenous. In particular, the constitution writing majority may be try to
"gerrymander" the districts in order to minimize the number of representative
elected by the minority. The possibility of unconstrained gerrymandering obviously makes the SD rule preferable to a majority writing the constitution. As we
will discuss below, empirically this is an important consideration for American
cities. How advantageous for the white majority it is to choose gerrymandering
with a SD system versus an AL system, depends also on the nature of residential segregation in the city7 . This is of course a well know issue in the vast
literature on gerrymandering.8
In the context of the above model, the constitution writers in the W − group
will simply choose to maximize f, that is, to pack as many new B−voters
as possible in one district, say district 2, in order to prevent them from ever
acquiring a majority of votes in the council. In the absence of any constraints
on gerrymandering (one such constraint for example would be that diﬀerentials
7 Cole

(1976) for instance emphasizes how at large elections, while in principle should favor

minorities which are spread out within city boundaries, in fact do not.
8 On gerrymandering, see in particular Cox and Katz (2002) and Friedman and Holden
(2005).

15

between the number of voters across the various districts cannot be larger than
a given percentage), the constitution writers will simply choose f equal to one,
in which case SD will always dominates AL. However, if various constraints
on gerrymandering limits the maximum f that can be achieved by constitution
writers in the W −group, then as we just saw in the previous subsection the
conclusions of Proposition 1 will again hold as long as f < 2/3.
Finally, it is interesting to note that the possibility of gerrymandering could
give rise to the same pattern with AL dominating for intermediate values of π
and SL dominating for high values of π, even when the loss incurred by the
W −group is independent of the size of the B−majority, that is, even when
∆ = δ. To see this, let us slightly modify our basic model by assuming that as
in Proposition1 by assuming that constitution writers in the W −group suﬀer
from having the B−group hold even one (minority) seat in the council. Then,
as the size π of the B−group increases from zero to 1/2, the W −group will first
choose the AL rule in order to dilute the B−voters among all W −voters as in
our previous analysis. But then, as π increases further, the only way to prevent
the B−group from winning a majority of seats is to move from AL to SD and
at the same time "gerrymander", that is pack all B−voters in one district.
Already without gerrymandering, the SD rule already allowed the W −group
to "waste" B−votes by preventing them from contaminating district 1. With
gerrymandering the wasting (or packing) eﬀect of SD is only reinforced: B−voters
cannot outnumber W −voters now in two districts instead of one in the absence
of gerrymandering. But the logic and predictions are basically the same with
and without gerrymandering.

3.4

Uniform distributions of voters across districts

Suppose the three districts are evenly aﬀected by any ex ante variation in the
size of the B population, namely:
Wi =

1
+ z, for i = 1, 2, 3,
2

16

we have
z=

1
− π,
2

and that new comers are also evenly distributed across the three districts. Then
the probabilities of the B−group winning under the AL and SD rules, are the
same and equal to:
p0 = (1 −

3
(1 − 2π))+ ,
α

and the ex ante expected loss of constitution writers under the two rules are
also the same equal to
L = p0 ∆.
This underlies the importance of the unevenness of the distribution of B
within the electoral area (the city) if we want to explain why local constitutions
shift from one rule to another as the relative influence of B− voters increases.
In particular, the well known pattern of segregation in American cities makes
this uniform distribution case not relevant.
Now, suppose that while ex ante B−voters are evenly distributed across the
three districts, ex post new comers migrate only to districts 2 and 3. In that
case, the probability of the B−group winning under the AL rule is still equal
to p0 , whereas their probability of winning under the SD rule is now given by
p1 = (1 −

2
(1 − 2π))+ .
α

But then it is easy to see that constitution writers in the W − group will never
prefer the SD rule for values of π close to
LSD
W (π =

1
2

since

1
1
) = p1 δ = δ < LAL
W (π = ) = p0 ∆ = ∆.
2
2

Given that
(1 −

3
2
(1 − 2π)) < (1 − (1 − 2π)),
α
α

for all π, as before as π increases away from zero, the ex ante expected loss
AL
LSD
W will become positive before LW does. Overall, as π increases from 0 to

1/2, constitution writers will first be indiﬀerent between the two rules, then

17

will prefer the AL rule because it dilutes B−votes, then may prefer the SD rule
because it reduces losses, but then eventually will always reverse to the AL rule.
As we shall see in the empirical analysis, this last reversal to the AL rule (which
is the one departure from Proposition 1) is not observed in our cross-city data.

3.5

Mayors and managers

Another dimension that diﬀerentiates between American cities, is the degree of
autonomy of the ”executive”. In a mayor-council system the executive is more
autonomous from the council. Therefore, it is more diﬃcult for the council to
influence the executive process relative to the council manager system. One
way of modelling this situation is to assume that the majority needed to block
the mayor is larger than the one needed to block a manager. An additional
variation involves the power of the mayors which is diﬀerent in strong mayors
versus weak mayor forms of governments, as discussed below.
Without a veil of ignorance, if the W majority always knew that it would
elect the mayor it would choose a more powerful mayor. But following the same
logic of above, this would not be necessarily the case if the W majority is slim
and there are unforeseeable shocks to the composition of the electorate. In the
empirical part we also briefly explore the choice between mayor council system
and manager council systems.

3.6

Mayors and councils

Our analysis and main conclusions in Proposition 1, remain unaﬀected if we
replace the timing described in Section 2.1 by one in which: (i) the constitution is chosen; (ii) the mayor is elected; (iii) shocks to the composition of the
electorate occur; (iv) the council is elected; (v) the policy is chosen. With the
W −group having an ex ante majority they would choose the mayor. As we
have discussed above, our choice of policy outcomes for given composition of
the council can capture this institutional structure. Note that the latter implies a non-simultaneous election of the mayor and the council, a feature that

18

characterizes a sizeable fraction of American cities9 .
What changes from Section 2.1 is that now, whenever the B− group obtains
a majority of seats on the council, it is their preferred policy which prevails
in equilibrium. This in turn implies that the loss incurred by the W −group
becomes independent of the electoral rule. But then, under the assumptions of
Proposition 1, with equal number of new B−voters in the two districts 2 and 3,
the W −group will always weakly prefer the AL rule since it dilutes B−voters
among the overall W −population whereas moving to the SD rule does no longer
limit losses to the W −group if they lose the majority. On the other hand, if
gerrymandering allows the W −group to pack all new B−voters in one district,
then the SD rule will always dominate as it prevents the B−group from ever
obtaining a majority of seats in the council.

4

Institutional setting and data

In our empirical investigation in the next sections, we shall focus on the main
prediction of our model, namely that an increase in the size of the minority
makes AL preferable over SD if initially the minority group (the B voters)
represents a suﬃciently small fraction of the overall population, whereas the
opposite is true if initially the minority group represents a suﬃciently large
fraction of the overall population. In other words, the preference of constitution
writers for AL over SD, increases and then decreases with the initial size of
the minority group.
With the aim of testing a (reduced form) model of endogenous choice of
checks and balances, Aghion, Alesina, and Trebbi (2004) employ data on a vast
cross-section of countries, including democracies and non-democracies. American cities oﬀer a potentially ”cleaner” sample for testing the hypothesis of constitutional endogeneity consistently. First of all, American cities are much more
similar to each other than a cross-section of countries ranging from advanced
9 See

Alesina and Rosenthal (1995) for a discussion of staggered elections or simultaneous

elections at the national level.

19

democracies to developing dictatorships. Moreover, US cities present enough
time-series variation to allow us to account for time-unvarying unobserved heterogeneity in the data, arguably a potential source of bias in cross-sectional
analysis. Second, the racial divide (mostly white/black historically, most recently Whites/Blacks/Asians/Hispanics) has been a prominent feature of the
institutional debate and political choice in US cities10 . Moreover, bloc-voting
within racial lines has empirical foundation. Third, the evolution of minority
”voting rights” and the Civil Rights movement in the sixties suggest a transformation of the nature of democratic institution in US cities. Before the Voting
Rights Act of 1965, African Americans in the South were largely disenfranchised, consequently the choice of electoral rules was rather irrelevant from a
race-relation point of view. From the mid-sixties onward white majorities had
to cope with black voters; therefore they had an incentive to adopt electoral
rules and forms of governments that minimized black influence. This episode
allows us additional robustness checks of our model of endogenous evolution
of electoral institutions. We begin with a brief review of the history of voting
rights in the South.

4.1

Legal and judicial interventions on voting in the United
States

There was no constitutional protection for voting and electoral participation in
the United States before the Civil War.11 African American individuals in state
of servitude were neither granted citizenship nor, consequently, voting rights.
After the war, during the Reconstruction (1867-1877), the Congress provided
such constitutional protection with the ratification of the 14th Amendment in
1868 (conferring citizenship to all persons born or naturalized in the United
States) and the 15th Amendment in 1870 (providing that the right of vote
1 0 US

cities are not the only example of local politics influenced by race relations. For a

discussion of electoral rules and racial politics in elections in India see Pande (2003).
1 1 We refer to the United States Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Voting Section
for further details and reference for this section.

20

should not be denied or abridged on the basis of race, color, or previous status
of servitude). The Enforcement Act (1870) and the Force Act (1871) ensured
additional legislative detail, among other things introducing federal oversight
over elections. Such measures eﬀectively induced an enlargement of the electoral
franchise to the black minority, both in the South and the rest of the country12 .
Around 1872 more than three hundred Southern black legislators were holding
elected oﬃces.
However, after the 1877 compromise, following the election of the republican Hayes, the demilitarization of the South and steadily up until 1910 with the
”Redemption”, Southern whites succeeded in reimposing pre-war political equilibria. The introduction of a series of legal procedures, color-blind on paper but
anti-black in practice, such as poll taxes, literacy tests, ”grandfather clauses”,
”understanding clauses”, vouchers of ”good character”, and disqualification for
crimes of ”moral turpitude” achieved the substantial disenfranchisement of the
black minorities in the South. In addition, white majorities extensively entertained the practice of ”white primaries”13 . By the early 1900’s the number of
1 2 All

voters were white male according to the Naturalization Law of 1790.

Only with the 19th Amendment to the Constitution, which became law in 1920, women
obtained the right to vote in all elections. Constitutional amendment proposals for the extension of the electoral franchise to women had begun in 1878 and were proposed in every
session of the Congress for the following 40 years. Some States already had laws enabling
women to vote before 1920. Examples are Utah, Colorado, Idaho, and Wyoming, the first
State in the Union allowing women to vote in 1890. The States of New York, Massachusetts,
New Hampshire, and New Jersey allowed women to vote at the end of the 18th century, but
between 1777 and 1807 they revoked those clauses.
Also Asian, Native American and Mexican individuals were not allowed to vote, not being
recognized as U.S. citizens. In 1924 Native Americans were granted citizenship and in 1948
the last state laws denying vote were overturned. Asians were able to obtain full citizenship
after the progressive overturning of the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 completed in 1952.
1 3 See Myrdal (1944) for a detailed account. According to Woodward (2002, p.85) ”the
state-wide Democratic primary was adopted in South Carolina in 1896, Arkansas in 1897,
Georgia in 1898, Florida and Tennessee in 1901, Alabama and Mississippi in 1902, Kentucky
and Texas in 1903, Louisiana in 1906, Oklahoma in 1907, Virginia in 1913, and North Carolina
in 1915.” Primaries were not open to racial minorities and were eﬀectively used to skim out

21

Southern black legislators was back to zero: an early exemplification of the endogeneity of political institutions to sudden shifts in the electoral franchise (see
Kousser, 1999). According to Woodward (2002) in Louisiana registered black
voters were 1,342 in 1904, down from a peak of 130,334 in 1896. This coincided with the appearance of extensive Jim Crow legislation at the State level
in the South. Until the mid-sixties the number of Southern black legislators
remained close to zero. This coincided with a seemingly marginal role played
by the Supreme Court in the active defense of the 15th Amendment.14
It was only form the mid 1960’s that the Supreme Court started an active
monitoring of electoral participation provisions and apportionment of state legislative districts. In Baker v. Carr, 369 US 186 (1962), the Court ruled against
malapportionment. In a series of cases (Wesberry v. Sanders, 376 US 1 (1964),
Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533 (1964), Fortson v. Dorsey, 379 U.S. 433 (1965))
the Court ruled in the direction of re-equilibrating the weight of rural and urban
votes, favoring urban minorities, that is blacks. At the same time the federal
government started playing a much active role as well. President Lyndon Johnson ratified the 24th Amendment of the Constitution15 (1964) and signed into
law both the Civil Rights Act in 1964 and the Voting Rights Act in 1965.
The goal of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 is to remove strong obstacles
in voting registration procedures for racial minorities. Section 2 of the Voting
Rights Act included a broad reassessment of the principles embedded in the 14th
and 15th Amendments. It deemed illegal the use of poll taxes, literacy tests, and
the requirement of fluency in English for voting eligibility. Section 5 introduced
black voters, hence the appellation ”white primaries”.
1 4 However, there were exceptions. In Guinn v. United States, 238 U.S. 347 (1915), the
Court ruled against a Oklahoma ”grandfather clauses” provision, in Smith v. Allwright,
321 U.S. 649 (1944), the Court ruled against Texas’ ”white primaries”, and in Gomillon v.
Lightfoot, 364 U.S. 339 (1960), the Supreme Court found unconstitutional the practice of
gerrymandering in the city of Tuskugee (Alabama).
1 5 The amendment outlawed the poll tax in federal elections. Virginia ratified the amendment in 1977, albeit the ratification process was completed on January 23, 1964 (by 38 States).
The amendment was ratified by North Carolina in 1989. The amendment was rejected by the
State of Mississippi (and not subsequently ratified) in 1962.

22

strict requirements of pre-clearance (by the District Court for the District of
Columbia or the U.S. Attorney General) of new voting procedures

16

. The bill

authorized federal supervision of black voters’ registration in Alabama, Georgia,
Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina (in 34 counties), South Carolina, and
Virginia (Woodward, 2002). In South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U.S. 301
(1966), the Supreme Court upheld the Constitutionality of the Act. In Allen
v. State Board of Elections, 393 U.S. 544 (1969) pre-clearance conditions were
specified for a series of ”tests or devices” of minority vote dilution, including
explicitly changes to at-large elections from single district elections.
As a consequence of the Voting Rights Act, the number of registered minority
voters as a fraction of voting age population doubled and in some cases tripled in
Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Virginia between 1965 and 1988
(Grofman, Handley and Niemi, 1992). Amy (2002) reports that ”the number of
black elected oﬃcials in the United States grew an average 16.7 percent a year
between 1970 and 1977, from 1469 to 4311” (p.129).

17

.

In the light of continuing racial polarization in 1970, 1975, and 1982 the
Congress introduced amendments to the Voting Rights Act extending Section
5 of 5, 7, and 25 years and addressing the removal of persistent obstacles to
eﬀective voting by the newly registered racial minorities (like gerrymandering, annexations, at-large elections, multi-member districts, and other ”structural changes” to prevent blacks from voting through electoral dilution). The
Supreme Court followed suit, for example in White v. Regester, 412 U.S. 755
1 6 Section

5 precisely indicates which political organizations are covered by the act through

identification of specific parameters. States fully covered under the 1975 renewal of the Voting
Rights Act are Alabama, Alalska, Arizona, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina,
Texas, and Virginia. California, Florida New York, North Carolina, and South Dakota are only
partially covered in specific counties and Michigan and New Hampshire in specific townships.
See Data Appendix for details.
1 7 In 1999 according to the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies the total number
of black elected oﬃcials was 5938 in the South (respectively 8936 in all U.S.), of which 340
were city mayors (resp. 450 nationwide), 2677 members of municipal governing bodies (resp.
3498 nationwide). There were no black senators in 1999 and 19 representatives form the South
(39 black representatives nationwide).

23

(1973) and, with respect to dilution associated with at-large elections, in Thornburg v. Gingles, 478 U.S. 30 (1986). During the 1980’s and 1990’s the federal
government and the Supreme Court tended to diverge more frequently with respect to aﬃrmative intervention in promoting minorities’ political enfranchisement (particularly, with respect to aﬃrmative gerrymandering).18
From this brief historical excursus, we need to remember two points germane
to our empirical analysis:
1) Until the mid-sixties white majorities did not have to worry about black
vote in the South; only with the Voting Act of 1965 blacks were really a political
block vote to reckon with.
2) The implementation by the Courts of the Voting Rights Act also took
up the issues of the choice of electoral rules, precisely to avoid choices (like at
large elections) that would have favored the white majority. Thus, any attempt
of the white majority to engage in the kind of strategic choices implied by our
theoretical model would have to face potential challenges from the Courts.

4.2

Data and summary statistics

This section briefly reviews the main variables employed in the empirical analysis. We refer the reader to the Data Appendix19 for details on variables definition, data construction and sources. We used two sets of data; one includes
1 8 In

1980 the Supreme Court imposed the requirement of proof of ”racial discriminatory

purpose” in vote dilution cases (Mobile v. Bolden, 446 U.S. 55, 1980). This was rectified by
a 1982 Congress Amendment, dispensing from such proof. The Supreme Court substantially
challenged ”aﬃrmative gerrymandering” in Shaw v. Reno, 509 U.S. 630 (1993) and Holden
v. Hall, 512 U.S. 874 (1994) among the others. Under President Bill Clinton the National
Voter Registration Act (also known popularly as the Motor Voter Act of 1993) aimed at
strongly promoting voter registration (for example, through the department of motor vehicles
structures, unemployment, and welfare bureaus). More recently the Help America Vote Act
of 2001 has shifted back to individual States most of the supervisory power over the quality
of electoral franchise. Voting Rights Acts renewal hearings are due in 2007.
1 9 Due to space limitations we produce the Data Appendix in a separate document, available
on request. Please refer to the authors’ webpages for a downloadable version of the Data
Appendix.

24

characteristics of city governments and their institutional details; the other includes demographic, economic, and geographic characteristics of US cities. We
collected information on US municipal governments characteristics for the period 1930-2000, at decade intervals, from the Form of Government Survey and
Municipal Year Book by the International City/County Management Association (ICMA) in Washington D.C. ICMA is a professional organization of city
managers and administrators publishing local government data since 1914 and
a well-recognized scholarly source. ICMA survey data have been employed in a
number of papers, including Baqir (2001), Sass and Pittman (2000), DeSantis
and Renner (1992) among the others. Data from 1980 onward are available in
electronic format; data before 1980 needed to be collected and entered from
hard copies. For this reason we decided to collect data before 1960 only for the
South, since it is in the South where the eﬀect of the Voting Rights Act is more
relevant and should show larger diﬀerences before and after the mid sixties.
From the various issues of the ICMA surveys we collected information on
electoral rules and forms of government for each municipality, including: council
size; number of district-awarded council seats; city form of government; number of councilmen belonging to diﬀerent racial groups currently sitting in the
council; mayor’s veto power over council resolutions; mayor’s vote restrictions in
council resolutions; mayor’s length of term in oﬃce; indicators of the presence of
referendum, initiative or recall. We then constructed two ”single district” variables: (i) SD, a dichotomous variable equal to 1 if all councilmen are elected
at large, 0 otherwise; (ii) y, continuously defined as the fraction of councilmen
elected in single districts. We also constructed two ”form of government” indexes increasing in the power of the executive. The first index, indicated as
F OG, takes the value of 1 for mayor-council, 0 for council-manager and -1 for
Commission or Representative Town Meeting or Town Meeting. The second
index, indicated as SIN D, is constructed as increasing function of provisions
strengthening the executive (like mayor-council and veto power) and decreasing
in provisions weakening the executive (for example, recall).20 With regard to
2 0 The

mayor-council form of government consists of an at-large elected mayor (the executive

25

electoral rules in 2001 about 65.9 percent of the cities in the sample presented
only at-large-elected councilmen, about 14.8 percent presented only districtelected councilmen. The remaining cities presented some combination of the
two types of rules, with councils consisting of a fraction of councilmen representing specific geographic areas and the others ”representing the whole city”.
From the decadal issues of the Bureau of the Census’ of Population we
collected information on total population, racial groups sizes, median income,
and geographic characteristics of Places and Minor Civil Divisions (MCD’s)21 .
From 1930 to 1970, the data available allow for a breakdown into three groups:
white, black, and other races (we did not distinguish between foreign-born or
native). From 1980 the Census allows for a more refined breakdown (in general
the breakdown includes at least Whites, Blacks, Hispanics, Asians, Pacific Islanders, and Native Americans22 ). Since our empirical analysis runs from the
thirties to the nineties, for consistency we used the three group break down
(White, Blacks, others) for the entire sample. Our variable of interest was the
size of non-whites (we also reproduced all our result using blacks instead of
non whites, with virtually no changes in the results). ICMA and Census data
were subsequently merged on the basis of geographic identifiers and FIPS codes
(unique identifiers) whenever available or matched by city name and individually
checked. Details on the procedure are available in the Data Appendix.
A final caveat. ICMA surveys present diﬀerent coverage depending on the
year. We review their representativeness in terms of population characteristics
vis-a-vis the corresponding entire Census population of places and MCD’s in
Appendix A. The bottom line is that sample of US cities collected by ICMA
branch) and a legislative branch, the council of councilmen (or aldermen), elected by ward,
at-large, or a mix of both rules. The mayor acts as chief executive oﬃcer of the city. Mayor’s
powers vis-a-vis the council vary within this typology of government. Typically we have two
variants, weak-mayor and strong-mayor..The council-manager form of government consists of
a legislative branch, the council, which selects and supervises a professional administrator, the
city manager. The manager is in charge of the implementation of the policy and day-to-day
municipal administration and can be removed or fired by the council at will.
2 1 Definitions and references in the Data Appendix.
2 2 See Data Appendix.

26

is representative of the total population of relatively large cities, above 2,500
inhabitants, and less representative of the full population of the Bureau of the
Census Places and Minor Civil Divisions (MCD’s). This is the reason why in
what follows, we always report results for the entire available sample and for
a subsample of cities above this threshold of 2,500; the results are in general
almost identical. We were also able to obtain the full lists of cities sampled from
ICMA for the last survey in year 2001 and we verified the absence any response
selection in the survey23 . In the Data Appendix we report summary statistics
for the key variables of interest for the sample of all US cities and for the sample
of Southern cities. We now proceed to an empirical test of our model.

5

Empirical results

5.1

The choice of electoral rules

Empirical Strategy - Our main theoretical prediction is that the preference of
constitution writers for at-large over single-district increases and then decreases
with the initial size of the minority group.
We report a test of this hypothesis in Table 1. The empirical strategy that
we employ in this table and in the majority of the following ones is to stick to a
simple, yet flexible, linear (in the coeﬃcients) parametric two-way panel model
in which we account for unobserved, time-invariant heterogeneity at the city
level and for time-specific eﬀects. Proposition 1 hypothesizes a non-monotonic,
U −shaped relationship between either SD or y and π, which provides intuitive
appeal to the choice of fitting a quadratic relationship between SD or y and
π 24 . For each city i in year t let us define the political variable of interest
yit (the fraction of councilmen elected by ward or district), the fraction of the
2 3 See

Appendix C.
simple non-parametric evidence is provided in what follows. A third-order poly-

2 4 Further,

nomial produced a very similar fit as the quadratic model we report. The main diﬀerence
recurred for high levels of π, where the race of the charter writers could be non-white. Higherorder polinomials produced a worse fit than the quadratic.

27

minorities25 , π it , a matrix of (k x 1) controls Xit and the two-way error as
uit = αi + δ t + ηit . We specify26 the following:
yit

2

0
= β 0 + π it β 1 + (πit ) β 2 + Xit
γ + αi + δ t + η it

(7)

for i = 1, ..., N and t = 1, ..., T .
Controlling for city-specific unobserved characteristics is relevant to our empirical strategy. Historical, geographical, and cultural conditions explain much
of the variation in political institutions at the city cross-sectional level (about 67
percent). However, such conditions are often diﬃcult to measure directly and
would bias, if omitted, any inference concerning the role of changes of racial
composition of the city in the choice of electoral rules. Employing within-city
variation allows us to account for such unobserved heterogeneity and estimate
consistently the vector (β 1 , β 2 ) . Time-specific eﬀects are similarly useful in accounting for across-the-board eﬀects, such as federal legislation, that again need
to be controlled for, especially in the post-1965 period27 when indeed legislation
was extremely active. We address the issue of serial correlation in the error
component η by relaxing the assumption of independence and clustering at the
city level. Conditional heteroskedasticity of unknown type is also accounted for.
Identification of (7) is also particularly relevant. The most likely source of
reverse causation aﬀecting (7) is endogenous sorting across municipalities driven
by more favorable electoral rules. Minority voters may move towards cities
with better chances of representation or white voters may move out of cities
with excess minority representation. Hence, Tiebout sorting would predict a
correlation between changes in city racial composition and in electoral rules of
the opposite sign to what predicted by our model. Specifically, suppose that
2 5 Notice

that the theoretical restriction π < 0.5 is satisfied in the data, as more than 90

percent of cities are below π = 0.361 for the whole sample of American cities and below
π = 0.433 for the South.
2 6 The same specification is also employed for SD. However in that case we assume a logistic
distribution of η.
2 7 Formal F-tests for this specification support the use of a two-way setup. Both groups of
fixed eﬀects are jointly significant in every specification.

28

a city changes its electoral rule in favor of white voters against black voters,
then the percentage of the latter should go down because of Tiebout sorting
(and possibly the white group should increase in number reducing the fraction
of blacks even further). Instead, we show below that, as the share of blacks
increases, electoral rules turn against them. In this light the estimates presented
below need to be interpreted as lower bounds of the eﬀects the theory predicts.
A final issue on the empirical strategy concerns the timing of the Voting
Rights Act. Table 1 is divided in two parts: for the period before and after the
Voting Rights Act of 1965.28 The first year for which complete survey data from
ICMA are available after 1965 on electoral rules (and forms of government) is
1967, which we take as the dividing line for pre- and post-Voting Rights Act
and we match to the 1970 Census data. The non-monotonic relation should
emerge only in case of an enfranchised minority. From the time of its introduction, the Voting Rights Act represented a sudden extension of the political
franchise to blacks. We employ such date as an informative source of variation
for institutional manipulation, particularly in Southern cities.
Results - The first four columns of Table 1 refer to the sample of Southern
cities29 . Column (1) shows the basic specification including all cities. Column
(2) focuses on cities above the 2,500 threshold (remember the ICMA sample is
more representative for cities above this size) columns (3)-(4) include additional
controls for city size, median income, and a deterministic time trend at the State
level. The last two columns show the same regressions for the sample of all US
cities.
The model calls for a negative linear and a positive quadratic term on the
2 8 Note

that one may want to exclude cities in which whites are a minority. There are very

few of those and in addition even when whites are a minority in terms of number of inhabitants,
demographic factors and vote participation patterns may still make them a majority as active
voters (see Amy 1993, p.125 for an example). For this reason it is unclear which cities to drop
from the sample. We tried a few experiments and our results appear robust.
2 9 As for all the rest of our empirical analysis we exclude from the sample those cities for
which we have information that the change of structure of government is the result of court
mandate or State Law. ICMA data provide partial information with this respect.

29

share of the non-white minority; as this share increases, at-large elections become more desirable up to a point in which the voting minority is so large that
the majority is better oﬀ by "packing" minority votes through single-district
elections. The signs of the coeﬃcients are consistent with this story. Looking
for instance at column (1) the estimated coeﬃcients imply that this U − shaped
curve reaches a minimum at about 29.2 percent (0.292 = 0.885/3.028) non-white
minority. (Note that 66.7 percent of the sampled cities in year 2000 were below
this level). The last two columns show that when we look at the US as a whole,
the sign of the coeﬃcients is the same as that for the South, but the size of the
coeﬃcient is smaller in absolute value, roughly half, suggesting that these racial
eﬀects are stronger in the South. To gauge quantitatively the size of the two
eﬀects, one can start observing the empirical distribution of the size of minorities in Southern cities. Consider as a benchmark the cross-sectional distribution
of minority sizes in year 2000 (but likewise for all the decades 1970-1990) for
those cities employed in the column (1) sample. The first quartile (Q1) for the
fraction of minority is 9.76 percent and the third quartile (Q3) is 34.86. At Q1,
given estimated coeﬃcients in column (1) of -0.885 and 1.514 (with clustered
standard errors respectively 0.308 and 0.475), an increase of one standard deviation of minority sizes (16 percent) implies a reduction of -5.56 percentage
points (-0.0556 = -0.885*0.16+ 1.514*(0.2576^2-0.0976^2)) of the fraction of
single-district seats. This is equivalent to about one seat switching from singledistrict to at-large in a council of 18 seats. At Q3, the same increase of one
standard deviation would instead produce an increase of about +6.6 percentage
points in the fraction of single-district seats. This would be equivalent to about
one seat switching from at-large to single-district in a council of 15 seats. These
two estimates appear quantitatively reasonable. In order to evaluate the size of
these eﬀects one has to remember that the Voting Rights Act itself imposed limits on how much cities could switch to AL systems!30 In other words, without
Supreme Court involvement, these eﬀects would have been surely larger, even
if possibly not as large as the disenfranchisement of the 1877-1900.
3 0 See

below for further details.

30

The bottom panel shows regression for the Sample of Southern cities before
the Voting Rights Act, for the period 1930-197031 . Here the coeﬃcients on the
size of the minority and its square are statistically zero. This is consistent with
our hypothesis that before the Voting Act electoral rules were unaﬀected by the
city racial composition, since racial minorities (blacks) were almost completely
disenfranchised.
Table 2 presents estimates employing a discrete dependent variable, SD, and
a conditional logistic estimator grouping observations at the city level. This is
corresponds to what part of the applied literature calls fixed eﬀects (or conditional) logit model. The implications of Table 1 carry over to this specification
check consistently with the predictions of Proposition 1. Given that the likelihood contributions of cities which do not change their electoral rule are zero,
one observes a smaller number of observations than in Table 1. For what follows
we prefer to limit ourselves to the analysis of the continuous variable y given
the greater flexibility allowed by the continuity of the dependent variable.
Time persistence is an important characteristic of political systems, therefore we employ a standard dynamic panel technique, through first diﬀerencing
and application of the Arellano and Bond (1991) GMM estimator, in Table 3.
This procedure has the double advantage of enriching our basic specification
of a dynamic component and addressing the issue of endogeneity of size of the
minority through the use of lags of the exogenous variables (the time fixed effects), endogenous variables (city population and fraction of the minority), and
the dependent variable. The specification we employ is:
0
yit = yit−1 θ + β 0 + π it β 1 + (π it )2 β 2 + Xit
γ + αi + δ t + ηit .

Together with a significant autoregressive component (θ around 0.3 in column
(1), panel a) the first three columns show the same patterns of coeﬃcients on
3 1 The

panel observation we indicate as 1970 indeed employs information on 1967 ICMA

data, matched with 1970 Census demographic variables. We also repeated all the analysis
matching the Census with the 1972 ICMA data with very similar results. We opted for 1967
because of better coverage and vicinity to 1965, the actual date of enactment of the bill.

31

the share of minority variable as Table 1. The minimum in this U curve is
reached at a fraction of the minority of about 33.8 percent. The coeﬃcients
β 1 and β 2 for the size of the minority are in the same order of magnitude of
our previous results in Table 1, but about two times larger (β 1 = −1.644 and
β 2 = 2.645 in column (1) with one-step robust standard error respectively 0.712
and 1.002). Quantitatively a stronger result, this would imply a change of 1 seat
from single-district to at-large in a council of 9 at Q1 (about -11.27 percentage
points) and a change of 1 seat from at-large to single-district in a council of
10 at Q3 (about +9.97 percentage points). Again we also find no significant
role for racial composition in the pre-Voting Rights South (panel b). Finally, we
need to note that due to the lag requirements of the model we find ourselves
confined to a smaller sample (especially for the all US sample: it does not go
further back than 1980, so we can employ at most one lagged diﬀerence).
The specification checks for the dynamic model are reported at the bottom
of each panel of Table 3. For Columns (1) and (2) the second order serial
correlation p-values of the one-step procedure does not to rise concerns over the
validity of the instrument set, but the overidentification test’s p-value obtained
from the GMM two-step procedure seems low (although not granting rejection
at any confidence level for the South and not at 5 percent for all US) given the
low-power properties of such tests. However, additional robustness checks and
the consistency of the standard linear model and this simple dynamic extension
are source of reassurance.

5.2

Additional nonparametric evidence on the choice of
rules

Simple nonparametric evidence supports the main prediction of the model as
well. We expect to observe two basic regularities concerning the within variation
in the data. First, the slope of a within regression of the single-district variable
on the fraction of the minority (or the fraction of blacks) should be increasing
in subsamples where the average minority size is increasingly higher. Second,

32

we would expect statistically significant coeﬃcients of negative sign to appear
at relatively small values of the fraction of the minority (where the downwardbending part of the U −shaped parabola is steeper) and statistically significant
coeﬃcients of positive sign to appear at relatively large values of the fraction
of the minority (where the upward-bending part of the U −shaped parabola
is steeper). A flat and insignificant relationship should appear in the middle
range. We borrow a simple modification of locally weighted scatterplot smoothing (lowess) from Imbs and Wacziarg (2003) and run a series of within-city
regressions in the relevant interval of minority sizes π ∈ [0.05, 0.55] employing
a symmetric bandwidth of half a cross-sectional standard deviation of minority
size (17/2 = 8.5 percent). Again we focus on the South of the United States
for the period post- and pre-1967. Specifically for each subsample we estimate:
yit = β 0 + πit β 1 + αi + δ t + η it .
At increments of 1/5 of a percentage point of minority fraction (i.e. 0.002) we
register the within-city slope (β 1 ) and its t-statistic. We then regress the estimated slopes and the t-statistics against the corresponding mid-sample fraction
of the minority. In both regressions a positive coeﬃcient on the mid-sample fraction of the minority would confirm each of the two hypotheses discussed above.
Table 4 reports results for both post- and pre-1967 for nonwhite minorities and
confirms our predictions.
As expected, coeﬃcients move from being prevalently negative at low levels
of π 32 to being prevalently positive at higher levels of π (around 1/2). Over the
interval33 π ∈ [0.05, 0.22] the average coeﬃcient for nonwhites in the post-1967
South is equal to −0.601 and gives an estimate that is larger but comparable
to the eﬀect of the parametric estimate at Q1 (for an increase of 17 percent the
change in single-district is −0.102 versus −0.0556 of the F.E. parametric model
3 2 Notice

that flats at low values of π are justified by the relative equivalence of at-large and

single-district rules in cases where minorities would not gain representation under any of the
two rules.
3 3 Bounds for the intervals of π are chosen to divide in three equal parts the support for the
downward, flat, and upward part of the curve.

33

and −0.1127 of the dynamic panel); the same holds for the average coeﬃcient
in the interval π ∈ [0.38, 0.55] (β 1 = 0.857) comparable to the parametric eﬀect
at Q3 (0.145 versus 0.0660 in the F.E. model and 0.0997 in the dynamic panel).
A within regression in such small subsamples (due to the small bandwidth)
is demanding but nonetheless the main nonlinearity is detectable. However,
we detect large fluctuations in the coeﬃcients due to the varying (and small)
number of changes in electoral rules in each subsample. We observe relatively
larger (in absolute value) t-statistics mostly around the extrema of the interval
of minority sizes (negative at low levels of π and positive at large levels of π)
and generally insignificant results otherwise.

5.3

Electoral rules and minority representation

Our basic story holds that electoral rules aﬀect the ratio of minorities elected
diﬀerently. This is the reason why the constitution writers choose diﬀerently in
the first place. The ratio of non-white council members should display dependence on the electoral rules in order for the fundamental tenet of our analysis
to be verified. Moreover, diﬀerent rules should have diﬀerent eﬀects on minority representation at diﬀerent minority sizes. By quantitatively estimating the
impact of electoral rules on minority representation, we provide evidence that
both statements are verified by the data and that the estimated eﬀects move in
the direction our model presumes and rationalizes.
The representational ratio is the fraction of minority councilmen in a council
divided by the fraction of the population that belongs to the minority and is
available for our all-US cities sample in year 1980, 1990, and 2000.34 A large
section of empirical Political Scientists have employed the representational ratio
as the typical measures of the degree of ”proportionality” of an electoral system
(i.e. if composition of population racial group maps one-to-one into the racial
3 4 Very

few cities for the all US sample present representational ratios of minorities of more

than 1, indicating over-proportional representation. Even less of them are present in the
South. In order to limit the role of these outliers we limit the representational ratio to be less
than 5.

34

composition of the legislative body). We regress it on our variable of interests,
the single-district rule variable. Table 5 reports the results. The null hypothesis
that the electoral rule adopted by a city has no association with the representational ratio is soundly rejected in both a pooled cross-sectional regressions
(Panel a) and in fixed-eﬀect regressions in which time invariant city-specific
unobserved heterogeneity is accounted for (Panel b). All specifications include
year fixed eﬀects and a set of standard controls for city size (log population) and
income levels (log household median income in 1990 dollars) and we apply the
same clustering as Table 1. Looking at columns (1) and (2) for the South and
(3) for the whole country, single-district rules substantially increase the chance
of minorities to be proportionally represented at the municipal level. Recalling
that the fraction of single-district seats, y, is defined over the [0, 1] interval, our
results in column (1) imply an average increase of the representational ratio of
the city council between 13 (in panel a) and 35.4 (in panel b) percentage points
from switching from a fully at-large rule to a fully single-district rule35 . This is a
quantitatively substantial eﬀect: each black or minority vote has something less
than 1/3 more weight in terms of electoral representation under single-district
than under at-large elections. Both our cross-sectional and fixed-eﬀect analysis
provide quantitatively similar evidence and, as one would expect, such results
are quantitatively stronger in the more segregated South.
In columns (4)-(7) we provide evidence that the impact of the single-district
rule on the representational ratio is actually non-monotonic in the size of the
minority by including an interaction of the single-district variable and the fraction of non-whites (the level of non-whites is included as well). At low levels
of minority size both at-large and single-district should be indistinguishable in
warranting representation: minority are just too small to achieve representation
under any rule. However, as the minority size increases single-district will oﬀer
better chances of representation to geographically segregated minorities vis-a3 5 Virtually

identical results are obtained when we define the left hand side as fraction of

non white concilpersons over the fraction of non white population. We use specifically the
black group in order to make our results more comparable with the previous literature.

35

vis at-large. Such eﬀect will diminish, however, when the minority becomes so
large that some district votes (those beyond simple majority in the district) will
be wasted. This implies that the sign of the coeﬃcient should be negative on
the interaction term. In panel a) columns (4)-(7) present interactions with the
predicted sign that are significant at standard confidence levels and reject the
absence of a non-monotonicity. Moreover, single-district maintains his expected
positive eﬀect, while the fraction of minority has a positive coeﬃcient. The
picture in the fixed eﬀect analysis in panel b) is less clear, primarily because the
required variation in the data is a contemporaneous change over three dimensions: electoral rules, fraction of minorities, and number of minority councilmen.
Albeit our data set is rich, this requirement is probably too stringent.
We are not the first to observe that at-large election favors the white majority and our results are consistent with a substantial body of Political Science
literature on the matter. For instance Amy (2002) writes that ”the system of
voting in at large elections often makes it virtually impossible for minority candidates to get elected. At-large elections require candidates to get a majority
or plurality of the vote to win, which usually allows a white majority to take
all seats and to deny minorities any representation at all.” (p. 150)

36

. Sass

and Pittman (2000) also provide panel data evidence on the eﬀect of electoral
rule on minority representation reporting a representational ratio diﬀerential of
36 percent, quite comparable with our linear estimates. Our results extend to
more recent data and a substantially larger sample of cities. We are not aware
of previous empirical study pointing at the non-monotonicity in the eﬀect of
single-district rules on minority representation.

5.4

The Voting Rights Act and electoral rules

This section investigate further how the Voting Rights Act imposes a constraint
on the constitutional choice of the white majorities. The Voting Rights Act not
3 6 For

similar views see Berry and Dye (1987). For empirical cross-sectional analysis see

Karning and Welch (1982), also cited in Amy (2002).

36

only removes (and has removed) obstacles to minority voting registration. Any
jurisdiction covered under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act has the duty of
obtaining pre-clearance for any change concerning voting from the oﬃce of the
Attorney General through the Department of Justice or United States District
Court for the District of Columbia. Every change proposed is individually reviewed from the Department of Justice and cleared37 "if the change does not
lead to a retrogression in the position of minority voters with respect to the effective exercise of the electoral franchise”. Case by case clearance is based on
the study of the most recent Census and electoral data available and through
interviews to concerned parties.
The implementation (both by Law and through the Courts) of the Voting
Rights Act has been extremely successful, but it is hard to presume it has been
perfect and definitive. The very fact that the VRA has been repeatedly renewed
over time indicates that pressures towards distortion of voting institutions are
still present and perceivable (the VRA is due for renewal in 2007). Riker (1984)
brilliant account of a camouflaged litigation in a council-manager redistricting
dispute (albeit in a diﬀerent legal context) shows an example of how political
institutions may still be distorted in favor of an incumbent majority even in
such situations. We believe our analysis detects such pressure in the form of
systematic strategic changes in electoral rules under the current legal constraint.
The estimated dimension of the changes detected seems not so large to lead to a
severe under-representation of blacks. Severe under-representation would raise
legal highbrows and court challenges and, ultimately, legally-imposed changes
in the electoral rule (which we exclude from our analysis).
There is also some evidence that the Voting Rights Legislation is progressively more eﬀective in detecting strategic electoral manipulation. Table 6 reports median values for ethnic fragmentation, fraction of blacks and fraction of
non-white minority. For the seventies both for the set of fully- and partiallycovered States in the South, median minority sizes of cities increased in the vari3 7 Information

concerning objected changes can be found in the motivation letters available

at http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/voting/sec_5/obj_activ.htm.

37

able of single-district rule are substantially higher and well outside confidence
intervals of medians of cities decreasing single-district, in a direction consistent
with a degree of manipulation. However, in the eighties the diﬀerence in the
medians is reduced and gets substantially smaller in the nineties.
Finally, the coverage on the Voting Act is endogenous: the loci of greater
potential conflict are those to which the VRA applies in full coverage. They are
also the ones where the eﬀects we detect are clearer. Table 7 reproduces the
post- Voting Rights result of Tables 1 and 3 for those cities belonging to fully
VRA-covered States and shows, especially for the basic panel model, greater
significance and quantitatively larger coeﬃcients. In column (2), panel a), the
linear coeﬃcient increases of about 48 percent, the quadratic 18 percent vis-a-vis
the benchmark reported in column (1).

5.5

Form of government

For given council composition, there is anecdotal evidence that the form of government may play a role as well in the enfranchisement of minorities. The two
main forms, mayor-council and council-manager, diﬀer with respect to the role
of the mayor as the pivot of the executive (stronger in the first instance). Our
model is not centered on the role of form of government38 but in this section we
briefly review empirical evidence which may be per se relevant. In cities where
the white voters hold a solid majority and are almost sure of electing a white
mayor, they may have prefer a strong mayor form of government. On the other
hand, in cities with a closer fifty-fifty split, the white constitutional writers may
prefer a council-manager form of government to avoid the risk of ending with
a black strong mayor. The following quote from an editorial from a newspaper
targeted to Hispanics in San Diego (La Prensa, April 24, 2004) is an example of
how form of government may enter the picture. In discussing proposed changes
in the charter of the city of San Diego, the editorial concludes that ” For Hispanics having a strong mayor form of government does not bode.... well for this
3 8 See

our discussion in the extensions of the basic model.

38

community. Putting so much power into one person’s hands....translates into
control by Republican right wings. Regardless of the changing demographics, i.e.
the continual growth of the Hispanic, Asian, Filipino, black community political
representation in the city of San Diego will be held by a diminishing number
of white ...citizens.” A relatively weak council hardly exercises any eﬀective
check on executive powers. A powerful council plays exactly the opposite role
in council-manager structures.
We start considering two indexes of form of government, F OG and SIN D,
increasing in the degree of executive power. A strong mayor could be preferred
by the charter writers as long as their position as majority of the city is strong,
but a strong mayor is relatively riskier whenever minorities are large enough.
At that point the more collegial council-manager form could be employed (given
that whites could still be able to seat in the council). Therefore, to be congruent
with our results on electoral rule, we would expect a positive coeﬃcient on the
size of the minority and perhaps a negative quadratic term in a regression where
form of government is the dependent variable. Table 8 is organized as Table 1,
a two-way panel model, while Table 9 mirrors Table 3, a dynamic panel model.
Both Tables employ F OG as dependent variable. Table 10 instead presents the
static panel model for SIN D39 .
These Tables suggest a blurred picture. The coeﬃcient of size of the minority in the post-1967 sample has the expected sign only in a limited subset of
regressions in Table 10, but never in Tables 8 and 9. Moreover, the coeﬃcient on
ethnic fractionalization is not statistically significant in most specifications for
the South (or it is at 10 percent, but with the wrong sign). This same coeﬃcient
is insignificant (in fact very close to zero and switching sign) in the pre-1967
sample. The explanation for the wrong signs has often to do with the correlation
between form of government and electoral rule (council-manager forms tend to
employ at-large elections). Surely, further analysis of this issue (especially the
institutional complementarity between form of government and electoral rule)
3 9 The

lack of pre-1980 observations for most components of SIND limit our analysis to the

simple static model.

39

is necessary, but on a first approximation it would appear that electoral rules
more than forms of government respond to the racial composition of a city. Not
surprisingly perhaps: electoral rules are the intuitive first line of defense against
extensions of the democratic franchise.

6

Conclusions

Electoral rules are endogenous and evolve relatively quickly in response to changing underlying conditions. Minority representation depends on the ability of a
majority bloc to adapt institutions to changing conditions and guaranteeing
its supremacy. The experience of voting rights and electoral institutions in
US cities, particularly in the South, is illuminating. Before the Voting Rights
Acts of 1965, racial minorities were essentially disenfranchised in the US South.
Therefore, the type of electoral institutions were irrelevant in determining the
level of control of the white majority: a level of control that was almost absolute.
The Voting Rights Act allowed racial minorities to enter into the political arena.
The white majorities reacted, within the legal boundaries of the Voting Rights
Act, by changing electoral rules as to minimize expected minority influence.
This evidence suggests how institutions (in this case electoral rules) evolve
even rather quickly in response to changes in the environment and raises questions about empirical evidence that holds electoral institutions as exogenous.

40

References
[1] Aghion, Philippe, Alberto Alesina, and Francesco Trebbi (2004) ”Endogenous Political Institutions” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, May, 565612.
[2] Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton (2003) "Incomplete Social Contracts"
Journal of the European Economic Association,1, 38-67.
[3] Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and Caroline Hoxby (2004) ”Political Jurisdictions in Heterogeneous Communities” Journal of Political Economy,
112, April, 348-396.
[4] Alesina, Alberto and Howard Rosenthal (1995) Partisan Politics, Divided
Government, and the Economy (Cambridge University press, Cambridge,
UK).
[5] Alexander, Gerard (2005) "France: Reform-mongering between Majority
Runoﬀ and Proportionality", in Handbook of Electoral System Choice, by
Josep M. Colomer (ed.) (Palgrave MacMillan, New York, N.Y.)
[6] Alt, James E. and Robert C. Lowry (1994) ”Divided Government, Fiscal
Institutions and Budget Deficits: Evidence from the States” American
Political Science Review, 89, December, 811-828.
[7] Amy, Douglas J. (1993) Real Choices / New Voices: The Case for Proportional Representation Elections in the United States (Columbia University
Press, New York, NY).
[8] Amy, Douglas J. (2002, second edition) Real Choices / New Voices:
The Case for Proportional Representation Elections in the United States
( Columbia University Press, New York, NY).
[9] Arellano, Manuel and Stephen Bond (1991) ”Some Tests of Specification
for Panel Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment
Equations” Review of Economics Studies, 58, January, 277-297.
41

[10] Baqir, Reza (2002) ”Districting and Government Overspending” Journal
of Political Economy, 110, December, 1318-1354.
[11] Berry, Barbara L., and Thomas R. Dye (1979) ”The Discriminatory Eﬀects
of At-Large Elections.” Florida State University Law Review 7, 85-122.
[12] Bohn, Henning and Robert P. Inman (1996) ”Balanced Budget Rules and
Public Deficits: Evidence from US States” Carnegie Rochester Conference
on Public Policies, 13-76.
[13] Buchanan, James M. and Gordon Tullock (1962) The Calculus of Consent:
Logical Foundations of Constitutional Democracy (University of Michigan
Press, Ann Arbor, MI).
[14] Cole, Leonard A. (1976) Blacks in Power: A Comparative Study of Black
and White Elected Oﬃcials (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
[15] Colomer, Josep M. (2005) Handbook of Electoral System Choice, (Palgrave
MacMillan, New York, N.Y.)
[16] Cox, Gary W. and Johnatan N. Katz (2002) Elbridge Gerry’s Salamander
(Cambridge University press, Cambridge, UK).
[17] Cutler, David, Edward Glaeser, and Jacob Vigdor (1999) "The Rise and
Decline of the American Ghetto", Journal of Political Economy, 107, June,
455-506.
[18] DeSantis, Victor and Tari Renner ”Minority and Gender Representation In
American County Legislatures: The Eﬀect of Election Systems” in Rule,
Wilma and Joseph F. Zimmerman (eds.) (1992) United States Electoral
Systems (Greenwood Press, New York, US).
[19] Eple, Dennis and Thomas Romer (1991) ”Mobility and Redistribution”
Journal of Political Economy, 99, August, 828-858.
[20] Friedman, John N. and Richard Holden (2005) "Towards a Theory of Optimal Partisan Gerrymandering" Mimeograph, Harvard University.
42

[21] Grofman, Bernard, Lisa Handley, and Richard Niemi (1992) Minority Representation and the Quest for Voting Equality (Cambridge University Press,
New York, NY).
[22] Hacker, Andrew (1992) Two nations: Black and White, Separate, Hostile,
Unequal (Scribner’s, New York, US).
[23] Hayek, Friedrich A. (1960) The Constitution of Liberty (University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill).
[24] Huckfeld, Robert, and Carol Weitzel Kohfeld (1989) Race and the Decline
of Class in American Politics (University of Illinois Press, Urbana, Ill).
[25] Imbs, Jean and Romain Wacziarg (2003) "Stages of Diversification" American Economic Review, 93, March, 63-86.
[26] Karning, Albert K. and Susan Welch (1982) ”Electoral Structure and Black
Representation on City Councils” Social Science Quarterly, 63, March, 99114.
[27] Kousser, Morgan J. (1999) Color-blind Injustice: Minority Voting Rights
and the Undoing of the Second Reconstruction (University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, NC).
[28] Kreuzer, Marcus (2005) "Germany: Partisan Engineering of Personalized
Proportional Representation", in Handbook of Electoral System Choice, by
Josep M. Colomer (ed.) (Palgrave MacMillan, New York, N.Y.)
[29] Lijphart, Arend (1994) Electoral Systems and Party Systems: a Study of
27 Democracies (Oxford University Press, New York, NY).
[30] Mulligan, Casey B., Richard Gil, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2004) ” Do
Democracies Have Diﬀerent Public Policies than Nondemocracies?” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 18, winter, 51-74.
[31] Myrdal, Gunnar (1944) An American Dilemma (Harper & Row Publishers,
New York, NY).
43

[32] Pande, Rohini (2003) ”Can Mandate Political Representation Increase Policy Influence for Disadvantaged Minorities? Theory and Evidence from
India” American Economic Review, 93, 1132-1151.
[33] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003) The Economics Eﬀects of
Constitutions (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
[34] Poterba, James M. (1994) ”State Response on Fiscal Crises: The Eﬀects
of Budgetary Institutions on Policies”, Journal of Political Economy, 102,
August, 799-821.
[35] Riker, William (1986) The Art of Political Manipulation (Yale University
Press, New Haven, CT).
[36] Strumpf, S. Koleman and Felix Oberholzer-Gee (2002) ”Endogenous Policy Decentralization: Testing the Central Tenet of Economic Federalism”
Journal of Political Economy, 110, February, 1-36.
[37] Voigt, Stefan (1997) ”Positive Constitutional Economics: A Survey” Public
Choice, 90, March,11-53.
[38] Wilson,William J. (1996) When Work Disappear: The World of the New
Urban Poor (Knopf, New York, NY)

7

Appendix: Sample selection

In this section we aim at inspecting mayor selection issues regarding the sample
of municipalities employed in the main analysis (the ICMA respondents sample).
First, we inspect diﬀerences in the distribution of population and economic
covariates between the main sample (all US and South municipalities) employed
in the analysis (that is the ICMA respondents sample) and the whole U.S.
Census of population sample for the 1980-2000 period. This comparison is
finalized at qualitatively assessing how representative is our sample of the whole
population of U.S. municipalities. Significant diﬀerences in the moments of the

44

distributions of the covariates would indicate non-random sampling from the
underlying population of U.S. municipalities.
Second, we compare population and economic covariates between the main
sample (all US and South) employed in the analysis and the universe of cities
to which the ICMA initially mailed the survey in year 2000. This comparison is finalized at assessing self-selection of the respondents. Significant differences in the moments of the distributions of the covariates would indicate
non-randomness of non-response patterns.
Third, sample selection is also investigated for the years 1930-1970, but
limited to States in the South.
Table (AI) presents qualitative evidence of sample selection. The ICMA
sample covers 13 percent of municipalities reported in the U.S. Census of Population for 1980, 11 percent in 1990, and 8 percent in year 2000. ICMA respondent
municipalities tend to be more ethnically divided, larger in terms of total population, and richer in terms of median income at the city level. All two-sample t
tests of diﬀerence in the means across the whole Census and ICMA samples for
each covariate reject equality in means significantly (below 1 percent confidence
level40 ).
One reason for selection arises naturally from ICMA sample construction
strategy. Municipalities included in the U.S. Census above 2500 population are
included in the ICMA survey ”universe” (Municipal Year Book, 2003). Of those
below 2500 population, only municipalities aﬃliated to ICMA are included. For
sample year 2000 ICMA respondent municipalities below 2500 amount to about
11 percent of the whole sample (376 municipalities out of a total 4193). Similar
proportions are found in the 1980 and 1990 samples.
Unfortunately, such explanations do not account for selection completely.
Even considering the Census and ICMA sub-samples with population above
4 0 Both

year by year and pooled two-sample t test for diﬀerence in means were run, for a total

of twelve tests (3 years: 1980-1990-2000 plus the pooled sample times 3 covariates: ethnic,
pop, income). We allow for unequal variances across sub-samples. All tests are available from
the authors.

45

2500 and comparing the two sub-samples, significant diﬀerences in the mean of
the covariates do not disappear in some cases (population size).
Table (AII) presents little evidence of response selection for the sample of
non-respondents and respondents in the 2001 ICMA Municipal Form of Government Survey. The choice of the year is dictated by the fact that ICMA maintains
historical record of the whole list of municipalities in their ”universe” for their
1996 and 2001 Form of Government surveys only. There was no corresponding
equivalent list of surveyed municipalities for 1981 and 1991.
The percentage of responses received in 2001 for which data is about 54 percent, a measure conforming to previous survey’s response rates as well. ICMA
respondent and non-respondent municipalities tend to be equally ethnically divided and to have the same total population. Two-sample t tests for diﬀerences
in means reject the hypothesis of equality at standard confidence levels (1, 5, and
10 percent). However, median income of ICMA non-respondent municipalities
is lower than income of respondents in a statistically significant fashion. One
possible explanation could be the availability of more administrative resources
in relatively richer communities, allowing for more eﬀective handling of survey
response and similar incidental administrative tasks.
Table (AIII) reports summary statistics for both the (matched) ICMA sample obtained from the ICMA Municipal Year Book (various years) and whole
Census sample for the period 1930-1970. Data for this period were collected
only for cities in the South (see Data Appendix for detailed data sources).
Again as for the 1980-2000 samples reported in Table (AI) the sampling
strategy adopted by the ICMA (and feasibility issues) presents statistically significant diﬀerence from the Census samples. ICMA selects larger (and therefore
more fragmented) and richer cities for its analysis (see details on samples sizes
in the Data Appendix). Again, t tests for diﬀerences in means provide formal
support to the inspection of Table (AIII).

46

Estimator:

Sample:

Table I
Size of Minority and City Electoral Rule: Within-city variation
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Effects
Effects
Effects
Effects
Effects
South,
Cities >
South
South
South
All U.S.
2500
Panel (a): Post 1967
Dependent variable: Fraction of councilmen elected by district
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Frac. Minority
(Frac. Minority)^2
Log(City Population)

-0.885
[0.308]***
1.514
[0.475]***
0.002
[0.038]

-0.943
[0.313]***
1.819
[0.491]***
0.015
[0.039]

Log(Median Income)

-0.877
[0.308]***
1.532
[0.478]***
-0.007
[0.041]
0.056
[0.093]

State trend
Observations
Number of cities
R-squared

4011
1914
0.71

Frac. Minority

0.421
[0.548]
-0.439
[0.638]
0.017
[0.041]

-0.818
[0.325]**
1.385
[0.462]***
-0.017
[0.043]
0.022
[0.100]
Included

-0.565
[0.198]***
0.964
[0.279]***
0.013
[0.023]

3723
4010
4010
12413
1746
1914
1914
6526
0.71
0.71
0.74
0.84
Panel (b): Pre 1967
Dependent variable: Fraction of councilmen elected by district
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(Frac. Minority)^2
Log(City Population)
Log(Median Income)
State trend

0.584
[0.858]
-0.754
[1.385]
0.021
[0.041]

1.233
[1.287]
-1.722
[1.932]
0.084
[0.058]
-0.113
[0.065]*

Fixed
Effects

All U.S.

(6)
-0.453
[0.195]**
0.777
[0.263]***
-0.003
[0.025]
0.011
[0.054]
Included
12412
6526
0.86

1.136
[1.276]
-1.958
[1.941]
0.095
[0.060]
-0.058
[0.061]
Included

Observations
2388
2382
2041
2041
Number of cities
968
964
966
966
R-squared
0.71
0.71
0.73
0.76
Notes: Standard errors in brackets below coefficients. * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%. In panel (a) and (b) standard errors are clustered at the city level.
All regressions include year fixed effects. Panel (a) covers the period 1970-2000. Panel (b)
covers the period 1930-1970.

Table II
Size of Minority and City Electoral Rule: Within-city variation
Estimator:
Condition- Condition- Condition- Condition- Conditional Logit
al Logit
al Logit
al Logit
al Logit
South,
Cities >
South
South
South
All U.S.
2500
Sample:
Panel (a): Post 1967
Dependent variable: Single district elections
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Frac. Minority

-11.422
[3.459]***
(Frac. Minority)^2
23.753
[5.574]***
Log(City Population) 0.486
[0.430]
Log(Median Income)

-11.604
[3.503]***
24.318
[5.660]***
0.491
[0.437]

-11.288
[3.458]***
23.842
[5.574]***
0.389
[0.436]
0.778
[0.933]

State trend
Observations
Number of cities

Frac. Minority

-5.184
[4.890]
19.253
[7.481]**
0.016
[0.626]
0.695
[1.335]
Included

641
214

620
641
641
205
214
214
Panel (b): Pre 1967
Dependent variable: Single district elections
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

10.805
[6.815]
(Frac. Minority)^2
-12.233
[10.265]
Log(City Population) -0.068
[0.422]
Log(Median Income)

10.805
[6.815]
-12.233
[10.265]
-0.068
[0.422]

10.345
[7.416]
-12.177
[10.992]
0.453
[0.501]
-1.753
[0.967]*

-8.476
[2.674]***
18.359
[4.214]***
0.193
[0.289]

1305
493

11.631
[9.969]
-19.614
[14.690]
0.865
[0.772]
-1.698
[1.407]

State trend
Observations
529
529
404
404
Number of cities
163
163
147
147
Notes: Standard errors in brackets below coefficients. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All regressions include year fixed
effects. Panel (a) covers the period 1970-2000. Panel (b) covers the period
1930-1970.

Table III
Size of Minority and City Electoral Rule: Within-city variation
Estimator:

ArellanoBond
GMM

ArellanoBond
GMM
South,
Cities >
2500

ArellanoBond
GMM

0.311
[0.055]***
-1.654
[0.724]**
2.822
[0.972]***
-0.33
[0.275]

0.29
[0.057]***
-2.113
[0.635]***
1.838
[0.706]***
-0.538
[0.236]**

All U.S.
South
Panel (a): Post 1967
Dependent variable: Fraction of councilmen elected by district
(1)
(2)
(3)

Sample:

Lag Single District
Frac. Minority
(Frac. Minority)^2
Log(City Population)

0.313
[0.056]***
-1.644
[0.712]**
2.649
[1.002]***
-0.342
[0.258]

Second Order Serial Correlation pvalue
0.140
0.140
0.196
J test p-value
0.123
0.160
0.021
Observations
1506
1489
2508
Number of cities
797
782
1799
Panel (b): Pre 1967
Dependent variable: Fraction of councilmen elected by district
(1)
(2)
Lag Single District
Frac. Minority
(Frac. Minority)^2
Log(City Population)

0.751
[0.109]***
1.829
[5.259]
-3.634
[7.928]
0.272
[0.319]

0.751
[0.109]***
1.829
[5.259]
-3.634
[7.928]
0.272
[0.319]

Second Order Serial Correlation pvalue
0.07
0.07
J test p-value
0.997
0.997
Observations
891
891
Number of cities
462
462
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets below coefficients. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Lag
Single District is the the first lag of the dependent variable. All
regressions include year fixed effects. Panel (a) covers the period
1970-2000. Panel (b) covers the period 1930-1970. Both ethnic
fractionalization and population are treated as endogenous variables.
The maximum number of lags used for instrumenting them is 2.

Table IV
Change in slope and t-stat of local
within regressions of single-district
on fraction of minority (π) over the
range of π.
Sample:
South
Slope
t-stat
(1)
(2)
post 1967

4.596
2.850
[0.797]*** [0.473]***

South

Slope
(1)

t-stat
(2)

0.165
[0.353]

0.897
[0.926]

pre 1967

Notes: Column (1) reports coefficients
and standard errors corresponding to
regression of locally estimated
coefficients of single-district on fraction
of minority on the corresponding midsample fraction of minority. Column (2)
employs the corresponding t-statistic.
Robust standard errors are in brackets
below coefficients. * significant at 10%;
** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%. Regressions include a constant
(not reported). See text for local
sample details.

Table V
City Electoral Rule and Minority Representation: Cross-sectional and Within-city variation

Sample:

Single-District
(Single-Distr. * Frac. Min.)
Frac. Minority
Log(City Population)
Log(Median Income)

Observations
R-squared

Single-District
(Single-Distr. * Frac. Min.)
Frac. Minority
Log(City Population)
Log(Median Income)

South,
Cities >
South
All U.S.
South
South
2500
Panel (a): OLS
Dependent variable: Representaional ratio
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

South,
Cities >
2500

South
(Black
only)

(6)

(7)

0.173
[0.071]**
-0.315
[0.167]*
0.533
[0.091]***
0.108
[0.017]***
-0.352
[0.072]***

0.299
[0.069]***
-0.38
[0.163]**
0.824
[0.066]***
0.072
[0.012]***

2767
11113
3039
3039
0.08
0.06
0.07
0.08
Panel (b): City Fixed Effects
Dependent variable: Representaional ratio
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

2767
0.09

2875
0.09

(6)

(7)

0.354
0.377
0.204
0.298
[0.091]*** [0.081]*** [0.061]*** [0.196]
0.211
[0.472]
-0.643
[0.380]*
-0.006
0.012
0.072
0.033
[0.097]
[0.114]
[0.070]
[0.096]
0.215
0.214
0.000
[0.182]
[0.202]
[0.110]

0.36
[0.174]**
0.063
[0.436]
-0.626
[0.436]
0.04
[0.118]
0.107
[0.207]

0.221
[0.163]
0.385
[0.420]
-0.568
[0.354]
0.012
[0.103]

0.13
0.125
0.015
[0.041]*** [0.043]*** [0.018]

0.205
[0.067]***
-0.333
[0.159]**
0.802
[0.077]***
0.106
0.117
0.102
0.08
[0.015]*** [0.016]*** [0.007]*** [0.014]***
-0.362
-0.45
-0.338
[0.062]*** [0.064]*** [0.021]***

0.169
[0.068]**
-0.289
[0.157]*
0.586
[0.081]***
0.096
[0.015]***
-0.254
[0.068]***

3039
0.07

0.297
[0.196]
0.212
[0.472]
-0.579
[0.380]
0.013
[0.099]
0.124
[0.183]

Observations
3039
2767
11113
3039
3039
2767
2875
Number of cities
1642
1482
6158
1642
1642
1482
1570
R-squared
0.76
0.76
0.71
0.76
0.76
0.76
0.69
Notes: Robust standard errors are in brackets below coefficients. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%. Standard errors are clustered at the city level. All regressions include year fixed effects.
Sample coverage: period 1980-2000. The representational ratio is the fraction of non-white (black in column
7 of both panels) councilmen in the council divided by the fraction of the population that is non-white (black
in column 7).

Table VI: Characteristics of Cities Changing Electoral Rule Under Voting Rights Act Preclearance Condition (by
decade)
Period 1970-1980
Voting Rights Act - South States fully covered

Voting Rights Act - All South States with some coverage

Subsample Decreasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
21
0.166378 .0693809 .3390113
Ethnic(t)
21
0.264663 .1964563 .4114405
Frac. Black(t-10)
21
0.089928 .0348796
.21687
Frac. Black(t)
21
0.098622 .0468097 .2428612
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
21
0.091503 .0359641 .2196268
Frac. Minrty(t)
21
0.155286 .1083713 .2895482
Subsample Increasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
47
0.399117 .3215923 .4472221
Ethnic(t)
47
0.447266 .3823418 .4795029
Frac. Black(t-10)
47
0.273235 .1994838 .3360678
Frac. Black(t)
47
0.284737 .2312183 .3751268
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
47
0.274588 .2008917 .3368007
Frac. Minrty(t)
47
0.301235 .2507999 .3861642

Subsample Decreasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
33
0.194508 .1245294 .3270092
Ethnic(t)
33
0.293621 .2108922
.40505
Frac. Black(t-10)
33
0.10792 .0529065 .203928
Frac. Black(t)
33
0.101751 .0556345 .2656905
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
33
0.109021 .0659537 .2053961
Frac. Minrty(t)
33
0.168885 .1170527 .2795585
Subsample Increasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
60
0.373299 .3035595 .4265772
Ethnic(t)
60
0.429007 .3687487 .4599396
Frac. Black(t-10)
60
0.244803 .1787823 .3061703
Frac. Black(t)
60
0.25262 .1942273 .3326913
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
60
0.24784 .1839426 .3074507
60
0.293116 .2378248 .3573126
Frac. Minrty(t)

Period 1980-1990
Voting Rights Act - South States fully covered

Voting Rights Act - All South States with some coverage

Subsample Decreasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
17
0.217387 .1443274 .3484081
Ethnic(t)
17
0.315041 .2239849 .4026764
Frac. Black(t-10)
17
0.089428 .0521425 .160876
Frac. Black(t)
17
0.128993 .043128 .1980163
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
17
0.124092 .0770264 .2160449
Frac. Minrty(t)
17
0.182511 .1253335 .2545895
Subsample Increasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
65
0.347108 .3075647 .3947446
Ethnic(t)
67
0.40034 .3682412 .4260964
Frac. Black(t-10)
65
0.165714 .1039453 .2080752
Frac. Black(t)
67
0.179089 .144787 .2106473
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
65
0.219606 .1854808 .2644502
Frac. Minrty(t)
67
0.256799 .2300964 .2818591

Subsample Decreasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
30
0.231083 .1419625 .3267115
Ethnic(t)
30
0.312536 .2282883 .3680777
Frac. Black(t-10)
30
0.094368 .0548517 .1727142
Frac. Black(t)
30
0.143769 .0895188 .1661797
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
30
0.130488 .0766336 .2023592
Frac. Minrty(t)
30
0.182582 .1275517 .2312641
Subsample Increasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
86
0.368366 .3349446 .4078901
Ethnic(t)
88
0.406157 .3725483 .4366212
Frac. Black(t-10)
86
0.19266 .1584294 .2327117
Frac. Black(t)
88
0.200002 .1642106 .2602224
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
86
0.229868 .2097406 .2767364
Frac. Minrty(t)
88
0.272591 .2359458 .3136792

Period 1990-2000
Voting Rights Act - South States fully covered

Voting Rights Act - All South States with some coverage

Subsample Decreasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
18
0.395447 .3501902 .4837628
Ethnic(t)
20
0.441584 .3721584 .4774563
Frac. Black(t-10)
18
0.113582 .0628309 .255522
Frac. Black(t)
20
0.176006 .0598381 .2968652
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
18
0.255387 .2146877 .3557325
Frac. Minrty(t)
20
0.29508 .2291953 .3703512
Subsample Increasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
42
0.413317 .3798746 .4660986
Ethnic(t)
46
0.448415 .4033347 .4838997
Frac. Black(t-10)
42
0.181325 .1063943 .2678239
Frac. Black(t)
46
0.214429 .1339626 .3017227
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
42
0.275677 .2340786 .3207284
Frac. Minrty(t)
46
0.323101 .2709005 .373635

Subsample Decreasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
21
0.406057 .3756696 .4828541
Ethnic(t)
23
0.455352 .3991932 .5043442
Frac. Black(t-10)
21
0.179089 .0732573 .2642068
Frac. Black(t)
23
0.239966 .0882167 .3533759
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
21
0.261304 .2340239 .3530408
Frac. Minrty(t)
23
0.324099 .2464538 .4250296
Subsample Increasing SINGLE DISTRICT
-- Binom. Interp. -Variable
Obs Median
[95% Conf. Interval]
Ethnic(t-10)
61
0.41117 .3318195 .442139
Ethnic(t)
67
0.447307 .4036738 .4723136
Frac. Black(t-10)
61
0.172879 .1219406 .2654401
Frac. Black(t)
67
0.216827 .1495089 .2823543
Frac. Minrty(t-10)
61
0.275659 .2040158 .3016066
Frac. Minrty(t)
67
0.322583 .2719806 .3521422

Notes: time period t for each variable refers to the final date of the period (for instance t=2000 for period 1990-2000). States fully
covered under the 1975 renewal of the Voting Rights Act are Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina, Texas,
and Virginia. Florida and North Carolina are only partially covered. Data exclude cities for which the change in electoral rule was
dictated by court mandate or State law.

Table VII
Size of Minority and City Electoral Rule: Within-city variation in States Fully Covered by Voting
Rights Act

Sample:

South,
South,
Cities,
South,
South,
Cities,
Fully
Cities,
Cities,
All U.S.,
Fully
covered
Fully
Fully
Fully
covered
States,
covered
covered
covered
South
States
pop>2500 States
States
States
Panel (a): City Fixed Effects
Dependent variable: Fraction of councilmen elected by district
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Frac. Minority

-0.885
[0.308]***
1.514
[0.475]***
0.002
[0.038]

(Frac. Minority)^2
Log(City Population)

-1.307
[0.393]***
1.781
[0.558]***
-0.007
[0.056]

-1.332
[0.404]***
2.136
[0.608]***
0.013
[0.058]

Log(Median Income)
State trend
Observations
Number of cities
R-squared

Lag Single District
Frac. Minority
(Frac. Minority)^2
Log(City Population)

4011
1914
0.71

-1.305
[0.393]***
1.79
[0.563]***
-0.01
[0.060]
0.018
[0.139]

-0.85
[0.433]**
1.358
[0.584]**
-0.034
[0.059]
0.043
[0.146]
Included

-1.27
[0.380]***
1.702
[0.525]***
-0.011
[0.051]

1992
1872
1991
1991
2171
962
901
962
962
1056
0.72
0.71
0.72
0.74
0.72
Panel (b): Arellano-Bond GMM
Dependent variable: Fraction of councilmen elected by district
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.313
[0.056]***
-1.644
[0.712]**
2.649
[1.002]***
-0.342
[0.258]

0.293
[0.082]***
-2.326
[0.831]***
2.66
[1.053]**
-0.182
[0.282]

All U.S.,
Fully
covered
States

(7)
-0.849
[0.415]**
1.305
[0.545]**
-0.022
[0.054]
0.022
[0.137]
Included
2170
1056
0.75

0.276
[0.079]***
-2.389
[0.802]***
2.683
[0.983]***
-0.163
[0.282]

Second Order Serial
Correlation p-value
0.140
0.04
0.046
J test p-value
0.123
0.172
0.142
Observations
1506
768
758
Number of cities
797
399
391
Notes: Standard errors in brackets below coefficients. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%. In panel (a) standard errors are clustered at the city level. All regressions include year
fixed effects. Both Panel (a) and (b) refer to period 1970-2000. States fully covered under the 1975
renewal of the Voting Rights Act are Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina, Texas,
and Virginia.

Table VIII
Size of Minority and City Form of Government: Within-city variation
Estimator:

Sample:

Frac. Minority
(Frac. Minority)^2
Log(City Population)

Fixed
Effects

Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Effects
Effects
Effects
Effects
South,
Cities >
South
South
South
All U.S.
2500
Panel (a): Post 1967
Dependent variable: Form of government index
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.428
[0.347]
0.699
[0.515]
0.055
[0.048]

-0.405
[0.367]
0.748
[0.587]
0.067
[0.057]

Log(Median Income)

-0.458
[0.348]
0.658
[0.511]
0.077
[0.051]
-0.141
[0.088]

State trend
Observations
Number of cities
R-squared

Frac. Minority
(Frac. Minority)^2
Log(City Population)
Log(Median Income)
State trend

-0.236
[0.388]
0.375
[0.535]
0.078
[0.050]
-0.135
[0.091]
Included

4492
1980
0.79

-0.211
[0.244]
0.459
[0.325]
0.036
[0.037]

4161
4491
4491
14082
1812
1980
1980
6827
0.79
0.79
0.8
0.86
Panel (b): Pre 1967
Dependent variable: Form of government index
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.091
[0.650]
0.378
[0.815]
0.018
[0.066]

0.387
[0.970]
-0.175
[1.648]
0.017
[0.066]

-0.481
[1.143]
0.742
[1.782]
0.059
[0.061]
-0.226
[0.082]***

Fixed
Effects

South

(6)
-0.143
[0.258]
0.295
[0.322]
0.047
[0.036]
-0.135
[0.065]**
Included
14081
6827
0.86

-0.455
[1.194]
0.687
[1.873]
0.046
[0.065]
-0.188
[0.085]**
Included

Observations
2454
2447
2087
2087
Number of cities
979
974
978
978
R-squared
0.77
0.77
0.82
0.83
Notes: Corrected standard errors in brackets below coefficients. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. In panels (a) and (b) standard errors are clustered at
the city level. All regressions include year fixed effects. Panel (a) covers the period 19702000. Panel (b) covers the period 1930-1970.

Table IX
Size of Minority and City Form of Government: Withincity variation
Estimator:

ArellanoBond
GMM

Lag Form of Gov.

0.444
[0.059]***
-1.231
[0.654]*
0.997
[0.775]
-0.036
[0.224]

Arellano- ArellanoBond
Bond
GMM
GMM
South,
Cities >
2500
All U.S.
South
Sample:
Panel (a): Post 1967
Dependent variable: Form of government index
(1)
(2)
(3)

Frac. Minority
(Frac. Minority)^2
Log(City Population)

0.459
[0.060]***
-1.306
[0.670]*
1.185
[0.787]
-0.093
[0.247]

0.44
[0.053]***
-0.862
[0.596]
0.868
[0.640]
-0.175
[0.226]

Second Order Serial
Correlation p-value
0.161
0.131
0.094
J test p-value
0.069
0.119
0.101
Observations
1848
1820
3291
Number of cities
940
914
2383
Panel (b): Pre 1967
Dependent variable: Form of government index
(1)
(2)
Lag Form of Gov.
Frac. Minority
(Frac. Minority)^2
Log(City Population)

0.55
[0.091]***
8.964
[7.688]
-11.995
[11.956]
0.859
[0.405]**

0.55
[0.091]***
8.964
[7.688]
-11.995
[11.956]
0.859
[0.405]**

Second Order Serial
Correlation p-value
0.662
0.662
J test p-value
0.173
0.173
Observations
938
938
Number of cities
473
473
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets below
coefficients. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%. Lag Form of Gov. is the the first lag of
the dependent variable. All regressions include year fixed
effects. Panel (a) covers the period 1970-2000. Panel (b)
covers the period 1930-1970. Both ethnic
fractionalization and population are treated as
endogenous variables. The maximum number of lags
used for instrumenting them is 2.

Estimator:

Sample:

Table X
Size of Minority and Form of Government Indexes: Within-city variation
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Effects
Effects
Effects
Effects
Effects
Effects
Effects
South,
Cities >
South
South
South
South
South
All U.S.
2500
Period 1980-2000

Fixed
Effects
All U.S.,
Cities>
2500

Length
Term limit term of
for Mayor Mayor
(1)
(2)

Executive Executive Executive Executive Executive Executive
Index
Index
Index
Index
Index
Index
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

Frac. Minority

0.281
[0.154]*

0.138
[0.517]

-0.908
[1.610]

-0.413
[1.596]

-0.927
[1.635]

-0.074
[1.682]

0.811
[0.954]

0.879
[0.982]

(Frac. Minority)^2

-0.375
[0.185]**

0.345
[0.700]

1.137
[2.268]

0.247
[2.235]

1.144
[2.270]

0.577
[2.424]

-0.36
[1.260]

-0.452
[1.280]

0.033
[0.024]

0.068
[0.061]

0.089
[0.149]

-0.004
[0.169]

0.093
[0.161]

0.003
[0.189]

0.054
[0.087]

0.013
[0.111]

-0.027
[0.393]

0.065
[0.434]
Included

Dependent
variable:

Log(City
Population)
Log(Median
Income)
State trend
Observations
Number of cities
R-squared

0.2
[0.240]

3488
4423
2754
2504
2754
2754
9488
8731
1723
1970
1547
1391
1547
1547
5474
4989
0.77
0.86
0.89
0.9
0.89
0.89
0.88
0.88
Notes: Standard errors in brackets below coefficients. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%. Standard errors are clustered at the city level. All regressions include year fixed effects. Term limit of mayor
is computed as 1-max no. terms/8 if term limits are present, 0 otherwise. The executive index is computed as
the sum of 1 if the system is mayor-council, 1 if the mayor has veto power, and lenght of term for the mayor
divided by 7, and subtracting term limit, - 1 for the presence of recall, initiative or popular referendum.

year

Table DI
Summary Statistics (All U.S. sample, excl. South)
Single
Form of
Fract.
Population Median
District
Governme Minority
Household
nt
Income
year

Summary Statistics (All U.S. sample, incl. South)
Single
Form of
Fract.
Population
District
Governme Minority
nt

Median
Household
Income

1980

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.264445
0.408385
0
1
2870

0.366814
0.683129
-1
1
3176

0.067241 22787.53
22809.2
0.111262 142177.4 8163.656
0
161 8347.087
0.95962 7071638 91020.62
3151
3176
3176

1980

mean
0.23934 0.377363
0.09799
st. dev. 0.395861 0.647312 0.137489
min.
0
-1
0
max.
1
1 0.998817
N. obs.
3943
4338
4297

22559.6
127573.8
113
7071638
4338

21573.12
7987.236
6479.371
91020.62
4338

1990

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.221614
0.381637
0
1
2904

0.352992
0.662213
-1
1
3476

0.085131 20925.98 25754.26
0.129206 75066.69 11934.09
0
107 6783.474
0.994365 3485398 114767.4
3455
3476
3476

1990

mean
0.22391
0.3656 0.118933
st. dev. 0.382196 0.625077 0.153624
min.
0
-1
0
max.
1
1 0.994365
N. obs.
3976
4814
4754

20816.74
69684.18
107
3485398
4814

23949.99
11484.99
5696.253
114767.4
4814

2000

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.275712
0.407991
0
1
2671

0.278485
0.660554
-1
1
2984

0.125633
22625.3 27690.47
0.153197 83089.34 12362.81
0
124 8470.961
0.979246 3694834 116144.6
2984
2984
2984

2000

mean 0.287567 0.290456 0.158393
st. dev. 0.412552 0.623114 0.171226
min.
0
-1
0
max.
1
1 0.993369
N. obs.
3681
4097
4097

23113.37 26127.72
84880.19 12285.1
124 8309.526
3694834 116144.6
4097
4097

Total

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.25328
0.399898
0
1
8445

0.334475
0.669677
-1
1
9636

0.091855 22065.77 25383.17
0.133983 104075.6 11159.28
0
107 6783.474
0.994365 7071638 116144.6
9590
9636
9636

Total

mean 0.249355 0.346215 0.124384
st. dev. 0.397537 0.632916
0.15634
min.
0
-1
0
max.
1
1 0.998817
N. obs.
11600
13249
13148

22097.58
96543.37
107
7071638
13249

23845.18
10898.35
5696.253
116144.6
13249

year

Table DII
Summary Statistics (South sample)
South Region
Fract.
Single
Form of
District
Governme Minority
nt

Population

1930

mean 0.190187 0.614458
st. dev. 0.341789
0.67566
min.
0
-1
max. 0.947368
1
N. obs.
144
166

0.240152
0.152765
0.00094
0.96162
137

55689.73
97710.1
284.928
804874.1
137

1940

mean 0.367765 0.231325
st. dev. 0.459492 0.795204
min.
0
-1
max.
1
1
N. obs.
415
415

0.221453
0.145513
0.000239
0.597693
229

44127.13
85805.16
4868
859100.3
229

1950

mean 0.345231 0.254065
st. dev. 0.452349
0.74599
min.
0
-1
max.
1
1
N. obs.
486
492

0.208854
0.144826
0.000111
0.723511
492

32005.15
73305.76
2774
949708.4
492

1960

mean 0.253952 0.264264
st. dev.
0.41375 0.675556
min.
0
-1
max.
1
1
N. obs.
656
666

0.194137
0.145493
0
0.694678
663

34242.28
82867.91
3202.001
939023.6
663

1970

mean 0.161332 0.283726
st. dev. 0.354326 0.555411
min.
0
-1
max.
1
1
N. obs.
904
934

0.17797
0.150278
0
0.770336
936

29274.97
79091.1
2406
1199388
936

1980

mean
0.17219 0.406196
st. dev. 0.351701 0.536582
min.
0
-1
max.
1
1
N. obs.
1073
1162

0.182536
0.164655
0
0.998817
1146

21936.64
74266.77
113
1595138
1162

1990

mean
0.23013 0.398356
st. dev. 0.383814 0.515051
min.
0
-1
max.
1
1
N. obs.
1072
1338

0.208838
0.175684
0
0.986468
1299

20532.95
53238.92
243
935926.6
1338

2000

mean 0.318919 0.322552
st. dev. 0.422985
0.50821
min.
0
-1
max.
1
1
N. obs.
1010
1113

0.246224
0.185563
0
0.993369
1113

24421.92
89530.48
138
1954847
1113

Total

mean
0.24545
0.33853
st. dev. 0.401669 0.593737
min.
0
-1
max.
1
1
N. obs.
5760
6286

0.205515
0.166296
0
0.998817
6015

26973.67
76418.88
113
1954847
6070

Table DIII
Voting Rights Act Coverage: Applicable Date; Fed. Register; Date
States Covered as a Whole:
Alabama
Nov. 1, 1964
Alaska
Nov. 1, 1972
Arizona
Nov. 1, 1972
Georgia
Nov. 1, 1964
Louisiana
Nov. 1, 1964
Mississippi
Nov. 1, 1964
South Carolina Nov. 1, 1964
Texas
Nov. 1, 1972
Virginia
Nov. 1, 1964

30 FR 9897
40 FR 49422
40 FR 43746
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
40 FR 43746
30 FR 9897

Aug. 7, 1965.
Oct. 22, 1975.
Sept. 23, 1975.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Sept. 23, 1975.
Aug. 7, 1965.

Covered Counties in States Not Covered as a Whole:
California:
Kings County
Merced County
Monterey County
Yuba County
Yuba County
Florida:
Collier County
Hardee County
Hendry County
Hillsborough County
Monroe County
New York:
Bronx County
Bronx County
Kings County
Kings County
New York County
North Carolina:
Anson County
Beaufort County
Bertie County
Bladen County
Camden County
Caswell County
Chowan County
Cleveland County
Craven County
Cumberland County

Nov. 1, 1972
Nov. 1, 1972
Nov. 1, 1968
Nov. 1, 1968
Nov. 1, 1972

40 FR 43746
40 FR 43746
36 FR 5809
36 FR 5809
41 FR 784

Sept. 23. 1975.
Sept. 23, 1975.
Mar. 27, 1971.
Mar. 27, 1971.
Jan. 5, 1976.

Nov. 1, 1972
Nov. 1, 1972
Nov. 1, 1972
Nov. 1, 1972
Nov. 1, 1972

41 FR 34329
40 FR 43746
41 FR 34329
40 FR 43746
40 FR 43746

Aug. 13, 1976.
Sept. 23, 1975.
Aug. 13, 1976.
Sept. 23, 1975.
Sept. 23, 1975.

Nov. 1, 1968
Nov. 1, 1972
Nov. 1, 1968
Nov. 1, 1972
Nov. 1, 1968

36 FR 5809
40 FR 43746
36 FR 5809
40 FR 43746
36 FR 5809

Mar. 27, 1971.
Sept. 23, 1975.
Mar. 27, 1971.
Sept. 23, 1975.
Mar. 27, 1971.

Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964

30 FR 9897
31 FR 5081
30 FR 9897
31 FR 5081
31 FR 3317
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
31 FR 5081
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897

Aug. 7, 1965.
Mar. 29, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Mar. 29, 1966.
Mar. 2, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Mar. 29, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.

Edgecombe County
Franklin County
Gaston County
Gates County
Granville County
Greene County
Guilford County
Halifax County
Harnett County
Hertford County
Hoke County
Jackson County
Lee County
Lenoir County
Martin County
Nash County
Northampton County
Onslow County
Pasquotank County
Perquimans County
Person County
Pitt County
Robeson County
Rockingham County
Scotland County
Union County
Vance County
Washington County
Wayne County
Wilson County
South Dakota:
Shannon County
Todd County

Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1972
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964
Nov. 1, 1964

30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
31 FR 5081
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
31 FR 5081
30 FR 9897
31 FR 5081
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
40 FR 49422
31 FR 5081
30 FR 9897
31 FR 19
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
31 FR 3317
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897
31 FR 5081
30 FR 9897
31 FR 5081
30 FR 9897
31 FR 19
30 FR 9897
30 FR 9897

Nov. 1, 1972 41 FR 784
Nov. 1, 1972 41 FR 784

Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Mar. 29, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Mar. 29, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Mar. 29, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Oct. 22, 1975.
Mar. 29, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Jan. 4, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Mar. 2, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Mar. 29, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Mar. 29, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Jan. 4, 1966.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Aug. 7, 1965.
Jan. 5, 1976.
Jan. 5, 1976.

Covered Townships in States Not Covered as a Whole
Michigan:
Allegan County: Clyde Township Nov. 1, 1972 41 FR 34329 Aug. 13, 1976.
Saginaw County: Buena Vista Township Nov. 1, 1972 41 FR 34329 Aug. 13,
1976.
New Hampshire:
Cheshire County:
Rindge Town Nov. 1, 1968 39 FR 16912 May 10, 1974.
Coos County: Millsfield Township Nov. 1, 1968 39 FR 16912 May 10, 1974.
Pinkhams Grant
Nov. 1, 1968 39 FR 16912 May 10, 1974.
Stewartstown Town Nov. 1, 1968 39 FR 16912 May 10, 1974.
Stratford Town
Nov. 1, 1968 39 FR 16912 May 10, 1974.

Grafton County:
Benton Town Nov. 1, 1968 39 FR 16912 May 10, 1974.
Hillsborough County: Antrim Town Nov. 1, 1968 39 FR 16912 May 10, 1974.
Merrimack County: Boscawen Town Nov. 1, 1968 39 FR 16912 May 10, 1974.
Rockingham County: Newington Town Nov. 1, 1968 39 FR 16912 May 10,
1974.
Sullivan County: Unity Town Nov. 1, 1968 39 FR 16912 May 10, 1974.
Source: Department of Justice.

Table A I: Sample Selection (years 1980-2000)

year
1980

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

Census Places and selected MCD's Not ICMA Form of Government Sample
(ICMA Survey Respondents)
All Census Places and selected MCD's
in ICMA Sample
Ethnic Frac. Population Med. Income Ethnic Frac. Population Med. Income Ethnic Frac. Population Med. Income
0.119897 9118.068
19208.98 0.1160492 7172.804
18883.43 0.1467891 22713.42
21484.27
0.1455027 63175.11
6744.721
0.14351 47311.46
6485.699 0.1561237 126620.4
7971.08
0
100
3032.767
0
100
3032.767
0
113
6479.369
0.664348
7071639
91020.63
0.664348 3122307
91020.63 0.6593081
7071639
91020.63
35439
35439
35439
31003
31003
31003
4436
4436
4436

1990

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.1006002
0.1471291
0
0.6645895
44929

6170.385
50790.99
100
7322564
44929

20617.8
8899.342
3824.79
114767.4
44929

0.0919233
0.1423105
0
0.6645895
40014

4444.582
48046.86
100
7322564
40014

20215.08
8439.477
3824.79
114767.4
40014

0.1712403
0.1655406
0
0.6546158
4915

20220.49
67579.89
107
3485398
4915

23896.39
11492.09
5696.251
114767.4
4915

2000

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.1501133
0.1628525
0
0.6665496
51851

8582.013
62828.02
100
8008278
51851

22822.19
9093.845
2177.7
116144.6
51851

0.1439961
0.1607504
0
0.6665496
47658

7315.146
60455.36
100
8008278
47658

22528.88
8684.614
2177.7
116144.6
47658

0.2196418
0.1702933
0
0.6632373
4193

22981.33
83952.82
124
3694834
4193

26156
12382.84
8309.523
116144.6
4193

Total

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.1251894
0.1545542
0
0.6665496
132219

7906.204
59126.08
100
8008278
132219

21104.66
8586.952
2177.7
116144.6
132219

0.1191376
0.151941
0
0.6665496
118675

6310.084
53222
100
8008278
118675

20796.38
8219.904
2177.7
116144.6
118675

0.1782162
0.166656
0
0.6632373
13544

21891.7
95344.94
107
7071639
13544

23805.9
10939.28
5696.251
116144.6
13544

Note: Median income equal to 0 indicates a value of income zeroed by the U.S. Census for confidentiality purposes. Only 2 municipalities in
1980 and 2 in 2000 required such treatment and were dropped from the sample. 11185 municipalities below 100 inhabitants were dropped
and 4 obs. with inconsistent racial data were dropped.

Table A II: Response Selection (year 2000)

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

ICMA Form of Government Full Sample
Ethnic Frac. Population Med. Income
0.2208746 22780.94
25502.09
0.1740321 121694.4
12237.76
0
124
5897.793
0.6658266 8008278
116144.6
7757
7757
7757

2000

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

ICMA Survey Respondents
0.2196418 22981.33
26156
0.1702933 83952.82
12382.84
0
124
8309.523
0.6632373 3694834
116144.6
4193
4193
4193

2000

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

ICMA Survey Non Respondents
0.2223249 22545.18
24732.77
0.1783436 154742.4
12021.1
0
124
5897.793
0.6658266 8008278
116144.6
3564
3564
3564

year
2000

Note: the ICMA 2001 FOG survey sample universe has
been provided by ICMA. We thank Sebia Clark for
making the data available to us.

Table A III: Sample Selection (years 1930-1970)
All Census Places and selected MCD's Census Places and selected MCD's Not ICMA Form of Government Sample
year
Ethnic Frac. Population Med. Income Ethnic Frac. Population Med. Income Ethnic Frac. Population Med. Income
1930

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.3292589
0.1502718
0.0018783
0.6480194
485

22008.04
60550.19
284.928
804874
485

.
.
.
.
.

0.331009
0.1526281
0.0042565
0.5599921
347

8764.79
27382.69
1985.251
505508
347

.
.
.
.
.

0.3248581
0.1446257
0.0018783
0.6480194
138

55308.09
97456.01
284.928
804874
138

.
.
.
.
.

1940

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.3030753
0.1564919
0.0004773
0.501893
379

28999.28
69525.07
2522
859100
379

.
.
.
.
.

0.3029203
0.162654
0.003721
0.501893
150

5904.107
10389.01
2522
111580
150

.
.
.
.
.

0.3031768
0.1526823
0.0004773
0.500385
229

44127.13
85805.15
4868
859100
229

.
.
.
.
.

1950

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.2554969
0.1734978
0
0.5287216
1351

15490.66
52227.8
1012
949708
1351

9398.706
6513.281
975.1038
215854.8
1350

0.2360436
0.1790261
0
0.5287216
858

6030.967
31175.21
1012
802178
858

9272.253
3651.893
1937.759
41493.78
858

0.2893527
0.157986
0.0002228
0.5028492
493

31953.97
73240.03
2774
949708
493

9619.227
9654.049
975.1038
215854.8
492

1960

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.2346919
0.1769923
0
0.5097046
1626

17858.46
58170.46
1851
939024
1626

13421.45
4990.751
2094.594
42929.05
1648

0.2094234
0.1821448
0
0.5097046
960

6570.596
26076.79
1851
763956
960

13895.89
5552.122
2094.594
36564.19
978

0.2711151
0.1626483
0
0.5051175
666

34129.25
82698.15
3202
939024
666

12728.9
3936.007
2324.324
42929.05
670

1970

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.2113373
0.1742144
0
0.5558298
2044

17452.66
58033.25
1235
1199388
2044

21521.73
7005.694
4692.664
76871.13
2040

0.2018225
0.1744557
0
0.5558298
1551

9929.842
32521.35
1235
730359
1551

21489.66
7413.138
4692.664
76871.13
1547

0.2412711
0.1701882
0
0.5053402
493

41119.77
99564.85
4906
1199388
493

21622.34
5541.271
10051.55
59262.89
493

Total

mean
st. dev.
min.
max.
N. obs.

0.2435539
0.1754291
0
0.6480194
5885

18233.4
57900.31
284.928
1199388
5885

15623.49
8089.185
975.1038
215854.8
5038

0.2268228
0.1794255
0
0.5599921
3866

7969.613
29711.03
1012
802178
3866

16195.77
7994.725
1937.759
76871.13
3383

0.2755909
0.1628231
0
0.6480194
2019

37886.61
86579.32
284.928
1199388
2019

14453.68
8157.32
975.1038
215854.8
1655

Note: The table includes only observations with non missing values.

