                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SUICIDAL BEHAVIOR AND THE LABOR MARKET PRODUCTIVITY OF YOUNG
                                ADULTS

                                             Erdal Tekin
                                           Sara Markowitz

                                        Working Paper 11238
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11238


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2005




We would like to express our sincere thanks to Carol Tremblay for her very helpful suggestions and
comments.

© 2005 by Erdal Tekin and Sara Markowitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Suicidal Behavior and the Labor Market Productivity of Young Adults
Erdal Tekin and Sara Markowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 11238
April 2005, Revised October 2006
JEL No. I1,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper provides a comprehensive analysis of the link between suicidal behaviors and human capital
formation of young adults in the United States. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health, we estimate the effects of suicide thoughts and attempts on the probability of engaging
in work or school. The richness of the data set allows us to implement several strategies to control
for unobserved heterogeneity and the potential reverse causality. These include using a large set of
control variables that are likely to be correlated with both suicidal behavior and the outcome measures,
an instrumental variables method, and a fixed effects analysis from the subsample of twin pairs contained
in the data. The longitudinal nature of the data set also allows us to control for past suicidal thoughts
and suicide attempts of the individuals from their high school years as well as the suicidal behavior
of their family members. Results from the different identification strategies consistently indicate that
both suicide thoughts and suicide attempts decrease the likelihood a young adult individual engages
in work or schooling.

Erdal Tekin
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
tekin@gsu.edu

Sara Markowitz
Rutgers University
Department of Economics
360 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd.
Newark, NJ 07102
and NBER
smarkow@rutgers.edu
I. Introduction

       The suicide rate among youths has reached an alarming rate in recent years and is now the

third leading cause of death for those aged 15-24 (Anderson and Smith 2003). Since 1950, the

suicide rate has tripled among youths (Cutler et al. 2001). Even more striking is the number of

suicide attempts by young individuals. For every teen that commits suicide, as many as 150 teens

attempt suicide (Chatterji et al. 2004). Concern over the health and well-being of youths has

prompted the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) to develop a national

strategy for suicide prevention. This comprehensive campaign includes developing public

education campaigns, increasing the number of suicide prevention programs in schools, work sites

and community services, and incorporating screening at primary health care facilities.

       Suicide attempts, regardless of whether or not they are completed, impose real health care

and other costs on individuals and society. For example, the direct medical costs associated with

both completed and medically treated suicides by youths under 21 amounted to $945 million in

1996, and lost future earnings are estimated at $2.85 billion (Miller et al. 1999). A suicide attempt

can have adverse effects on one’s current and future labor market productivity due to a bodily injury

or permanent disability, lost credibility in the workplace, interruptions at work and school, lost

interest in future employment efforts, and continuing psychological problems. Despite this strong

link between suicidal behavior and labor market outcomes, our knowledge of the potential effects of

suicidal behavior on labor market and school outcomes is very limited. This relationship is also

confounded by the potential effects that poor school or labor market outcomes have in contributing

to suicidal behaviors.

       This paper explores in depth the link between suicidal behaviors and engaging in productive

activities. Specifically, we focus on labor market and educational outcomes of young adults who

are at a stage in life characterized by intense investment in human capital. These adults are in

                                                   1
school, participating in job training or are just starting their careers. Disruptions to these

investments can have profound, long-term implications for future earnings and occupational

choices. If there is a positive link between the quality of the initial job and future labor market

success, the answer to this question will provide important insights into the long-term effects of

suicidal behavior and will help structure a better-informed policy debate over the effectiveness of

cognitive behavioral therapies and anti-suicide programs such as those implemented at high schools

in the United States.

       A study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (1992) documents that most anti-

suicide programs focus on teenagers with little emphasis given to suicide among young adults. This

is partly due to the fact that teenagers in high school are easier to reach than young adults and partly

due to a failure to appreciate that the suicide rate is generally twice as high among persons 20-24

years of age as among adolescents 15-19 years of age. The study recommends an expansion of the

suicide prevention efforts for young adults 20-24 years of age.

       The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a summary of the previous evidence

on the subject. Section III discusses the econometric methodology. Section IV introduces the data

set and the variables used in the analyses. Section V summarizes the results. Section VI concludes

the paper.



II. Background

       Researchers believe that almost all individuals who commit suicide have a diagnosable

mental disorder, and mental illnesses are also primary risk factors for suicide thoughts and attempts

(Maris et al. 1992, Alexopoulos et al. 1999, Johnson et al. 1990). It has been estimated that two-

thirds of people who commit suicide have a depressive illness; 5 percent suffer from schizophrenia;

and 10 percent meet the criteria for other mental illnesses including borderline personality disorder.

                                                    2
The relationship between mental illness and suicidal behaviors also holds for youth (Fergusson and

Woodward 2002). One estimate shows that over 90 percent of children and adolescents who

commit suicide have a mental disorder (Shaffer and Craft 1999).

       While depressive illnesses are most commonly associated with suicidal behaviors, other

disorders are also frequently observed, including substance abuse disorders, attention deficit

disorder, anxiety disorders, panic disorder, schizophrenic disorders, post-traumatic stress disorders,

borderline personality disorders (Alexopoulos et al. 1999, Johnson et al. 1990, Goldsmith et al.

2002). For example, in a study of youth in a psychiatric hospital, Borst and Noam (1989) find that

conduct disorders are the most prevalent type of disorders diagnosed among suicide attempters.

The authors conclude, “factors such as impulsivity and anger may contribute significantly to

suicidal behavior in children and adolescents.” (p. 174) Personality disorders are also highly

prevalent, with a diagnosis rate of 40 to 53 percent among youth who have committed suicide

(Goldsmith et al. 2002).

       It is important to note that the mental illnesses that manifest themselves through suicidal

behaviors likely represent the most severe cases of illness. Simon and Von Korff (1998) find that

among insured patients receiving treatment for depression, the highest risk of suicide was among

those receiving inpatient treatment and medication and the lowest risk was found among individuals

receiving outpatient treatment without medication.

       Cutler et al. (2001) argue that there is a fundamental difference between suicide attempts

and completions among youth, where the latter is a result of the desire to die and the former is not.

The authors discuss four reasons for suicide attempts among youth: The first involves strategic

motives to “…signal others that they are unhappy or to punish others for their unhappiness.” (p.

233). The second is the depression theory where youths cross some unhappiness threshold and

desire to take their own lives. The third is the contagion theory where a “‘social multiplier’ may

                                                  3
amplify the effects of stressors leading to depression or may amplify the effects of factors leading to

suicidal signaling as a method of conflict resolution among youths.” (p. 233-234). The fourth

theory involves the combination of unhappiness and the means to kill themselves. Even in the

absence of the intent to die, it is clear that underlying mental states are extremely important in the

theories predicting suicidal behaviors.

       In contrast to the conclusions drawn by Culter et al., Boergers et al. (1998) find that most

adolescents who attempt suicides cite the reasons of wanting to die or to get relief from a terrible

state of mind as the primary reason for the attempt. Few identify the attempt as a cry for help or a

way of getting back at someone. Although it is difficult to pinpoint the exact underlying motives

for a suicide thought or attempt, the link between suicide and mental illness cannot be denied.

       Suicidal behaviors and the underlying mental illness may influence labor market and

schooling outcomes through direct and indirect channels. The direct mechanism may work through

suicidal behavior causing lower engagement in work and schooling activities due to reduced

concentration and cognitive abilities (Greenberg et al. 1990, Conti and Burton 1994). Injuries from

failed suicide attempts may also contribute absenteeism and reduced productivity at work and

school. About 116,000 individuals who survive a suicide attempt are hospitalized with an average

hospital stay of ten days and an average cost of $15,000 (Miller 1995). Seventeen percent of these

people are permanently disabled and restricted in their ability to work (Miller 1995).

       The indirect mechanism may work through mental illness which may, for example,

contribute to teenage pregnancy and marital instability, or may lead to low educational attainment,

poor labor market productivity and lower wages (Kessler et al. 1997, Overbeek et al. 2003).

Whether direct or indirect, suicidal behaviors can affect an individual’s productivity which may

have consequences for wages and earnings. If a positive link exists between the quality of a job




                                                   4
early in adulthood and future labor market success, suicidal behaviors in early adulthood can have

long-lasting implications.

       There is also evidence that individuals with depression symptoms and those who exhibit

suicidal behaviors are less likely to reach their potential academically. According to the

Department of Education, 50 percent of children with serious emotional and behavioral problems

drop out of high school, compared to 30 percent of students with other disabilities (U.S. Department

of Education 2001). Stoep et al. (2003) find that over half of the adolescents in the United States

who fail to complete their secondary education have a diagnosable psychiatric disorder. Using a

twin sample from Minnesota, Marmorstein and Iacono (2001) conclude that depression is related to

significant difficulties in functioning and school adjustment which result in an increased number of

suspensions and failure of classes. Slap et al. (2001) document that those who attempt suicide

perform poorer at school and have a lower level of school connectedness than non-attempters.

       The relationship from labor market outcomes to poor mental health also cannot be ignored.

Mental health may certainly be affected by labor market involvement as higher wages may improve

mental health. In the simplest case, more income can allow a person to purchase treatment for

mental illness. Higher incomes might also remove stress from financial insecurity and contribute to

good health. Hamermesh and Soss (1974) propose that suicide occurs when an individual’s taste

for living plus the total discounted lifetime utility, which is a function of permanent income, equals

zero. Aggregate suicide rates should therefore fluctuate with expectations about future income and

the unemployment rate. Indeed, a number of studies on the economic determinants of suicide show

that suicide rates fall with rising incomes and rise with the unemployment rate (see Marcotte 2003

for a review). In short, mental health status and labor market outcomes may be intertwined. In this

case it is necessary to model the link between suicidal behavior and labor market outcomes as

simultaneous equations in order to obtain unbiased estimates.

                                                   5
       To the best of our knowledge, only one previous study, Marcotte (2003), has directly

estimated the effects of suicide thoughts and attempts on labor market outcomes. The lack of

economic studies on suicidal behavior is largely due to lack of individual level data. The majority

of studies on the topic use aggregate data from sources such as vital statistics to look at the

correlations between economic outcomes such as income and suicidal behavior. However, to the

extent that the underlying behavioral mechanism that leads to suicide decisions and thoughts is

based on micro-level utility maximization decisions, aggregate data analysis is unsatisfying

(Marcotte 2003). Using data from the National Comorbidity Survey conducted in 1991-1992,

Marcotte (2003) finds that suicidal behaviors are associated with lower current income, although

suicide attempters are associated with a higher current income than those who only thought about

suicide. The higher income may result because of income transfers from family members or the

government following the attempt. Subsequent mental health treatment may also improve mental

health and labor market outcomes. The sample size in this paper is 5,877 and the target population

is all adults between ages 18-54. In contrast, we use a much larger sample in this study from a more

recent survey and we explicitly look at the responses of young adult population between ages 18

and 26. Our outcome measures differ in that we examine school and work activities. Finally, the

cross-sectional nature of the data set used in Marcotte study and the lack of any potential

instruments do not allow the author to rule out the possibility that his findings are due to

heterogeneity (Marcotte 2003, p. 640).

       Despite the lack of evidence in the literature of the labor market effects of suicidal

behaviors, a number of studies have examined the relationship between mental illness and labor

market outcomes. Given the close link between suicide and mental illness, this literature can

provide insights into the true nature of the relationship. Most of this research shows that poor

mental health is associated with reduced success in the labor market among adults. The first

                                                   6
generation of papers focusing on the effects of mental health status on labor market outcomes

acknowledges but ignores the potential endogeneity between the outcomes. Studies such as Bartel

and Taubman (1979, 1986), Mullahy and Sindelar (1990), and Frank and Gertler (1991) all show

that individuals with reported or diagnosed mental disorders have worse labor market outcomes

than other individuals. Bartel and Taubman (1979, 1986) find that earnings are lower among

individuals with a recent or past mental illness diagnosis. Mullahy and Sindelar (1990) find that

people with both self-reported and diagnosed mental illnesses are associated with a lower

probability of working. Frank and Gertler (1991) show that having a mental illness reduces one’s

earnings. This paper is also important because it shows the bias introduced by using a utilization

based measure that disregards mental health status rather than population based measure of mental

illness. The bias arises because only a subset of the mentally ill seeks treatment.

       The second generation of papers explicitly tests for and if necessary, accounts for, the

potential endogeneity of mental illness in the equations for labor market outcomes. The results of

these studies are generally consistent with the first generation studies and find worse labor market

outcomes among mentally ill individuals. For example, Ettner et al. (1997) use the National

Comorbidity Survey to study effects of the presence of specific mental illnesses (such as

schizophrenia and major depression) on the probability of being employed, usual hours of work and

annual income. The number of psychiatric disorders experienced during childhood and parental

history of mental illness serve as instrumental variables. Results show that psychiatric disorders

have detrimental effects on all three labor market outcomes. French and Zarkin (1998) examine the

relationship between symptoms of emotional and psychological problems and earnings at a large

worksite in the U.S. Results of tests for the endogeneity of mental health in the earnings equation

leads the authors to treat mental health as exogenous. They find that earnings are lower and

absenteeism is higher among those reporting mental health problems. Hamilton et al. (1997)

                                                   7
examine the simultaneous relationship between unemployment and mental health. Using maximum

likelihood estimation, the authors find evidence that being employed is associated with improved

mental health and that being in poor mental health is associated with a lower probability of

employment.

       Our paper expands the second generation literature by looking at the effects of suicide

thoughts and attempts on the probability of engaging in a productive activity, that is, work or

school. Whereas the average age in many of the above mentioned studies ranges from 35 to 40, this

is the first paper to examine schooling and labor market outcomes for a sample of young adults.

This paper also uses a variety of methods to control for the potential endogeneity of suicidal

behaviors, which allows us to asses the validity of our conclusions. Suicide thoughts and attempts

as measures of mental health are advantageous in that we are able to identify people in severe

mental distress and are not limited to drawing conclusions for one particular mental illness, such as

depression or schizophrenia. Another advantage is that these measures of mental health are

population based rather than treatment based, the latter of which, as Frank and Gertler (1991) point

out, can produce biased results.



III. Methods

       The goal of this paper is to model the effect of suicidal behavior on schooling and labor

market outcomes. Therefore, the basic econometric model can be expressed as:

       Li = βSi+ Xiα + εi,                                               (1)

where Li is a dichotomous indicator for whether the individual i is either at work or school or both,

and is 0 otherwise. Si is a measure of suicidal behavior, Xi is a vector of personal and family

characteristics, and ε is the disturbance term.




                                                  8
        Estimating unbiased effects of suicidal behaviors on labor market outcomes is a difficult

task. Biased estimates can come from two sources of endogeneity. The first, statistical

endogeneity, results from unobserved factors in the error term of equation 1 that are correlated with

both the schooling/labor market outcome and the suicidal behaviors. For example, a lack of a

caring home environment might lead to insufficient investment in activities of child development

and nutrition. This in turn could result simultaneously in poor labor market and schooling outcomes

and poor mental health status. Estimates of the impact of suicidal behavior that do not take account

of this type of effect would be biased. The second source of endogeneity, structural endogeneity,

comes from the potential reverse causality from labor market and schooling outcomes to mental

illness and suicidal tendencies. For example, unemployment and poor school performance may

contribute to stress and poor mental health outcomes. Not accounting for this relationship would

bias the estimates of the suicidal behaviors in equation 1.

        We will attempt to address the potential endogeneity problems in a number of ways. First,

we will try to control for the statistical endogeneity by specifying a full set of variables designed to

minimize the unobserved factors left in the error term. These are variables designed to represent the

home and family environment. By comparing models with and without the background variables,

we will be able to see the extent to which correlation between suicidal behavior and the outcome

variable is affected by controls for these observable characteristics. We are also able to control for

suicidal behaviors of the respondents and their family members from Wave 1, when these

individuals were at high school. These will further help us eliminate the unobserved heterogeneity. 1

Lastly, we include measures of current and previously observed depressive symptoms to account for


1
 Selection bias may be present in our data as it is possible that individuals with severe mental illness in Wave 1 may
have dropped out of the sample because of hospitalization or having committed suicide (although only 96 individuals
are dropped from the data between Waves 1 and 3 due to death, the cause of which is unknown). If this is the case then
our sample would represent people with less severe illnesses. The extent of the problem should be very small as only
41 of the original 20,745 adolescents were not re-interviewed because they were physically or mentally incapable.

                                                          9
one of the many mental illnesses that may confound the relationship between human capital and

suicidal behaviors. These measures are all discussed in further detail below.

       In order to guard against any bias from potential measurement error and also to address a

potential reverse causality from our outcome measures toward suicidal behavior, we will next turn

to the instrumental variables (IV) method. The IV method can be used to address both forms of

endogeneity discussed above. Instrumental variables will yield unbiased estimates of the effects of

suicidal behaviors if instruments can be found which 1) predict suicidal behaviors; and 2) do not

affect outcomes except through their effects on the probability that an individual is suicidal.

Variables describing the suicidal behaviors of friends from Wave 1 and Wave 3 will be used as

instruments for identification under the assumption that these variables will predict an individual’s

own decision on suicide while having no direct impact on his/her work and school decisions.

       One potential concern with the instrumental variables is that if individuals with suicidal

tendencies associate with other people who are suicidal themselves, then the IV strategy would not

work. As we will show below, this does not appear to be a problem and suicidal behavior of friends

appears to be a valid instrument. Using lagged suicidal behavior of friends might be an alternative

way to address some of these concerns but the lagged value does not have much predictive power in

the first stage suicide models. We rely on friends’ suicidal behaviors as instruments in the absence

of better alternatives. The justification for this choice of instruments is presented in detail below.

       The third way we address the endogeneity issue and guard against unobserved omitted

family and background characteristics is to exploit the genetic oversample of the data. In particular,

any observed or unobserved background measures common to both twins will be controlled by

estimating a model with twin-fixed effects. To the extent that twin pairs are exposed to the same

unobservables, a fixed-effects approach will further eliminate unobserved heterogeneity. In order to

implement this design, we restrict our sample to twin pairs, and estimate models of the form:

                                                   10
        Li = δSi+ X’iλ + γPairIDi + ηi,                                                       (2)

where X’ is a vector of fewer control variables then specified in equation 1, and PairID is a unique

identifier for each twin pair. Since any observed or unobserved background measures common to

both twins will be controlled for by including the PairID, only things that differ between twins, such

as gender, marital status, test scores, and drug use will be included in the vector X’. The twin-fixed

effects is a powerful way to control for family background characteristics and experiences common

to both twins that might be correlated with both the suicidal behaviors and the outcome measures.

Unfortunately, one potential problem with this approach is that the results may be biased if there are

individual experiences that are correlated with suicidal behavior and that differ between twins.

Given that our sample is of young adults, it is likely that events and environments related to the

family will be picked up by the fixed effects. Also, it is important to acknowledge the possibility

that an individual may be depressed or traumatized by the suicidal behavior of his or her twin,

which may in turn cause him or her to engage in suicidal thoughts or attempts. In this case, the

difference in labor market outcomes between the two will be reduced, which may cause bias in the

estimated coefficients. However, we guard against this problem by controlling for depression in

Waves 1 and 3 in some of our specifications.



IV. Data

        The data for this project come from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health

(Add Health). 2 The Add Health is the largest and most comprehensive nationally representative

survey of adolescents ever undertaken. The first wave of the survey was administered between
2
 The Add Health is a program project designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris, and
funded by a grant P01-HD31921 from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative
funding from 17 other agencies. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for
assistance in the original design. Persons interested in obtaining data files from Add Health should contact Add Health,
Carolina Population Center, 123 W. Franklin Street, Chapel Hill, NC 27516-2524
(www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth/contract.html).


                                                          11
September 1994 and April 1995 to 20,745 youths in grades 7 through 12. Approximately 200

adolescents were randomly selected from each of 132 schools that are representative of U.S. schools

with respect to county, urbanicity, school size, school type, and ethnicity. The adolescents were

interviewed for the second time between April and August 1996 for Wave 2. Of the original Wave

1 respondents, 15,170 were re-interviewed between August 2001 and April 2002 for Wave 3. There

are about 5,500 cases excluded from Wave 3 for various reasons including moving out of country,

active military duty, incarceration and being institutionalized, death, and failure to locate in

repeated attempts. In order to assess whether individuals who are suicidal in Wave 1 are more

likely to be excluded from Wave 3, we compared the means of suicide thoughts and suicide

attempts as reported in Wave between those who exit the sample from Waves 1 to 3 and those who

stayed in the sample. For both suicide thoughts and suicide attempt, we could not reject the

hypothesis that these means are equal to each other. Therefore, we believe that the sample attrition

is unlikely to be correlated with the suicidal behaviors in our data. The Wave 3 respondents

constitute our main analysis sample. As described below, we also utilize a number of questions

from Wave 1. 3

        One interesting feature of Add Health is the genetic oversample, which consists of a large

number of twins. As one of our identification strategies, we limit our sample to twins and estimate

fixed effect models. There are a total of 578 pairs of identical and fraternal twins in our sample. It

is noteworthy that the fractions of twins who report suicide thoughts and suicide attempts are

similar to that reported in the full sample. 4

        Dependent Variables



3
  We exclude responses from Wave 2 because a large number of individuals were not interviewed in Wave 2 but are
interviewed Waves 1 and 3.
4
  The sample size for our analyses with twins decreases further because of the elimination of missing variables from
either of the individuals within the pairs.

                                                          12
        Our dependent variable is a dichotomous indicator for whether or not the individual is

currently engaged in a productive (or work-related) activity. This indicates whether the individual

currently works, attends school, or both. That is, the variable Work-School equals 1 if the

respondent is either working, in school, or both, and equals 0 otherwise. We define individuals who

are at school as engaging in productive activity because many individuals in our sample are still at

school age. In fact about 38 percent reported going to school, and 63 percent of those who are

working are also at school. 5

        Suicide Variables

        The Add Health contains a series of questions about suicidal behaviors of the respondents,

their friends, and family members in each wave. The self-suicidal behavior questions include

whether the respondent seriously thought about committing suicide in the past 12 months (termed

suicide thoughts) and whether she/he attempted suicide in the past 12 months (termed suicide

attempt). The two questions on suicide from Wave 3 constitute our primary measures of suicidal

behavior. To the extent that suicide attempts are reflective of a more serious mental health problem

than having just suicide thoughts, these two measures provide an opportunity to assess the

differential effect of the degree of suicidal behavior on our outcome measures.

        Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of the variables used in the analyses as well as

their definitions. The first column displays the means for the full sample. The next two columns

display the means for the sub-sample of individuals who report that they had suicide thoughts in the

past 12 months and those who do not report having such thoughts. As shown in Table 1, 6 percent

of the sample seriously thought about committing suicide during the past 12 months and 1.6 percent

reported attempting suicide during the past 12 months. The same figures from Wave 1 are 13.4


5
 Another possible outcome to analyze is the wage rate. However, many of these students are employed at or near
minimum wage (nearly forty percent making less than seven dollars per hour) and the job choices in school and the
associated wages may not reflect accurately what will be their wage trajectory in the future.

                                                         13
percent and 3.7 percent, respectively. Note that among individuals with suicide thoughts, about 27

percent actually attempted suicide. These statistics correspond well with figures from other surveys.

For example, the rates of suicide thoughts and attempts from the 1991-1992 National Comorbidity

Survey are 5.2 percent and 1.4 percent, respectively, for youths ages 15-24.

        In Wave 3, 6.7 percent of our sample reported having friends who tried to kill themselves

during the past 12 months, and about 3 percent reported having family members who tried to kill

themselves during the same period. These numbers are down from 17.5 percent for friends and

from 4.4 percent for family members in Wave 1. The decline in the suicidal behavior of family

members between Wave 1 and Wave 3 is consistent with the general decline in suicides that started

in 1992 (Lubell et al. 2004).

        As illustrated in Table 1, 83.4 percent of our sample is engaged in a work or schooling

activity. The engagement in productive activity is less common (79.2 percent versus 83.7 percent)

among those with suicide thoughts than those with none.

        Other Control Variables

        The richness of the Add Health allows us to control for a large set of background variables

in our analyses. There are 34 variables in this set and their definitions and descriptive statistics are

reported in Table 1. The set includes indicators for age, gender, race, ethnicity, U.S. resident status,

marital status, mother’s educational attainment, non-wage income, and standard Picture Peabody

Vocabulary Test scores from Wave 1. 6 In expanded models, we also include religion, physical

health status, cocaine and drug use from Wave 1, indicators of whether the person experienced any

type of abuse during childhood, whether she/he spent time in foster care, and whether the father had

ever been in jail.


6
  The Add Health Picture Vocabulary Test (AHPVT) is a computerized, abridged version of the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test-Revised (PPVT-R). The AHPVT is a test of hearing vocabulary, designed for persons aged 2 1/2
to 40 years old who can see and hear reasonably well and who understand standard English to some degree.

                                                       14
        It is important to include this extensive set of variables in the analysis to obtain consistent

estimates because they will help reduce the amount of unobserved factors in the error term that are

correlated with both suicidal behavior and productive activity. For example, negative experiences

early in life could predispose individuals to risky, self-destructive or aggressive behaviors by

impairing their self-esteem and damaging their ability to form relationships with others (Veltman

and Browne 2001, Felitti 1998, and Dube et al. 2003). However, many of these variables may be

endogenous themselves, therefore models are estimated with and without these potentially

endogenous variables so that we can gauge the effects of the inclusion or exclusion of these

variables on the coefficients of interest.

        As part of the expanded set of variables, we also include in some models measures of

depressive symptoms. In Wave 1, Add Health asks 18 of the 20 standard questions from the Center

for Epidemiological Scale for Depression (CES-D). 7 In Wave 3, Add Health includes only 9 of

these questions. Responses in the depressive symptoms scale include 0 (never or rarely), 1

(sometimes), 2 (a lot of the time), and 3 (most of the time or all of the time). 8 After summing up

scores from these questions, we generate dichotomous indicators that equals 1 if the individual’s

score places them at the 75th percentile or higher in the sample distribution for that wave and 0

otherwise (Cuellar and Chatterji 2006). We consider these indicators as reflecting elevated levels of

depressive symptoms. The CES-D scale does not correspond to a DSM-IV diagnosis of major

depression. It is used primarily as a screening tool for depression, not as a diagnostic tool (Eaton et

al. 2003). We recognize that depression is endogenous in our models for the same reasons that

suicidal behaviors are endogenous. For this reason we present models with and without the

measures of depression. In addition, we present some models that only include the depression


7
 See Radloff (1977) for more on the CES-D scale.
8
 Several items assess positive symptoms. These are reversed before the scale scores were calculated. The Add Health
CES-D is shown to have a high internal consistency (Goodman 1999).

                                                        15
measure from Wave 1 in order to avoid some of the bias due to potential reverse causality, as

depression will have been measured before the labor market and schooling choices are observed.

Lastly, we show models that include depression measured both at Wave 1 and Wave 3. Note that

the effects of depressive symptoms on labor market and school outcomes are not the main focus of

this paper because the CES-D is primarily a screening tool for depression and may not be able to

identify cases of depression precisely. Also, the scale of depressive symptoms is a very narrow

measure of mental illness as depression is only one of the many that affect human capital formation.

Suicide behaviors, by contract, are associated with many different mental illnesses and therefore

represent a broad scope of illnesses. Suicidal behaviors are much more likely than the CES-D score

to represent the most severe cases of illness. It is the severe cases that are the most likely to have

negative schooling and labor market outcomes.

       Despite the problems with the depression measures, we believe it is important to show

models that include and exclude these measures in order to see the influence of this mental illness

on the estimates of suicidal behaviors. This exercise will help us to gauge, albeit rather imperfectly,

whether or not suicidal behaviors are merely representing the underlying depressive symptoms.

Large decreases in the magnitude of the coefficients on suicide thoughts and attempts that result

when our measures of depression are included will indicate that the suicidal behaviors are likely

representing the effects of this one particular mental illness which is commonly associated with

suicide. Small or no changes in the coefficients will imply that suicidal behaviors affect human

capital formation independently of depressive symptoms, however, we still will not be able to

isolate indirect effects from other mental illness. That is, even with depression held constant, the

coefficients on suicidal behaviors will still represent a combination of the direct and indirect effects

since depression is only one of the many conditions associated with suicides. Unfortunately data

limitations do not allow us to control for all of the possible comorbid conditions.

                                                   16
         In order to conserve a sample as large and representative as possible, we constructed a

dummy variable for “missing category” for the variables for which at least one observation was

missing due to any reason. This method allows us to utilize a sample size of 14,401, which is larger

than those usually employed in most other studies. Age in our sample only ranges from 18 to 26.

We use dummy variables for age in order to capture any non-linear association between age and the

outcomes variables. Certain variables from Wave 1 are used to avoid the potential bias from any

reverse causality. For example, we use the standard test scores and illicit drug use from Wave 1

because the current values may be endogenous to the current productive activity. Furthermore, we

do not include the individual’s own years of schooling into the models because (1) this variable may

be endogenous; and (2) 38 percent of our sample is still in school. Instead, we adopt a quasi-

reduced form approach by substituting in the determinants of human capital accumulation, such as

mother’s education, physical health, and non-wage income. 9 However, we experimented with

models that include the number of years of schooling, models that include the standard test scores

from Wave 3, and models that are only estimated for the non-school sample (the outcome is “work”

in that case). Results are all similar to those presented in this paper and are available upon request.



V. Results

         We begin by discussing the determinants of suicide thoughts and attempts. The results in

Table 2 display the effects of the suicidal behaviors of friends and family as well as personal

characteristics on the probability of suicide thought or attempts among Add Health respondents.

We present results from three different specifications for both suicidal thoughts and attempts. The

first column does not include any of the depression indicators from Waves 1 and 3. The second

column presents the results with the depression indicator from Wave 1 and the third column

9
 Our health variable is a measure of physical health. Therefore it should not be co-linear with the suicidal behavior. In
any case, we estimated models excluding physical health as a control and the results remained the same.

                                                           17
contains the depression indicators from both Waves 1 and 3. These results will later be used as the

first stage results in the work-school equations. Linear probability models are shown with robust

standard errors to adjust for heteroskedasticity in the error term. 10

         The most striking result from Table 2 is that peer and family behaviors have a strong,

positive relationship with the suicidal behaviors of respondents. For example, having a friend who

attempted suicide in Wave 3 increases the probability of suicide thoughts by 12 percentage points

and suicide attempts by more than 3 percentage points. Similarly, having a family member who had

attempted suicide in the past 12 months increases suicide thoughts by 9 percentage points and

suicide attempts by 3 percentage points. A past suicide attempt is highly associated with current

suicidal behavior, increasing suicide thoughts and suicide attempts by about 9 and 4 percentage

points, respectively. This result suggests that mental health problems during adolescence may have

persistent effects on the mental health of individuals even after they enter adulthood. The past

suicidal experiences of the friends and family members have effects in the expected direction

(positive), but the magnitudes of the coefficients are small and are not estimated with much

precision. For practical purposes, these effects are not distinguishable from zero.

         A few other variables are worth mentioning for their efficacy in predicting suicide thoughts

and attempts. Individuals in the top 25th percent of the CES-D distribution (the depression

indicators) are positively associated with suicide thoughts and attempts. Having a standardized test

score in one of the top three percentile categories actually increases the probability of having

suicide thoughts over those individuals having scores in the lowest 25th percentile. It is interesting




10
   We specify linear equations for ease of estimation and interpretation. Instrumental Variable estimation is much more
straightforward with a linear model than with a nonlinear model such as a probit. Least squares estimates of
coefficients in linear probability models are consistent estimates of average probability derivatives, but standard error
estimates are biased as a result of heteroskedasticity (Angrist and Krueger 1999). We report standard error estimates
that are robust to any form of heteroskedasticity.


                                                           18
to note that the effect monotonically increases as one moves in the direction of higher test scores. 11

However, the differences disappear when suicidal attempts are considered. Having suffered any

type of abuse as a child is positively related to current suicide thoughts (4 percentage points) and

attempts (1 percentage point). A similar pattern is observed for the effect of having a father who

was ever jailed, although the effect is only statistically significant for suicide thoughts. Being

married and being in good physical health are negatively related to both suicide thoughts and

attempts.

         Table 3A presents baseline OLS results for the effects of suicide thoughts and attempts on

the probability of being in a productive activity as measured by working and/or being at school.

The results for the suicide thoughts are displayed in column 1 and the results for the suicide

attempts are displayed in column 2. None of the family background and socio-economic status

variables is controlled for in the Table 3A specification. Table 3B presents the results from these

expanded specifications. In Table 3B, columns 1 and 4 exclude the two measures of depression

indicator, columns 2 and 5 include only depression indicator from Wave 1, and columns 3 and 6

include the depression indicators from Waves 1 and 3.

         A comparison of the results in Tables 3A and 3B shows that including the larger set of

variables does not affect the sign or the statistical significance of the suicide coefficients in the

work-school models, although the magnitudes of the effects fall somewhat when the larger set of

variables is included. The results from Tables 3A and 3B indicate that having suicide thoughts

decrease the probability of being in a productive activity by a range of 3 to 6 percentage points, and

attempting suicide decreases the probability of being in a productive activity by a range of 10 to 14


11
  The reason for including the test scores as dummies rather than as a continuous percentile is because the test scores
are either missing for or not taken by about 5 percent of the respondents. In order to avoid dropping these individuals,
we use dummy categories for test scores and include a dummy category for missing test scores. However, dropping
observations with missing test scores and using a continuous test score variable produced results very similar to those
presented in the paper.

                                                           19
percentage points. Another interesting finding is that the inclusion of the measures of depression

indicators has no appreciable effect on the magnitude of these coefficients. Also, using a

specification with a rich set of control variables does not have much effect on the overall fit of the

model as indicated by the R-squared values. The fact that controlling for a large set of background

characteristics and past suicidal behavior only slightly reduces the effect of current suicide thoughts

and attempts can be interpreted to mean that unobserved heterogeneity accounts for only a small

percentage of the effect of suicidal behavior on human capital activities. However, an alternative

interpretation is that the additional variables, though statistically significant in the work school

equation, are not able to capture the omitted variables that are correlated with suicide thoughts and

attempts. This suggests that the results from the two-state least squares estimation and the fixed

effects models are necessary for drawing more valid conclusions.

       Given the large set of control variables used in Table 3B, this is our preferred specification

for OLS models. An interesting result that arises in Table 3B is that the current suicidal behaviors

affect the decision to go to work or school even after holding constant past suicide attempts, and

holding constant current and past suicide attempts of a family member. In fact, none of these other

suicide measures are statistically significant predictors of the work-school decision. Although the

coefficients are negative as one would expect, the magnitudes are small. It appears that these

factors primarily affect the outcomes of individuals through their influence on the current suicidal

behaviors of individuals, as shown in Table 2.

       The other control variables in Table 3B are usually consistent with our expectations and the

results from the relevant literature. The indicators for depressive symptoms in Wave 1 and 3 are

negatively associated with the probability of work-school. High standard test scores at high school

and having a mother with more than a high school education are both associated with increases in

working and schooling. Being in good physical health is a strong predictor of engaging in

                                                   20
productive activities, while having spent time in foster care is negatively associated with these

outcomes. Finally, having used illicit drugs at high school, and having a father who was jailed in

the past have negative effects on working/schooling.

        Table 4 shows the results of two-stage least squares (TSLS) estimation of suicidal behaviors

on the outcome variable for select coefficients. 12 Here, the variables from our preferred

specification, the full specification, are reported since the inclusion of the potentially endogenous

variables does not seem to have a large effect on the coefficients on the suicide variables. The

TSLS results are qualitatively similar to those in Table 3B, but the magnitudes are much larger.

Having suicide thoughts decreases the probability of being in a productive activity by a range of

about 20-22 percentage points, while a suicide attempt decreases the probability of being in a

productive activity by a range of about 69-72 percentage points. In all models, including measures

of depressive symptoms has little effect on the magnitude of the coefficients.

        Intuitively, the instruments are attractive because there is existing strong evidence that peer

suicide affects one’s own state of mental health and resulting behaviors. For example, in a sample

of high school students, Ho et al. (2000) find that there is a high risk of suicidal behaviors and

psychiatric disturbances among peers of individuals who completed suicide. Cerel et al. (2005) find

that adolescents who are exposed to peer suicide are more likely to have suicidal thoughts and

attempts and to engage in other destructive behavior such as substance use.

        While it is not hard to imagine that a friend’s suicidal behavior strongly predicts an

individual’s own behavior, we believe it is unlikely that the suicidal behavior of a friend will have

direct effects on one’s own labor market and schooling decisions above and beyond the effects on

the individual’s own suicidal behavior, particularly when a measure of depression is held constant.

However, one possibility is that youths react to peer suicide by engaging in risky behavior, such as

12
  To economize on space, we present only the key coefficients. The coefficients from other variables largely remain
same with those in Table 3B. The full results are available from the authors upon request.

                                                         21
substance abuse, and if that behavior has a direct effect on labor market and school outcomes, the

exogeneity of the instruments may be called into question. One can guard against this criticism by

including controls for current risky behavior, such as drug and alcohol use. The problem is that

these variables may themselves be endogenous to our outcome measures. This is why we control

for measures of past drug use in the models, which do not suffer from endogeneity. Despite the

potential endogeneity problem, we re-estimated our models including current drug and alcohol use.

These models did not alter the estimates of suicidal behavior in any significant way.

       The validity of our instrumental variables analyses hinges on the assumption that friends’

suicidal behaviors are strongly associated with the individuals’ own suicidal behaviors, while

having no direct association with the outcome measures that we examine. The strength of the

instruments can be gauged in two ways—theoretically and empirically. As we have discussed, the

instruments have some theoretical strengths and weaknesses, but Table 4 shows evidence that the

instruments are valid, nonetheless, based on empirical tests. As reported at the bottom of Table 4,

the two instruments, a friend’s attempt in the first wave and a friend’s attempt in the third wave, are

strong predictors of current suicidal behaviors as indicated by the F-statistics. Furthermore, the

Durbin-Wu-Hausman test results indicate that OLS estimate is inconsistent at less than 10 percent

level in all models. Finally, the results from the over-identification tests suggest that the

instruments can be appropriately excluded from the second stage equations.

       The results from the twin sample which includes the twin fixed effects are show in Table 5.

Only the coefficients on select variables of interest are shown for brevity. We believe the results of

these specifications are reliable since the fixed effects can control for a host of unmeasured, time

invariant characteristics that might be correlated with the suicidal behaviors and the outcome

measures. Obviously, the number of control variables in the twin models is much lower than the

others as many of the background variables exhibit no variation between sibling pairs. The results

                                                   22
are largely consistent with those of the previous tables. Both suicidal thoughts and attempts are

negatively and statistically significantly related to the probability of being in a productive activity as

measured by working and/or schooling. The effect of suicidal thoughts between TSLS and the

fixed effects models are particularly close to each other (around -0.20 versus -0.19) while the effect

of suicide attempt goes down sharply between the models. As pointed out in the methods section,

the twin results may be an underestimate of the true effects of suicidal behavior if one twin engages

in suicidal behavior because of the suicidal behavior of the other. A comparison between the TSLS

and twin-fixed effects results supports this possibility, especially for the suicide attempt models.

Another potential explanation as to why the suicide attempt coefficients differ between the TSLS

and the fixed effects model may be due to the low variation in this variable, especially for the twin

fixed effects model. Note that the sample size in the twin fixed effects model is not only smaller

but the identification comes from a much smaller number of twin pairs with discordant reports on

their suicide attempts, while the number of discordant reports is much higher for the suicidal

thoughts as one would expect. Specifically, there are only 10 twin pairs with discordant reports for

the suicide attempts out of a total of 383 twin pairs, while the number of twin pairs with discordant

reports for the suicide thoughts is 45 out of 383.



Specification Checks

       One can argue that the family members’ suicide attempts may be endogenous to the

individuals’ own suicidal behavior. For example, a respondent may attempt suicide and a parent

may follow in response. If this is the case, our results from the OLS and twin-fixed effects could be

biased. However, the coefficients on the family members’ suicide attempts are not statistically

significant in any of our models. In fact, our results basically remain the same when we exclude

these variables from our models.

                                                     23
       Our instrumental variables method can account for the potential reverse causality from labor

market and schooling choices to suicidal behavior. A useful exercise is to estimate models that only

includes the past suicidal behavior since these models are not subject to any reverse causality

problem to begin with. Also, having both the current and past suicidal behavior in the same models

might be problematic due to multicollinearity. Therefore, we estimated our models excluding the

current suicidal behavior variables. In these models, the past suicidal attempt has a negative

coefficient in the work-school model.

        In order to see if suicidal behaviors have a differential impact on the decisions to go to

work, school, or both, we estimate a multinomial logit model in Table 6. In doing this, we have

separated the dichotomous indicator of being in a productive activity into its possible components.

The decisions modeled in this table are 1) school, 2) work, 3) school and work together, or 4) no

work and no school, which is the omitted reference category. Note that estimating a fixed effects

multinomial logit model in our context may be problematic because it has been shown by Monte

Carlo simulations that the fixed effects estimator produce a large finite sample bias in discrete

choice models when the number of observations in each group is very small (Green 2002). In our

case, there are two individuals in each twin pair by definition. Therefore, the fixed effects model in

this context will be unreliable so we rely on the expanded set of variables to help control for omitted

variables. Since we do not explicitly account for the potential endogeneity of the suicide behaviors

in the multinomial logit, we treat these results as merely demonstrative and do not place much

emphasis on the magnitude of the coefficients.

       The estimates from the multinomial logit model are presented in Table 6. The coefficients

in the first three columns show the results for the suicidal thoughts model and the coefficients in the

last three columns show the results for the suicide attempt model. The omitted outcome in the

multinomial logit models is no-work and no-school. The results indicate that suicidal behaviors as

                                                  24
measured by suicide thoughts and suicide attempts decrease the probability that an individual is

engaged in work, school, or both of these activities in comparison to the omitted category of not

working and not going to school.

       Finally, there may exist some state level variables that can influence both the suicidal

behavior and the choice of productive activities. For example, a high unemployment rate in a state

may depress labor market opportunities for individuals and encourage school enrollment. At the

same time, a high unemployment rate may also cause mental health problems and may in turn

increase suicidal tendencies. Because of the concerns about confidentiality, state identifiers have

not been made available to the researchers. Therefore, it is not possible to control for any state level

characteristics from Wave 3, such as unemployment rate. However, the pseudo-identifiers for states

are available, which allows for estimation of models with state fixed effects. These models would

control for any type of state level unobservables that would be correlated with both the suicidal

behavior and the outcome. We repeated our analyses including the state fixed effects in the models.

None of the implications discussed in this paper has changed as a result of this exercise. Given the

negligible effects of these dummies on the coefficients of suicide variables, we present the more

parsimonious models in this paper.



VI. Conclusion

       This paper expand our understanding of the link between mental health and human capital

formation by providing insights into the effects of suicidal behavior on the outcome of productive

activities of young adults. The suicidal behaviors are measured as suicide thoughts and suicide

attempts, and productive activities are measured as engaging in work and/or schooling activities.

Obtaining a reliable effect of suicidal behavior on productivity outcomes can be problematic

because of the presence of unobserved heterogeneity and a potential reverse causality. In this paper,

                                                   25
we employ three strategies to eliminate these problems. First, we control for a very large set of

background variables that are likely to be correlated with both suicidal behavior and our outcome

measure. Second, we use the instrumental variables method to control for both unobserved

heterogeneity and reverse causality. Finally, we estimate models with twin fixed effects to sweep

out any unobservables that are common to both twins.

        The results from all three approaches suggest that suicide thoughts and attempts have

negative effects on the work and schooling decisions of young adults. All of the effects are found to

be robust to different sets of control variables and various specification tests. It is also interesting to

note that the size of the effect of suicide attempt is larger than that of the suicidal thoughts in all the

models that are estimated. This is a sensible result given that suicide attempt is likely to be an

indicator for a more serious mental health problem than having suicidal thoughts only. One

explanation for the relatively large effects of suicidal behavior on labor market outcomes found in

this paper is that the suicidal behaviors examined here are indicative of more severe mental health

problems and should have larger adverse effects on productivity. These effects may be magnified

by the direct deleterious effects on productivity via increased bodily injury, absenteeism, and loss of

concentration.

        The results shown in this paper highlight the costs to individuals and to society resulting

from suicidal behaviors. The fact that all of the three strategies that we employ to tease out both the

unobserved heterogeneity and reverse causality points to a negative link between the suicidal

behaviors and the outcome measure makes us believe that the detrimental effects are consistent with

a causal explanation. Furthermore, the small and statistically insignificant coefficients on past

suicide attempts arising from models that both include and exclude current suicidal behaviors

suggest that there is no long term effect of past attempts (i.e. attempts during high school) on future




                                                    26
human capital formation. This result should be interpreted with caution, however, as teenagers who

attempt suicide may receive mental health treatment that prevents future deleterious effects.




                                                 27
                                               References

Alexopoulos, George S.; Martha L. Bruce; James Hull; Jo Anne Sirey; Tatsuyuki Kakuma. (1999)
      “Clinical Determinants of Suicidal Ideation and Behavior in Geriatric Depression” Archives
      of General Psychiatry. 56:1048-1053.

Anderson R.N., Smith B.L. (2003). Deaths: leading causes for 2001. National Vital Statistics
      Report, 52(9):1-86.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger (1999). "Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics," in
       Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 3A, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds.,
       Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Bartel, A. and Taubman, P. (1979). “Health and Labor Market Success: The Role of Various
        Diseases.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 61(1), 1-8.

Bartel, A. and Taubman, P. (1986). “Some Economic and Demographic Consequences of Mental
        Illness.” Journal of Labor Economics, 4(2), p 243-56.

Boergers, J., Spirito, A. and Donaldson, D. “Reasons for Adolescent Suicide Attempts:
      Associations with Psychological Functioning.” Journal of the American Academy of Child
      and Adolescent Psychiatry. 37:12, December 1998, 1287-1293.

Borst SR. and GG Noam. (1989) “Suicidality and Psychopathology in Hospitalized Children and
       Adolescents.” Acta Paedopsychiatrica 52:165-175.

Center for Disease Control and Prevention (1992). “Youth Suicide Prevention Programs: A
       Resource Guide,” U.S Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service,
       National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, September.

Cerel J, Roberts TA, Nilsen WJ. Peer suicidal behavior and adolescent risk behavior.
        J Nerv Ment Dis. 2005 Apr;193(4):237-43.

Chatterji, P., D. Dave, R. Kaestner, and S. Markowitz (2004). “Alcohol Abuse and Suicide
       Attempts Among Youth.” Economics and Human Biology, 2:2 June, 159-180.

Conti DJ, Burton, W.N.(1994). “Economic Impact of Depression in a Workplace,” Journal of
       Occupational Environmental Medicine, 36: 983-988.

Cuellar, Alison and Pinka Chatterji. “How Do Youth With Mental Disorders Fare in the Juvenile
       Justice System.” NBER Working Paper #12437, August 2006.

Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Karen E. Norberg (2001). “Explaining The Rise in Youth
        Suicide,” in J. Gruber (ed) Risky Behavior among Youth University of Chicago Press,
        Chicago IL.




                                                28
Dube, Shanta,Vincent Felitti, Maxia Dong, W.H. Giles, and Robert Anda (2003). “The Impact of
       Adverse childhood Experiences on Health Problems: Evidence from Four Birth Cohorts
       Dating Back to 1900,” Preventive Medicine, 37 #3, 268-277.

Eaton, W.W., C. Muntaner, C. Smith, A. Tien, and M. Ybarra. 2003. Center for epidemiologic
       studies depression scale: Review and revision (CESD and CESDR). In The use of
       psychological testing for treatment planning and outcomes assessment, 3rd edition, chapter
       40, volume III, edited by M.E. Maruish. Mahwah, NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Ettner, S. Frank, R. Kessler, R.(1997). “The Impact of Psychiatric Disorders on Labor Market
        Outcomes”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review; 51(1), p. 64-81.

Felitti, Vincent J., Robert Anda, Dale Nordenberg, David Williamson, Alison Spitz, Valerie
         Edwards, Mary Koss, and James Marks (1998). “Relationship of Childhood Abuse and
         Household Dysfunction to Many of the Leading Causes of Death in Adults,” American
         Journal of Preventive Medicine, 14 #4, 245-258.

Fergusson David M and Lianne J. Woodward (2002). “Mental Health, Educational, and Social
       Role Outcomes of Adolescents With Depression.” Archives of General Psychiatry. 59: 225-
       31.

Frank R. and Gertler P. (1991). “An Assessment of Measurement Error Bias for Estimating the
       Effect of Mental Distress on Income.” Journal of Human Resources, vol. XXVI, no. 1, p.
       154-164.

French M. and G. Zarkin (1998). “Mental Health, Absenteeism and Earnings at a Large
       Manufacturing Worksite.” Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 1, 161-172.

Goldsmith SK, TC Pellmar, AM Kleinman, WE Bunney, editors. Reducing Suicide, A National
   Imperative. The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C. 2002.

Greene, William (2002). “The Bias of the Fixed Effects Estimator in Nonlinear Models” Working
      Paper, Department of Economics, New York University, October.

Greenberg, P.E., Stiglin, LE, Finkelstein, SN, Berndt ER. (1990). “The Economic Burden of
      Depression in 1990,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 2:32-35.

Hamermesh, Daniel S, Soss, Neal M. (1974). “An Economic Theory of Suicide.” Journal of
     Political Economy. Vol. 82 (1). p 83-98. Jan.-Feb.

Hamilton, V.H. P. Merrigan and Eric Dufresne (1997). “Down and Out: Estimating the
      Relationship Between Mental Health and Unemployment.” Health Economics, 6: 397-406.

Ho TP, Leung PW, Hung SF, Lee CC, Tang CP. The Mental Health of the Peers of Suicide
      Completers and Attempters. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2000 Mar;41(3):301-8.

Johnson, J., M. M. Weissman, G. L. Klerman (1990). “Panic Disorder, Comorbidity, and Suicide
      Attempts.” Archives of General Psychiatry. 47: 805-808.
                                                29
Kessler, R. C., P. A. Berglund, C. L. Foster, W. B. Saunders, P. E. Stang, and E. E Walters (1997).
       “Social Consequences of Psychiatric Disorders, II: Teenage parenthood,” American Journal
       of Psychiatry 154(10):1405-11, October.

Lubell KM, Swahn MH, Crosby AE, Kegler SR (2004) “Methods of suicide among persons aged
       10-19 years—United States, 1992-2001. MMWR, (53)471-473. Available online from:
       URL: http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/wk/mm5322.pdf.

Marcotte, Dave E. (2003). “The Economics of Suicide, Revisited,” Southern Economic Journal.
      69(3), 628-643.

Maris RW, Berman A.L, Maltsberger J.T, and Yufit, R.I. (eds) (1992). Assessment and Prediction
       of Suicide, New York: The Guilford Press.

Marmorstein, N.R., and Iacono W.G (2001). “An Investigation of Female Adolescent Twins with
     Both Major Depression and Conduct Disorder,” Journal of the American Academy of Child
     and Adolescent Psychiatry. 40(3):299-306.

Melhem NM, Day N, Shear MK, Day R, Reynolds CF 3rd, Brent D. “Traumatic Grief among
      adolescents Exposed to a Peer's Suicide. Am J Psychiatry. 2004 Aug;161(8):1411-6.

Miller, Ted R. (1995). Databook on Nonfatal Injury: Incidence, Costs, and Consequences,
        Washington D.C.: Urban Institute Press, 166-67.

Miller T.R., K.L. Covington, A.F. Jensen (1999). Costs of Injury by Major Cause, United States,
       1995: Cobbling Together Estimates, in Measuring the Burden of Injuries, Proceedings of a
       Conference in Noordwijkerhout, Netherlands, May 13-15, 1998, S Mulder, ed., December.
       Available on line at: http://www.edarc.org/pubs/tables/youthsui.htm

Mullahy, J. and Sindelar, J. (1990). “Gender Differences in the Effects of Mental Health on Labor
      Force Participation,” Research in Human Capital and Development, vol. 6, p. 125-146. JAI
      Press Inc.

Radloff L. (1977). “The CES-D Scale: A Self-Reported Depression Scale for Research in the
       General Population,” Appl Psychol Meas. 1:385-401.

Overbeek, Geertjan; Vollebergh, Wilma; Engels, Rutger C.M.E.; Meeus, Wim (2003). “Young
      adults’ relationship transitions and the incidence of mental disorders: A three-wave
      longitudinal study.” Social Psychiatry & Psychiatric Epidemiology, 38(12), 669-676.

Shaffer, D, and L. Craft (1999). “Methods of Adolescent Suicide Prevention,” Journal of Clinical
       Psychiatry 69 (suppl. 2), 70-74.

Simon, GE and M. Von Korff (1998). “Suicide Mortality among Patients Treated for Depression in
       an Insured Population” American Journal of Epidemiology, 147(2), 155-160.



                                                30
Slap G., Goodman, E. & Huang, B (2001). “Adoption as a Risk Factor for Attempted Suicide
       during Adolescence,” Pediatrics. 108(2):E30.

Stoep, A..V., Weiss, N. S., Kuo, E. S., Cheney, D. and Cohen, P (2003). “What Proportion of
       Failure to Complete Secondary School in the U.S. Population is Attributable to Adolescent
       Psychiatric Disorder?” Journal of Behavioral Health Services & Research 30(1):119-24.

U.S. Department of Education (2001). “23rd Annual Report to Congress on the Implementation of
       the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.” Washington, D.C.

Veltman, Marijcke and Kevin D. Browne (2001). “Three Decades of Child Maltreatment Research:
      Implications for the School Years,” Trauma, Violence, and Abuse, 2(3): 215-239, July.




                                               31
                                                              Table 1
                                                Definitions and Descriptive Statistics
Variable                                                 Definition                                    Full Sample     Suicide      Suicide
                                                                                                                     thoughts=1   thoughts=0
Work-school          Dummy variable =1 if working and/or attending school, =0 otherwise                   0.834      0.792***       0.837
                                                                                                         (0.372)      (0.406)      (0.370)
Suicide thoughts     Dummy variable =1 if ever thought seriously about committing suicide during          0.059        1.000        0.000
                     the past 12 months, =0 otherwise                                                    (0.235)      (0.000)      (0.000)
Suicide attempt      Dummy variable =1 if actually attempted suicide during the past 12 months, =0        0.016      0.265***       0.000
                     otherwise                                                                           (0.124)      (0.442)      (0.000)
Suicidal friend      Dummy variable =1 if any friends tried to kill themselves, =0 otherwise              0.067      0.223***       0.057
                                                                                                         (0.250)      (0.416)      (0.233)
Suicidal family      Dummy variable =1 if any family members tried to kill themselves, =0                 0.029      0.095***       0.025
                     otherwise                                                                           (0.167)      (0.294)      (0.155)
Suicide thoughs_w1   Dummy variable =1 if ever thought about committing suicide during the past 12        0.134      0.307***       0.123
                     months (reported at Wave 1), =0 otherwise                                           (0.340)      (0.462)      (0.328)
Suicide attempt_w1   Dummy variable =1 if actually attempted suicide during the past 12 months            0.037      0.107***       0.032
                     (reported at Wave 1), =0 otherwise                                                  (0.189)      (0.310)      (0.178)
Suicidal friend_w1   Dummy variable =1 if any friends tried to kill themselves (reported at Wave 1),      0.175      0.245***       0.171
                     =0 otherwise                                                                        (0.380)      (0.431)      (0.376)
Suicidal family_w1   Dummy variable =1 if any family members tried to kill themselves (reported at        0.044      0.064***       0.042
                     Wave 1), =0 otherwise                                                               (0.204)      (0.245)      (0.201)
Catholic             Dummy variable =1 if Catholic, =0 otherwise                                          0.255       0.230*        0.256
                                                                                                         (0.436)      (0.421)      (0.437)
Protestant           Dummy variable =1 if Protestant, =0 otherwise                                        0.406      0.348***       0.410
                                                                                                         (0.491)      (0.477)      (0.492)
No religion          Dummy variable =1 if no religion or agnostic, =0 otherwise                           0.205      0.281***       0.200
                                                                                                         (0.403)      (0.450)      (0.400)
Other religion a     Dummy variable =1 if other religion, =0 otherwise                                    0.135        0.141        0.134
                                                                                                         (0.341)      (0.349)      (0.341)
Healthy              Dummy variable =1 if in good physical health, =0 otherwise                           0.954      0.888***       0.958
                                                                                                         (0.209)      (0.316)      (0.200)
Any abuse            Dummy variable =1 if experienced sexual abuse, physical abuse, or neglect            0.245      0.419***       0.234
                     from parents or other adult caregivers by the start of 6th grade, =0 otherwise      (0.430)      (0.494)      (0.423)
Foster               Dummy variable =1 if ever spent time in foster care, =0 otherwise                    0.023      0.041***       0.022
                                                                                                         (0.151)      (0.199)      (0.147)
Jailed father        Dummy variable =1 if father ever spent time in prison, =0 otherwise                  0.147      0.233***       0.142
                                                                                                         (0.354)      (0.423)      (0.349)
Cocaine_w1           Dummy variable =1 if ever used cocaine (reported at Wave 1), =0 otherwise            0.032      0.052***       0.031

                                                                      32
                                                                                             (0.175)     (0.222)   (0.172)
Marijuana_w1   Dummy variable =1 if ever used marijuana( reported at Wave 1), =0 otherwise    0.277     0.331***    0.274
                                                                                             (0.448)     (0.471)   (0.446)
Age            Age in years                                                                  21.956    21.649***   21.975
                                                                                             (1.772)     (1.837)   (1.776)
Age18 a        Dummy variable =1 if 18 years of age, =0 otherwise                             0.010       0.014     0.009
                                                                                             (0.098)     (0.118)   (0.097)
Age19          Dummy variable =1 if 19 years of age, =0 otherwise                             0.095     0.138***    0.092
                                                                                             (0.293)     (0.345)   (0.289)
Age20          Dummy variable =1 if 20 years of age, =0 otherwise                             0.132      0.156**    0.131
                                                                                             (0.339)     (0.363)   (0.337)
Age21          Dummy variable =1 if 21 years of age, =0 otherwise                             0.161       0.165     0.161
                                                                                             (0.368)     (0.371)   (0.368)
Age22          Dummy variable =1 if 22 years of age, =0 otherwise                             0.189       0.191     0.187
                                                                                             (0.391)     (0.393)   (0.391)
Age23          Dummy variable =1 if 23 years of age, =0 otherwise                             0.191    0.136***     0.195
                                                                                             (0.393)     (0.343)   (0.396)
Age24          Dummy variable =1 if 24 years of age, =0 otherwise                             0.163       0.145     0.164
                                                                                             (0.369)     (0.352)   (0.370)
Age25          Dummy variable =1 if 25 years of age, =0 otherwise                             0.051       0.052     0.051
                                                                                             (0.220)     (0.222)   (0.220)
Age26+         Dummy variable =1 if 26 years of age, =0 otherwise                             0.008       0.004     0.008
                                                                                             (0.090)     (0.059)   (0.091)
Male           Dummy variable =1 if male, =0 otherwise                                        0.468       0.442     0.470
                                                                                             (0.499)     (0.497)   (0.499)
White          Dummy variable =1 if white, =0 otherwise                                       0.662    0.713***     0.658
                                                                                             (0.473)     (0.453)   (0.474)
Black          Dummy variable =1 if black, =0 otherwise                                       0.227    0.178***     0.230
                                                                                             (0.419)     (0.383)   (0.421)
Other race a   Dummy variable =1 if other race, =0 otherwise                                  0.111       0.109     0.112
                                                                                             (0.315)     (0.312)   (0.315)
Hispanic       Dummy variable =1 if Hispanic ethnicity, =0 otherwise                          0.161       0.149     0.162
                                                                                             (0.368)     (0.357)   (0.369)
U.S. born      Dummy variable =1 if born in the U.S., =0 otherwise                            0.920       0.926     0.920
                                                                                             (0.271)     (0.262)   (0.271)
PVT_w1A a      Standard Peabody test score ranking from Wave 1 in the lowest 25 percentile    0.250     0.177***    0.255
                                                                                             (0.434)     (0.382)   (0.436)
PVT_w1B        Standard Peabody test score ranking from Wave 1 in the 25-50 percentile        0.257       0.257     0.256
                                                                                             (0.438)     (0.437)   (0.437)

                                                            33
PVT_w1C                   Standard Peabody test score ranking from Wave 1 in the 50-75 percentile               0.233           0.257       0.231
                                                                                                               (0.423)        (0.437)      (0.422)
PVT_w1D                   Standard Peabody test score ranking from Wave 1 in the highest 25 percentile          0.260        0.310***       0.257
                                                                                                               (0.439)        (0.463)      (0.437)
Married                   Dummy variable =1 if married, =0 otherwise                                            0.171        0.099***       0.176
                                                                                                               (0.377)        (0.299)      (0.381)
Mother high school- a     Dummy variable =1 if mother has less than a high school degree reported at            0.159           0.139       0.160
                          Wave 1, =0 otherwise                                                                 (0.366)        (0.346)      (0.367)
Mother high school        Dummy variable =1 if mother has a high school degree reported at Wave 1, =0           0.352           0.353       0.351
                          otherwise                                                                            (0.477)        (0.478)      (0.477)
Mother high school+       Dummy variable =1 if mother has more than a high school degree at Wave 1,             0.489           0.508       0.488
                          =0 otherwise                                                                         (0.500)        (0.500)      (0.500)
Non-wage                  Non-wage income in the past year in dollars                                           1909.3         1662.2      1924.8
                                                                                                              (14238.2)      (7768.9)     (14551.6)
Non-wage1a                Dummy variable =1 if non-wage income is < 0, =0 otherwise                              0.031          0.039       0.030
                                                                                                               (0.173)        (0.196)      (0.171)
Non-wage2                 Dummy variable =1 if non-wage income is =0, =0 otherwise                               0.536         0.507*       0.538
                                                                                                               (0.499)        (0.500)      (0.499)
Non-wage3                 Dummy variable =1 if 0<non-wage income<=1000, =0 otherwise                            0.158           0.161       0.158
                                                                                                               (0.365)        (0.367)      (0.365)
Non-wage4                 Dummy variable =1 if 1000<non-wage income<=2000, =0 otherwise                          0.067          0.072       0.067
                                                                                                               (0.250)        (0.259)      (0.249)
Non-wage5                 Dummy variable =1 if 2000<non-wage income<=5000, =0 otherwise                          0.098          0.103       0.97
                                                                                                               (0.297)        (0.305)      (0.296)
Non-wage6                 Dummy variable =1 if 5000<non-wage income<=10000, =0 otherwise                        0.054         0.070**       0.053
                                                                                                               (0.227)        (0.255)      (0.225)
Non-wage7                 Dummy variable =1 if 10000<non-wage income, =0 otherwise                              0.056           0.047       0.056
                                                                                                               (0.230)        (0.212)      (0.231)
Number of
observations                                                                                                       14,401        848         13,553
Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate that the mean is statistically different between the sample with suicide
thoughts and those without at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
a
  Omitted category




                                                                         34
                                         Table 2
                     Determinants of Suicide Thoughts and Attempts
Variable               Suicide   Suicide     Suicide    Suicide    Suicide          Suicide
                      Thoughts Thoughts Thoughts Attempts Attempts                 Attempts
Suicidal friend       0.120***     0.119***     0.114***    0.035***    0.035***    0.034***
                       (0.013)     (0.013)      (0.013)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)
Suicidal family       0.090***     0.088***     0.088***    0.030***    0.029**     0.029**
                       (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.018)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Suicide attempt_w1    0.094***     0.086***     0.083***    0.038***    0.035***    0.034***
                       (0.016)     (0.016)      (0.016)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Suicidal friend_w1       0.008       0.006        0.004       0.003       0.003       0.002
                       (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Suicidal family_w1       0.001      -0.001       -0.000       0.011       0.011       0.011
                       (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)
Catholic                -0.003      -0.003       -0.002      -0.003      -0.003      -0.003
                       (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
Protestant              -0.004      -0.004       -0.003      -0.005      -0.005      -0.004
                       (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
No religion            0.015**     0.015**      0.015**       0.002       0.002       0.002
                       (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
Healthy               -0.071***   -0.067***    -0.060***   -0.030***   -0.029***   -0.026***
                       (0.014)     (0.014)      (0.014)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)
Any abuse             0.043***     0.041***     0.038***    0.013***    0.012***    0.011***
                       (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Foster                   0.012       0.011        0.012       0.015       0.015       0.016
                       (0.016)     (0.016)      (0.016)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Jailed father         0.027***     0.027***     0.025***      0.005       0.005       0.004
                       (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
Cocaine_w1               0.009       0.006        0.006       0.003       0.003       0.003
                       (0.014)     (0.014)      (0.014)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
Marijuana_w1             0.004       0.002        0.000      -0.001      -0.001      -0.002
                       (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Age19                   -0.004      -0.004       -0.003       0.015       0.015       0.015
                       (0.024)     (0.024)      (0.024)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Age20                   -0.021      -0.021       -0.019       0.004       0.003       0.004
                       (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.023)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Age21                   -0.026      -0.028       -0.025       0.003       0.003       0.004
                       (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.023)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Age22                   -0.023      -0.025       -0.023       0.002       0.001       0.002
                       (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.023)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Age23                  -0.039*     -0.041*       -0.037      -0.000      -0.001       0.000
                       (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.023)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Age24                   -0.024      -0.026       -0.022      -0.000      -0.001       0.000
                       (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.023)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Age25                   -0.014      -0.016       -0.013      -0.002      -0.002      -0.001
                       (0.024)     (0.024)      (0.024)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Age26+                  -0.044     -0.049*      -0.045*      -0.003      -0.005      -0.003
                       (0.027)     (0.027)      (0.027)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)
Male                    -0.004      -0.002        0.002     -0.004*      -0.003      -0.002
                       (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
White                    0.007       0.008        0.007      -0.005      -0.005      -0.005



                                              35
                           (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)
 Black                      -0.005        -0.004        -0.006       -0.004        -0.004        -0.005
                           (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)
 Hispanic                   -0.001        -0.001        -0.001       -0.001        -0.001        -0.001
                           (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
 U.S. born                  -0.012        -0.012        -0.012       -0.004        -0.004        -0.004
                           (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)
 Married                  -0.027***     -0.027***     -0.026***    -0.007***     -0.007***     -0.007***
                           (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 PVT_w1B                   0.014**       0.016***      0.017***      0.005*       0.006**       0.006**
                           (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
 PVT_w1C                  0.018***       0.021***      0.022***      0.005         0.006*        0.006*
                           (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
 PVT_w1D                  0.028***       0.033***      0.033***      0.004         0.005          0.005
                           (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
 Mother high school          0.004         0.005         0.006       -0.006        -0.006        -0.005
                           (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)
 Mother high school+         0.004         0.006         0.007       -0.006        -0.005        -0.005
                           (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)
 Nonwage2                   -0.015        -0.015        -0.012       -0.010        -0.010        -0.009
                           (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)
 Nonwage3                   -0.015        -0.016        -0.015       -0.007        -0.007        -0.007
                           (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)
 Nonwage4                   -0.013        -0.015        -0.013       -0.007        -0.007        -0.007
                           (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)
 Nonwage5                   -0.015        -0.015        -0.013       -0.009        -0.009        -0.008
                           (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.014)      (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)
 Nonwage6                   -0.003        -0.004        -0.001       -0.007        -0.007        -0.006
                           (0.016)       (0.016)       (0.016)      (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)
 Nonwage7                   -0.020        -0.021        -0.019      -0.014*       -0.014*        -0.014
                           (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.008)
 Depressed                     ---       0.025***      0.018***        ---        0.008***       0.005*
                                         (0.005)       (0.005)                    (0.003)       (0.003)
 Depressed_w1                 ---            ---       0.056***        ---           ---        0.018***
                                                       (0.005)                                  (0.003)
 Constant                  0.129***     0.117***       0.088***     0.057***     0.053***       0.044**
                           (0.031)      (0.031)        (0.031)      (0.018)      (0.018)        (0.018)
  R-squared                  0.06         0.06            0.07        0.03         0.03            0.04
  Observations              14,401       14,401         14,401       14,401       14,401         14,401
Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. Models also include missing dummy categories for friends’ suicidal
behavior, family members’ suicidal behavior, abuse, foster care, jailed father, drug use, standard test
scores, mother’s education, and non-wage income.




                                                    36
                              Table 3A
      OLS Estimates for Work-School Model for Basic Specification
Variable                       Work-School       Work-School
Suicide thoughts                       -0.061***           ---
                                        (0.014)
Suicide attempt                            ---          -0.139***
                                                          (0.030)
Age19                                     0.006             0.008
                                        (0.033)           (0.033)
Age20                                    -0.003            -0.001
                                        (0.033)           (0.033)
Age21                                    -0.010            -0.008
                                        (0.032)           (0.033)
Age22                                    -0.014            -0.013
                                        (0.032)           (0.032)
Age23                                    -0.003            -0.001
                                        (0.032)           (0.033)
Age24                                     0.007             0.008
                                        (0.033)           (0.033)
Age25                                    -0.003            -0.002
                                        (0.035)           (0.035)
Age26+                                   -0.028            -0.026
                                        (0.049)           (0.049)
Male                                   0.018***         0.018***
                                        (0.006)           (0.006)
White                                  0.037***         0.036***
                                        (0.011)           (0.011)
Black                                   -0.025*          -0.025**
                                        (0.013)           (0.013)
Hispanic                                  0.012             0.012
                                        (0.009)           (0.009)
U.S. born                              -0.080***        -0.080***
                                        (0.012)           (0.012)
Married                                -0.051***        -0.051***
                                        (0.009)           (0.009)
PVT_w1B                                0.079***         0.079***
                                        (0.010)           (0.010)
PVT_w1C                                0.107***         0.106***
                                        (0.010)           (0.010)
PVT_w1D                                0.141***         0.139***
                                        (0.010)           (0.010)
Mother high school                     0.041***         0.040***
                                        (0.011)           (0.011)
Mother high school+                    0.087***         0.086***
                                        (0.011)           (0.011)
Non-wage2                                 0.017             0.016
                                        (0.019)           (0.019)
Non-wage3                                -0.005            -0.006
                                        (0.020)           (0.020)
Non-wage4                                 0.014             0.014
                                        (0.022)           (0.022)



                                  37
    Non-wage5                                        -0.033                  -0.034
                                                    (0.021)                 (0.021)
    Non-wage6                                        -0.027                  -0.028
                                                    (0.023)                 (0.023)
    Non-wage7                                        -0.001                  -0.002
                                                    (0.023)                 (0.023)
    Constant                                        0.761***                0.760***
                                                    (0.039)                 (0.039)
    R-squared                                         0.06                    0.06
    Observations                                     14,401                  14,401
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Models also include missing dummy categories for
standard test scores, mother’s education, and non-wage income.




                                               38
                                          Table 3B
                OLS Estimates for Work-School Model for Expanded Specification
Variable                Work-      Work-      Work-      Work-     Work-       Work-
                        School     School     School     School    School      School
Suicide thoughts         -0.037***   -0.033**     -0.030**       ---         ---         ---
                          (0.014)     (0.014)      (0.014)
Suicide attempt              ---         ---          ---     -0.106***   -0.102***   -0.098***
                                                               (0.030)      (0.030)     (0.030)
Suicide attempt_w1         -0.014      -0.000        0.000     -0.014        0.001       0.001
                          (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)    (0.018)      (0.018)     (0.018)
Suicidal family            -0.017      -0.015       -0.014      -0.017      -0.015      -0.014
                          (0.020)      (0.020)      (0.020)    (0.019)      (0.019)     (0.019)
Suicidal family_w1         -0.021      -0.016       -0.016      -0.020      -0.015      -0.015
                          (0.017)      (0.017)      (0.017)    (0.017)      (0.016)     (0.016)
Catholic                    0.006       0.007        0.006       0.006       0.007       0.006
                          (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)    (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.010)
Protestant                 -0.001      -0.001       -0.001      -0.002      -0.002      -0.002
                          (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)    (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)
No religion              -0.039***   -0.038***    -0.038***   -0.039***   -0.038***   -0.038***
                          (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)    (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.011)
Healthy                  0.105***    0.099***     0.098***    0.104***    0.099***     0.097***
                          (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)    (0.018)      (0.018)     (0.018)
Any abuse                  -0.008      -0.005       -0.004      -0.009      -0.005      -0.004
                          (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)
Foster                   -0.095***   -0.094***    -0.094***   -0.094***   -0.093***   -0.093***
                          (0.025)      (0.025)      (0.025)    (0.025)      (0.025)     (0.025)
Jailed father            -0.033***   -0.033***    -0.033***   -0.034***   -0.034***   -0.033***
                          (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)    (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.010)
Cocaine_w1               -0.063***   -0.059***    -0.059***   -0.063***   -0.059***   -0.058***
                          (0.021)      (0.021)      (0.021)    (0.021)      (0.021)     (0.021)
Marijuana_w1             -0.022***    -0.018**     -0.017**   -0.022***    -0.018**    -0.017**
                          (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)
Age19                       0.010       0.010        0.009       0.011       0.011       0.011
                          (0.033)      (0.033)      (0.033)    (0.033)      (0.033)     (0.033)
Age20                       0.003       0.004        0.004       0.004       0.005       0.005
                          (0.033)      (0.033)      (0.033)    (0.033)      (0.033)     (0.033)
Age21                      -0.001       0.002        0.002      0.000        0.003       0.003
                          (0.032)      (0.032)      (0.032)    (0.033)      (0.033)     (0.033)
Age22                      -0.003       0.001        0.000      -0.002       0.002       0.001
                          (0.032)      (0.032)      (0.032)    (0.033)      (0.033)     (0.033)
Age23                       0.010       0.014        0.014       0.011       0.016       0.015
                          (0.033)      (0.033)      (0.033)    (0.033)      (0.033)     (0.033)
Age24                       0.019       0.022        0.021       0.020       0.023       0.022
                          (0.033)      (0.033)      (0.033)    (0.033)      (0.033)     (0.033)
Age25                       0.010       0.013        0.013       0.010       0.014       0.013
                          (0.035)      (0.035)      (0.035)    (0.035)      (0.035)     (0.035)
Age26+                     -0.013      -0.004       -0.005      -0.011      -0.003      -0.004
                          (0.049)      (0.049)      (0.049)    (0.049)      (0.049)     (0.049)
Male                     0.019***      0.015**      0.014**   0.018***      0.014**    0.013**
                          (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)
White                    0.035***    0.032***     0.032***    0.034***    0.031***     0.032***



                                                 39
                           (0.011)         (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.011)
Black                      -0.025*        -0.027**      -0.026**       -0.026*       -0.027**       -0.026**
                           (0.013)         (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.013)
Hispanic                     0.010           0.009         0.009         0.010          0.009          0.009
                           (0.010)         (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.010)        (0.010)
U.S. born                 -0.067***      -0.068***     -0.068***      -0.067***     -0.068***      -0.068***
                           (0.012)         (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.012)
Married                   -0.052***      -0.052***     -0.052***      -0.052***     -0.052***      -0.052***
                           (0.009)         (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)        (0.009)        (0.009)
PVT_w1B                   0.081***       0.076***      0.076***       0.081***      0.076***        0.076***
                           (0.010)         (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.010)        (0.010)
PVT_w1C                   0.107***       0.102***      0.102***       0.107***      0.102***        0.101***
                           (0.010)         (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.010)        (0.010)
PVT_w1D                   0.137***       0.130***      0.130***       0.137***      0.130***        0.130***
                           (0.010)         (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.010)        (0.010)
Mother high school        0.036***       0.034***      0.034***       0.035***      0.033***        0.033***
                           (0.011)         (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.011)
Mother high school+       0.078***       0.075***      0.075***       0.077***      0.074***        0.074***
                           (0.011)         (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.011)
Non-wage2                    0.013           0.014         0.013         0.012          0.014          0.013
                           (0.019)         (0.019)       (0.019)       (0.019)        (0.019)        (0.019)
Non-wage3                   -0.011          -0.009        -0.009        -0.011         -0.009         -0.010
                           (0.020)         (0.020)       (0.020)       (0.020)        (0.020)        (0.020)
Non-wage4                    0.009           0.012         0.011         0.008          0.011          0.011
                           (0.022)         (0.022)       (0.022)       (0.022)        (0.022)        (0.022)
Non-wage5                  -0.035*          -0.034       -0.035*       -0.036*        -0.035*        -0.035*
                           (0.021)         (0.021)       (0.021)       (0.021)        (0.021)        (0.021)
Non-wage6                   -0.029          -0.028        -0.029        -0.030         -0.029         -0.029
                           (0.023)         (0.023)       (0.023)       (0.023)        (0.023)        (0.023)
Non-wage7                   -0.005          -0.004        -0.005        -0.005         -0.005         -0.005
                           (0.022)         (0.022)       (0.022)       (0.022)        (0.022)        (0.022)
Depressed_w1                   ---       -0.043***     -0.041***           ---      -0.043***      -0.041***
                                           (0.008)       (0.008)                      (0.008)        (0.008)
Depressed_w3                  ---              ---      -0.014**         ---              ---       -0.014**
                                                         (0.007)                                     (0.007)
Constant                   0.679***      0.700***      0.707***       0.680***      0.701***        0.708***
                           (0.044)       (0.044)         (0.044)      (0.044)       (0.044)          (0.044)
 R-squared                   0.07          0.07            0.07         0.07          0.07              0.07
 Observations               14,401        14,401         14,401        14,401        14,401          14,401
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Models also include missing dummy categories for family
members’ suicidal behavior, abuse, foster care, jailed father, drug use, standard test scores, mother’s
education, and non-wage income.




                                                     40
                                               Table 4
                           TSLS Estimates for Work-School Model (n=14,401)
Variable                  Work-      Work-       Work-      Work-        Work-                         Work-
                          School     School      School     School       School                        School
Suicide thoughts            -0.216**        -0.206*          -0.204*         ---             ---            ---
                             (0.106)        (0.107)          (0.112)
Suicide attempt                 ---            ---              ---        -0.722*        -0.685*        -0.682*
                                                                           (0.372)        (0.372)        (0.393)
Depressed_w1                   ---         -0.038***      -0.038***                      -0.038***      -0.038***
                                            (0.008)        (0.008)                        (0.008)        (0.008)
Depressed_w3                   ---             ---          -0.004                                        -0.003
                                                           (0.009)                                       (0.010)
R-squared                     0.06           0.06            0.06           0.03           0.04            0.04
Observations                 14,401         14,401         14,401          14,401         14,401         14,401

F-test on instruments       45.71***       45.38***        41.59***       11.99***        11.85***       10.74***

Hausman test statistic       3.15*          2.89*           2.68*           3.27*            2.88*          2.61*
Overidentification test
statistic                    0.013          0.223           0.241           0.037            0.292          0.307
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively. Models also include the extended set of variables as shown in Tables 3B.




                                                        41
                                                 Table 5
                  Fixed Effects Estimates for Work-School Model from the Twin Sample
Variable                  Work-        Work-        Work-      Work-       Work-                     Work-
                          School       School       School     School      School                    School
Suicide thoughts            -0.188**       -0.182**         -0.185**        ---            ---            ---
                             (0.072)        (0.071)          (0.072)
Suicide attempt                 ---            ---              ---       -0.276*        -0.249*        -0.252*
                                                                          (0.153)        (0.153)        (0.153)
Depressed_w1                   ---         -0.119**         -0.113**         ---        -0.126**       -0.137**
                                            (0.045)          (0.046)                     (0.055)        (0.057)
Depressed_w3                   ---             ---            0.033         ---             ---          0.044
                                                             (0.052)                                    (0.054)
R-squared                    0.06            0.08             0.08          0.05             0.07         0.07
Number of twin pairs         383             383               382          383              383          382
    Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the
    10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Models include all time-varying variables described in Tables 3B.




                                                       42
                                              Table 6
                     Multinomial Logit Coefficients for the Work-School Model
Variable                School,      No School,   School      School,     No School,   School,
                        No Work      Work         Work        No Work     Work         Work

Suicide thoughts         -0.296**     -0.209**    -0.248**       ---          ---         ---
                          (0.139)      (0.103)     (0.119)
Suicide attempt              ---          ---         ---      -0.499**    -0.588***   -0.721***
                                                                (0.237)      (0.177)     (0.212)
Suicidal family             -0.082       -0.054      -0.146      -0.097       -0.056      -0.150
                           (0.195)      (0.138)     (0.166)     (0.193)      (0.136)     (0.165)
Suicide attempt_w1           0.019        0.061      -0.123       0.017        0.066      -0.114
                           (0.182)      (0.123)     (0.151)     (0.182)      (0.123)     (0.151)
Suicidal family_w1          -0.159       -0.078      -0.115      -0.152       -0.070      -0.106
                           (0.165)      (0.112)     (0.135)     (0.164)      (0.112)     (0.135)
Catholic                    -0.021       0.051        0.152      -0.022        0.050       0.151
                           (0.114)      (0.090)     (0.101)     (0.114)      (0.090)     (0.101)
Protestant                  -0.018        0.001      -0.038      -0.021       -0.002      -0.042
                           (0.101)      (0.080)     (0.090)     (0.101)      (0.080)     (0.090)
No religion              -0.485***     -0.179**   -0.429***   -0.490***     -0.181**   -0.432***
                           (0.114)      (0.087)     (0.100)     (0.114)      (0.087)     (0.100)
Healthy                  0.541***     0.463***    0.793***    0.546***     0.460***    0.789***
                           (0.155)      (0.100)     (0.134)     (0.155)      (0.100)     (0.134)
Any abuse                 -0.172**       -0.003      -0.072    -0.176**       -0.003      -0.072
                           (0.083)      (0.060)     (0.070)     (0.083)      (0.060)     (0.070)
Foster                   -0.745***    -0.437***   -0.681***   -0.741***    -0.432***   -0.672***
                           (0.243)      (0.140)     (0.193)     (0.243)      (0.140)     (0.192)
Jailed father            -0.494***      -0.121*   -0.328***   -0.500***      -0.124*   -0.331***
                           (0.102)      (0.069)     (0.083)     (0.102)      (0.069)     (0.083)
Cocaine_w1               -0.949***    -0.345***      -0.229   -0.951***    -0.345***      -0.229
                           (0.275)      (0.126)     (0.166)     (0.275)      (0.126)     (0.166)
Marijuana_w1             -0.389***       -0.019   -0.327***   -0.391***       -0.021   -0.329***
                           (0.085)      (0.059)     (0.071)     (0.085)      (0.059)     (0.071)
Age19                       -0.187       0.508       -0.002      -0.176       0.519        0.013
                           (0.289)      (0.315)     (0.280)     (0.289)      (0.316)     (0.282)
Age20                       -0.444      0.735**      -0.134      -0.436      0.741**      -0.126
                           (0.286)      (0.309)     (0.276)     (0.286)      (0.310)     (0.277)
Age21                     -0.591**    0.807***       -0.178    -0.580**    0.814***       -0.168
                           (0.284)      (0.307)     (0.274)     (0.285)      (0.309)     (0.276)
Age22                    -1.097***    1.039***       -0.406   -1.089***    1.044***       -0.399
                           (0.286)      (0.306)     (0.275)     (0.287)      (0.308)     (0.276)
Age23                    -1.309***    1.242***      -0.466*   -1.298***    1.249***      -0.457*
                           (0.289)      (0.307)     (0.276)     (0.290)      (0.308)     (0.277)
Age24                    -1.437***    1.386***     -0.653**   -1.430***    1.390***     -0.647**
                           (0.294)      (0.308)     (0.280)     (0.294)      (0.309)     (0.281)
Age25                    -1.468***    1.297***     -0.777**   -1.464***    1.297***     -0.775**
                           (0.333)      (0.318)     (0.303)     (0.334)      (0.319)     (0.304)
Age26+                   -1.412***    1.189***     -0.870**   -1.399***    1.196***     -0.860**
                           (0.525)      (0.371)     (0.426)     (0.525)      (0.372)     (0.427)
Male                       -0.126*    0.282***    -0.213***     -0.127*    0.281***    -0.215***



                                                   43
                         (0.066)      (0.051)    (0.058)      (0.066)      (0.051)     (0.058)
White                   -0.225**    0.356***    0.259***     -0.230**    0.351***      0.253**
                         (0.110)      (0.086)    (0.099)      (0.110)      (0.087)     (0.099)
Black                    -0.235*     -0.199**     0.001       -0.235*     -0.201**     -0.001
                         (0.122)      (0.097)    (0.112)      (0.122)      (0.097)     (0.112)
Hispanic                  -0.103       -0.040   0.298***       -0.103       -0.041    0.296***
                         (0.111)      (0.076)    (0.087)      (0.111)      (0.076)     (0.087)
U.S. born              -0.666***     -0.269**   -0.955***   -0.669***     -0.272**    -0.958***
                         (0.142)      (0.108)    (0.120)      (0.142)      (0.109)     (0.121)
Married                -0.845***     -0.156**   -0.918***   -0.842***     -0.156**    -0.917***
                         (0.105)      (0.062)    (0.084)      (0.105)      (0.062)     (0.084)
PVT_w1B                0.411***     0.416***    0.546***    0.410***     0.418***     0.547***
                         (0.097)      (0.067)    (0.083)      (0.097)      (0.067)     (0.083)
PVT_w1C                0.754***     0.504***    1.011***    0.752***     0.505***     1.012***
                         (0.104)      (0.077)    (0.089)      (0.104)      (0.077)     (0.089)
PVT_w1D                1.353***     0.706***    1.449***    1.346***     0.702***     1.444***
                         (0.107)      (0.084)    (0.095)      (0.107)      (0.084)     (0.095)
Mother high school     0.438***       0.133*    0.321***    0.434***       0.129*     0.315***
                         (0.119)      (0.075)    (0.091)      (0.119)      (0.075)     (0.091)
Mother high school+    1.218***     0.247***    0.850***    1.214***     0.243***     0.845***
                         (0.116)      (0.077)    (0.092)      (0.116)      (0.077)     (0.092)
Non-wage2                 -0.017        0.161    -0.035        -0.018        0.158     -0.039
                         (0.201)      (0.145)    (0.167)      (0.201)      (0.145)     (0.167)
Non-wage3                  0.123       -0.182     0.013         0.125       -0.183      0.013
                         (0.211)      (0.156)    (0.176)      (0.211)      (0.156)     (0.176)
Non-wage4                0.487**       -0.089     0.210       0.489**       -0.090      0.208
                         (0.232)      (0.178)    (0.198)      (0.232)      (0.178)     (0.198)
Non-wage5                  0.163     -0.366**    -0.281         0.164     -0.368**     -0.284
                         (0.216)      (0.161)    (0.184)      (0.216)      (0.161)     (0.184)
Non-wage6                  0.290     -0.387**    -0.180         0.287     -0.392**     -0.185
                         (0.232)      (0.176)    (0.199)      (0.232)      (0.176)     (0.200)
Nonwage7                 0.468**       -0.141    -0.122       0.466**       -0.148     -0.129
                         (0.236)      (0.180)    (0.205)      (0.236)      (0.180)     (0.205)
Depressed              -0.386***    -0.195***   -0.412***   -0.387***    -0.195***    -0.412***
                         (0.078)      (0.056)    (0.066)      (0.078)      (0.056)     (0.066)
Depressed_w1             -0.115*     -0.117**    -0.062       -0.121*     -0.116**     -0.060
                         (0.070)      (0.053)    (0.061)      (0.070)      (0.053)     (0.060)
Constant                   0.324      -0.708*     0.206         0.322      -0.697*      0.218
                         (0.413)      (0.374)    (0.373)      (0.413)      (0.375)     (0.374)
Log-Likelihood                      16,410.0                              16,405.7
Observations                          14,392                               14,392
Notes: Omitted outcome in the multinomial logit model is No-school/No-work. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.




                                                 44
