NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSTITUTIONS, POLITICS AND ECONOMICS:
A REVIEW ESSAY ON PERSSON AND TABELLINI’S
“THE ECONOMIC EFFECT OF CONSTITUTIONS”
Daron Acemoglu
Working Paper 11235
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11235
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

Prepared for the Journal of Economic Literature. I thank Joshua Angrist, Victor Chernozukov, Roger Gordon,
Chad Jones, Torsten Persson, Guido Tabellini, Simon Johnson and Pierre Yared for useful comments and
Pierre Yared for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Daron Acemoglu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Constitutions, Politics and Economics: A Review Essay on Persson and Tabellini’s “The Economic
Effect of Constitutions”
Daron Acemoglu
NBER Working Paper No. 11235
March 2005
JEL No. P16, O10
ABSTRACT
In this essay I review the new book by Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini, The Economic Effects
of Constitutions, which investigates the policy and economic consequences of different forms of
government and electoral rules. I also take advantage of this opportunity to discuss the advantages
and disadvantages of a number of popular empirical strategies in the newly emerging field of
comparative political economy.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Political economy has now emerged as an active and flourishing subdiscipline of economics, with the ambition of oﬀering insights into the causes of the large cross-country
diﬀerences in major economic outcomes and policies.1

Torsten Persson and Guido

Tabellini deserve much of the credit for making this happen. Their book, Political
Economics: Explaining Economic Policy, which was published by MIT Press in 2000, is
an excellent introduction to basic models of political decision-making and their implications for economic outcomes. The objective of their new book, The Economic Eﬀects of
Constitutions, also published by MIT Press, is to continue where the first book left oﬀ,
and confront theory with data.
The book deserves enthusiastic reception for a number of reasons, including the
authors’ role in advancing the political economy research program, its ambitious objectives, its careful scholarship, and the long list of findings that come out of the research
methodology. Equally, however, such a bold attempt at confronting theory with data
requires a critical look. This motivates my review of their new book, focusing on the
identification issues that arise both in this context and more generally in recent political
economy research.
This review essay is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the context and the
objectives of Persson and Tabellini’s new book. Section 3 provides a detailed discussion of econometric issues and identification problems that Persson and Tabellini have
rightly emphasized in their work. Section 4 discusses the major empirical results of the
book. Sections 5-8 discuss a number of problems and challenges facing empirical work
in political economy, and reevaluates Persson and Tabellini’s contribution in this light.
Sections 9 and 10 discuss two sets of topics that I view as important areas for future
research in political economy.
2

Background and Objectives

Persson and Tabellini (henceforth PT) set the scene with Figure 1.1 in their book, which
I replicate here. The box on the left is where much of economics falls. We have a good,
though far from perfect, understanding of how diﬀerent organizations of markets lead
1

While there is renewed interest in political economy, in large part in the context of understanding
the sources of large cross-country diﬀerences in policies, institutions and economic performance, this
work is preceded by the important results of the earlier "social choice" literature. Austin-Smith and
Banks (2000) provide an excellent introduction to the major results in this literature.

1

to diﬀerent economic outcomes. But why are markets organized diﬀerently in diﬀerent
societies? Economists and other social scientists have long realized the importance of
"policies". If the government imposes rent control, this will impact how the rental market
works. The major advance that came with political economy is encapsulated in a new
question: why do policies diﬀer over time, across countries and more broadly across
polities? Why, for example, do some governments impose rent control while others do
not intervene in rental markets. Before, we had no better answer than "(some) politicians
just don’t get it". Political economy is about developing better answers.
This task requires a framework for thinking about why policies diﬀer across countries. This is what much of political economy does. Starting with Arrow’s celebrated
(im)possibility theorem (Arrow 1963, Black, 1958), Downs’s median voter result (Downs,
1957, Hotelling, 1929), and Stigler’s work on regulation (Stigler, 1970, 1972), the central working hypothesis has been that agents–as voters, lobbyists, revolutionaries,
politicians–have induced preferences over policies. This means that they understand
that diﬀerent policies will map into diﬀerent outcomes, and consequently their preferences over policies are shaped by their preferences over the outcomes that will be induced
by the policies.2 Political economy is then about understanding how these induced preferences over policies are aggregated. The recent work in political economy is also part
of this research program, but more explicitly investigates why collective decisions and
policies diﬀer across societies.
Much work in political science, on the other hand, as succinctly captured by the box
on the right in Persson and Tabellini’s figure is about how diﬀerent political procedures
lead to diﬀerent political outcomes. Let us refer to political procedures as "political
institutions" and make the link between political outcomes and policies. This gives us a
natural framework for thinking about why diﬀerent societies choose diﬀerent policies–
they have diﬀerent political institutions.
PT’s first book, Political Economics, developed various models of collective decisionmaking and derived predictions on how diﬀerences in political institutions translate into
diﬀerences of policies and economic outcomes. This new book is the next step to push
this framework further by confronting its predictions with data.
Although this type of comparative analysis has been vibrant in political science, there
are no systematic theoretical analyses deriving precise predictions from micro-founded
2

This approach is referred to as "rational choice" in political science. To economists, it is the natural
approach without apologies.

2

models to confront with data. Here PT are much more ambitious. They take the
predictions of a set of theoretical models, in particular, the probabilistic voting model
of Lindbeck and Weibull (1987), extensively studied in their first book, and an extended
version of the Ferejohn’s (1986) model of politician accountability, studied in Persson,
Roland and Tabellini (1997, 2000), seriously. Although one can have qualms about the
specific assumptions that are important to derive predictions in these models, PT’s is the
right approach in social science in general, and in comparative political economy more
specifically. What makes this work even more impressive is the fact that the authors are
investigating predictions of their earlier models.
In reality, PT have an even more ambitious goal. Many scholars attempt to document
a set of correlations in the data that are related to predictions of existing models. Instead,
PT are interested in more than correlations. They undertake the ambitious task of
identifying the causal eﬀects of the form of political institutions on economic and political
outcomes. They write on page 7:
"Our ultimate goal is to draw conclusions about the causal eﬀect of constitutions on specific policy outcomes. We would like to answer questions like
the following: if the United Kingdom were to switch its electoral rule from
majoritarian to proportional, how would this aﬀect the size of its welfare
state or its budget deficits? If Argentina were to abandon its presidential
regime in favor of a parliamentary form of government, would this facilitate
the adoption of sound policy towards economic development?"
How would we get to the causal eﬀects of a set of political institutions on outcomes? PT have a well-specified strategy. First, they focus on a subset of political
institutions; the constitutionally-determined form of electoral rules and the form of government among democracies. This leaves out a large part of political institutions, for
example, those that relate to whether a country is a democracy or not, and thus a lot
of interesting questions related to what makes constitutions credible in the first place.3
Nevertheless, narrowing the scope of the investigation is the right approach to be able to
3

See, for example, Dixit, Grossman and Gul (2000). This question perhaps is not first-order for
PT because they want to focus on democracies that are "fully consolidated" and do not switch to
dictatorship, and to investigate how electoral rules aﬀect policies within the democratic framework.
Nevertheless, whether a society is a fully consolidated democracy is endogenous and potentially also
depends on the form of government and electoral rules in democracy (see Acemoglu and Robinson,
2005, for a discussion).

3

estimate causal eﬀects. Second, they use a variety of state-of-the-art techniques developed in the micro-econometrics literature, in particular, matching estimators, propensity
score methods, instrumental variables estimation, and parametric selection corrections.
Since the identification of causal eﬀects is the major objective of this book, and also
because the econometric issues that arise here are becoming increasingly important in the
political economy literature, in the next section I discuss PT’s econometric methodology
in detail.
3
3.1

Econometric Methodology

The Basic Framework

PT’s major interest is to identify the causal eﬀect of two political institutions, presidentialism (versus parliamentary systems) and majoritarian electoral rules (versus proportional representation), on the amount and the composition of government spending, and
on politicians’ rents and other political outcomes. Ultimately, part of the interest is also
to estimate the eﬀect of these diﬀerent constitutional forms on aggregate productivity
and income per capita levels.
Following PT’s exposition in chapter 5, I simplify the problem by focusing only on one
binary constitutional feature, denoted by Si ∈ {0, 1}, and a generic outcome variable, Yi ,

with i denoting country in a cross-sectional dataset.4 PT consider a relatively general
econometric framework, incorporating potentially heterogeneous eﬀects. For the purposes of this review, let us focus on a model that is linear in the covariates and features
constant (marginal) eﬀects. Let Xi be a K × 1 vector of (observable) exogenous covari-

ates and suppose that the structural relationship of interest is E (Yi | Xi ) = αSi + X0i β,
or:

Yi = αSi + X0i β + ui ,

(1)

where α measures the eﬀect of Si on the outcome of interest, β is a K × 1 vector of

coeﬃcients associated with X, and ui captures the eﬀect of all unobserved determinants

as well as random influences on Yi .5
PT use four diﬀerent empirical strategies to estimate (1) or variants: (1) Ordinary
least-squares (OLS); (2) Matching and propensity score estimators to relax the linearity
4

See, for example, Angrist and Imbens (1995), Angrist, Imbens and Rubin (1996), Angrist and
Krueger (1999), Heckman (1997) and Wooldridge (2002), for more detailed treatments.
5
It is worth noting that equation (1) can be estimated without the constant marginal eﬀects and
linearity assumptions to obtain "average treatment eﬀects" with weights depending on the estimation
strategy, see Angrist and Krueger (1999).

4

assumption in (1). (3) Instrumental variables (IV). (4) Parametric selection corrections
due to Heckman.
These strategies deal with the identification problem in (1) in two diﬀerent ways,
which can be classified as "selection on observables" and "exclusion restrictions" (see
Angrist and Krueger, 1999).
3.2

Selection on Observables

The identifying assumption for strategy 1 is that conditional on Xi , Si and ui are orthogonal. This last condition implies that the OLS estimator is consistent. To see this
briefly, let variables with the tildes denote the original variable after the eﬀect of the
vector Xi has been partialed out.6 Then, (1) can be rewritten as:
Ỹi = αS̃i + ũi ,

(2)

which implies that
plimα̂OLS

´
³
Cov S̃i , Ỹi
³ ´
=
Var S̃i
³
´
Cov S̃i , ũi
³ ´ ,
= α+
Var S̃i

(3)

where the variance and covariance terms refer
values. Consequently, the
´
³ to population
identifying assumption for strategy 1 is Cov S̃i , ũi = 0 (or that conditional on Xi , ui
be statistically independent from Si ).

The fact that Si and ui need to be orthogonal conditional on Xi highlights the importance of selection on observables. It is quite possible that Si is correlated with some
other determinants of Yi , but once we condition on the covariates, this correlation disappears. Therefore, for this class of strategies controlling for the right set of observables
is of primary importance.
What distinguishes the OLS and matching strategies is the way in which they control
for the eﬀect of these observables. OLS regression, as in (1), imposes linearity, whereas
the matching estimators allow for non-linear eﬀects of observables. With matching estimators, the parameters of interest are estimated conditional on a set of observables, and
6

In words,³these are the residuals
from the original variable’s linear projection on the vector Xi ,
´
−1
0
given by ỹ = I − X (X X) X y, where X denotes the K × N matrix obtained from the Xi ’s.

5

then the average eﬀect is obtained by averaging these conditional parameter estimates.
The advantage of this estimator is that it allows the parameter of interest to depend
flexibly on the characteristics used for matching. Propensity score methods enable consistent estimation when there are many characteristics according to which observations
can be matched (see Angrist and Krueger, 1999, Wooldridge, 2002, chapter³ 18). ´
With both strategies, however, there are numerous reasons why Cov S̃i , ũi = 0

may not be valid. In this context this might be, for example, because the constitutional
features of a country are partly determined by omitted factors that also influence policy
choices and economic outcomes. These factors may include diﬀerences in the nature
of economic opportunities across societies, the distribution of non-institutional political
power between various groups, diﬀerences in culture, and diﬀerences in other institutional features influencing potential outcomes. Since the conceptual issues arising with
both linear regression and matching estimators are similar, in what follows I focus on
the identification issues with OLS, which are simpler to discuss.
To highlight the potential bias in OLS estimation, suppose, again using the tilde
notation:
ũi = λL̃i + ω i ,

(4)

where Li is some other potential determinant of the outcomes of interest, and L̃i denotes
its residuals from the projection on the Xi ’s, while ω i satisfies Cov(ωi , ũi ) = 0. This
implies that
plimα̂OLS

´
³
Cov S̃i , L̃i
³ ´ .
=α+λ
Var S̃i

Therefore, the OLS estimator will be inconsistent if there exists a potential determinant
Li of the outcome of interest (i.e., λ³6= 0), ´which is also correlated with the form of government or electoral rules (i.e., Cov S̃i , L̃i 6= 0). This corresponds to the usual omitted
variable bias. This notation can also capture the measurement error (attenuation) bias
whereby we observe a noisy signal of the true institutions, S̃i , while what³ we care
´ about

is T̃i = S̃i − τ̃ i , where τ̃ i is a classical measurement error term, with Cov T̃i , τ̃ i = 0. In
³ ´ ³
´
³ ´
this case, L̃i = −τ̃ i and λ = α, so that plimα̂OLS = αVar T̃i / Var T̃i + Var (τ̃ i ) .

3.3

Exclusion Restrictions and Instrumental Variables

The most important line of attack that researchers have against potential biases of
the OLS estimator is to use an instrumental variables (IV) strategy, which is PT’s
6

third strategy. The IV strategy relies on a M × 1 vector of instruments, Zi , which has
predictive power for the endogenous regressors, but is orthogonal to ui in (1) (where

naturally, M ≥ K + 1). The exclusion restriction refers to this last requirement, and is
equivalent to the condition E (Zi ui ) = 0. This means that the vector of instruments, Zi ,
has no eﬀect on the outcomes of interest other than its impact through the endogenous
regressors.
A common view in the applied economics literature is that the IV strategy is "atheoretical". This view originates from the fact that typically the IV strategy does not
necessitate a fully-specified structural model. Nevertheless, as I will argue in greater detail below, every IV strategy requires an underlying theory. In essence, the IV strategy
starts with an essentially non-testable hypothesis, that the vector of instruments, Zi , is
orthogonal to omitted influences captured by the error term ui . This presumption must
be based on some theoretical consideration, and the IV procedure would have no justification without a compelling (a priori) theory. This underlying theory can be extremely
simple, for example, the hypothesis that, everything else equal, a change in compulsory
schooling laws or their enforcement should aﬀect schooling (e.g., Angrist and Krueger,
1991, Acemoglu and Angrist, 2000), but have no eﬀect on earnings through other channels; or more involved, for example, the hypothesis that all information contained in
the past income realizations should already be incorporated in the current consumption decisions and should have no predictive power for consumption growth (e.g., Hall,
1978, Hansen and Singleton, 1982). I return below to the theoretical justifications of the
instruments used in PT’s work and in other work in political economy.
For now, let me simplify the discussion by assuming that all of the variables in Xi
are exogenous, and there is a single excludable instrument, Zi , for the only endogenous
regressor, Si . So the instrument vector is simply Zi = (Xi , Zi ). Using the tilde notation, the estimating equation can be written as (2), with a corresponding first-stage
relationship of
(5)
S̃i = γ Z̃i + vi ,
³
´
where, for simplicity, suppose that Cov Z̃i , vi = 0. The probability limit of the instru-

mental variable estimator of α is given by
´
´
³
³
Cov Z̃i , Ỹi
Cov Z̃i , ũi
³
³ ´ .
´ =α+
plimα̂IV =
Cov Z̃i , S̃i
γVar Z̃i

(6)

This equation encapsulates the two requirements for a valid instrument; (1) relevance,
7

7
which requires that there
´ be first-stage relationship, i.e., γ 6= 0; (2) excludability,
³ should

which means that Cov Z̃i , ũi = 0 (which is equivalent to Cov(Zi , ui | Xi ) = 0, and also
to E (Zi ui ) = 0).

To illustrate the usefulness of the IV strategy, let us³ return
´ to the model of the
unobserved eﬀect in equation (4), and suppose that Cov S̃i , L̃i 6= 0, so that OLS is

inconsistent. In this case, using the IV strategy leads to an estimate of α, α̂IV , with the
following probability limit:
plimα̂IV

³
´
λCov Z̃i , L̃i
³ ´ .
=α+
γVar Z̃i

³
´
Therefore, if Cov Z̃i , L̃i = 0, the IV estimator will be consistent (given γ 6= 0). The
´
³
condition that Cov Z̃i , L̃i = 0 is sometimes loosely referred to as the requirement
that "the instrument should be orthogonal to omitted eﬀects". Moreover, the above

discussion of measurement error illustrates that a valid instrument also removes the
attenuation bias arising from classical measurement error.
In all of this, the set of covariates included in Xi is important because one can
imagine that Zi could be correlated with the error term in the second stage, but this
correlation disappears once we condition on a set of covariates (i.e., we may have that
while Cov(Zi , ui | X1i ) 6= 0, Cov(Zi , ui | X2i ) = 0 for some (not necessarily mutually
exclusive) diﬀerent sets of covariates X1i and X2i ). Interestingly, this issue does not

arise when there is random assignment due to real experiments or because of natural
experiments. This makes the identification problem more diﬃcult and subtle in political
economy models than in many other contexts, and makes the distinction between the
selection on observables and exclusion restriction strategies I tried to highlight above
less clear-cut.
PT include income per capita, democracy score, age of democracy, measures of trade,
measures of age composition of the population, a dummy for federal and a dummy for
OECD in Xi in their main specifications. The instruments are various combinations of
the timing of adoption of the country’s constitution, fraction of the populations that
speak English or another European language, and latitude.
Note also that if γ ≈ 0, then even though plimα̂IV = α, in small samples α̂IV could systematically
deviate from α, causing the "weak instruments" problem (see, for example, Staiger and Stock, 1997,
Stock, Wright and Yogo, 2002). The sister problem is the "too many instruments" problem, which
arises when the vector Zi includes a large number of excluded instruments (relative to the number of
instruments), leading to a spurious first-stage relationship (e.g., Hansen, Hausman and Newey, 2004).
7

8

I will discuss the validity of these instruments below. Before doing this, however, an
important estimation issue needs to be raised. The above derivation of the consistency
of the instrumental variable estimator made it clear that the same set of covariates, Xi ,
needs to be included both in the first and the second stage. This was made explicit by
the "tilde" notation above, where the regressions include the variables after the vector Xi
has been partialed out. Equations (5) and
show immediately why the IV estimator,
³ (6) ´
given the identification assumption Cov Z̃i , ũi = 0, is consistent in this case.

PT, instead, choose a non-standard econometric method, and exclude some of the

Xi ’s from the first stage. In particular, suppose that the vector of covariates is partitioned as Xi = (X1i , X2i ), and only X1i is included in the first-stage relationship (while
the entire Xi is included in the second stage). In practice, the procedure is the following: first, Si is predicted on the basis of X1i and Zi (using linear regression). Denote
the predicted values by Ŝi . Then the parameters of interest are estimated using an
OLS regression with Ŝi instead of Si . It can be shown that for this estimator, α̂P T , to
be consistent the Xi ’s that are omitted from the first stage should have no predictive
power for the endogenous regressors (conditional on the other covariates).8 Otherwise,
the residuals from the first stage, which mechanically go into the second stage, are no
longer orthogonal to the covariates, and this biases the estimate of the vector β, and
the bias from β carries over to the estimate of the parameter of interest, α.9 Therefore,
¡ ¢0
¡ ¢0
In particular, let the true (statistical) first-stage relationship be Si = γZi + X1i π 1 + X2i π 2 +εi ,
¡ ¢0
¡ ¢0
with Ŝi = γZi + X1i π 1 + X2i π 2 denoting the predicted component of Si . The second-stage equation
¡ ¢0
¡ ¢0
of the traditional 2SLS procedure is Yi = αŜi + X1i β1 + X2i β 2 + ui . The assumption E (Zi ui ) = 0
ensures consistent estimation of η = (α, β) with the standard IV procedure. In contrast, the predicted
¡ ¢0
¡ ¢0
¡ ¢0
value from the PT procedure is S̆i = γ̆Zi + X1i π̆ 1 = Ŝi + (γ̆ − γ) Zi + X1i (π̆ 1 − π 1 ) − X2i π 2 ,
where the second equality substitutes for the definition of Ŝ³i . So the second stage in this case becomes:
¡ ¢0
¡ ¢0
¡ ¢0
¡ ¢0 ´
Yi = αS̆i + X1i β 1 + X2i β2 + ŭi , where ŭi = ui − α (γ̆ − γ) Zi + X1i (π̆ 1 − π 1 ) − X2i π 2 .
8

Defining W̆i = (Xi , S̆i ), PT’s estimator is
η̂ P T =

Ã

N −1

N
X
i=1

W̆i W̆i

!−1 Ã

N −1

N
X
i=1

W̆i Yi

!

Ã

= η+ N −1

N
X
i=1

W̆i W̆i

!−1 Ã

N −1

N
X
i=1

W̆i ŭi

!

.

´
³
For this estimator to be consistent, we need E W̆i ŭi = 0. However, when π 2 6= 0, ŭi will be no longer

vector coeﬃcients η is not estimated consistently.
orthogonal to X2i , and this will imply that
´
³ the entire
In other words, we will typically have E W̆i ŭi 6= 0 and plimα̂P T 6= α, even if E (Zi ui ) = 0.
9
For example, Wooldridge (2002, p. 91) notes: "In practice, it is best to use a software package
with a 2SLS rather than explicitly carry out the two-step procedure. Carrying out the two-step
procedure explicitly makes one susceptible to harmful mistakes. For example, the following seemingly
sensible, two-step procedure is generally inconsistent: (1) regress xK on 1, z1 , ...., zM [the set of excluded
instruments for xK ] and obtain the fitted values, say x̃K ; (2) run the regression [of the dependent variable

9

the estimator used
PT may be inconsistent even when the standard identification
³ by ´
assumption, Cov Z̃i , ũi = 0 or E (Zi ui ) = 0, is satisfied.10 One might wonder whether

this is an important source of bias in practice, and I return to this problem below.

Finally, PT’s Strategy 4, parametric selection corrections, is related ³
to the ´IV strategy. This is an attempt to deal with the failure of the assumption Cov S̃i , ũi = 0 by
positing a functional form for selection on unobservables, based on the work by Heckman (1976, 1979). Specifically, PT posit that Si = 1 if G (Zi ) + ν i ≥ 0, and Si = 0

otherwise. Following the common practice, they assume that the ν i ’s are normally
distributed, which enables a parametric correction for selection (see, e.g., Wooldridge,
2002). Parametric selection approaches exploit the functional form assumptions on ν i ,
but otherwise rely on the same set of exclusion restrictions. Consequently, though they
are a useful check on standard IV estimates, they will also lead to inconsistent estimates
if the underlying exclusion restrictions are not valid. This motivates my focus on the
the linear IV approach for most of the discussion, though I will also contrast the results
of the parametric selection approach to the OLS and IV estimates.
4

Main Results and Assessment

Using all four strategies, PT obtain a number of results that paint a broadly consistent
picture. The most important results are:
1. Presidential and majoritarian systems have smaller governments than parliamentary and proportional representation systems (where government size is measured
as government spending as a fraction of GDP). Majoritarian systems also appear
to have smaller welfare state spendings and budget deficits.
2. While presidential or majoritarian systems in general do not have a robust eﬀect
on political rents, corruption and aggregate productivity, certain details of the
electoral system, in particular the size of the electoral districts and whether voters
cast their ballots for individual politicians or for party lists, do have significant
eﬀects.
on the other covariates and on x̃K ]..." This example is equivalent to the procedure that PT implement.
10
PT justify this econometric method by arguing that, because the major source of bias is not reverse
causality but omitted variables, excluding some second-stage covariates from the first stage might be
justifiable. This may be an argument for why we should expect π 2 = 0 in terms of the notation in
footnote 8. They further suggest that this might be useful because it would lead to a stronger first-stage
relationship, avoiding weak instrument problems.

10

3. Countries with parliamentary systems have more persistent fiscal outcomes than
countries with a presidential system. Namely, in parliamentary systems, increases
in government spending during downturns are not reversed during booms. There is
a similar, but weaker pattern, for countries with proportional representation (relative to those with majoritarian elections). Finally, consistent with the predictions
of the political business cycle models, proportional representation also appears to
generate a greater expansion in welfare spending in the proximity of elections.
These results are exposed with great clarity, and PT show that they are robust.
For example, the results are similar with linear regressions, or with the matching and
propensity score methods. Importantly, results are also similar with the instrumental
variables and parametric selection correction strategies, though sometimes less precise.
What makes these results even more important than this brief description would suggest is that they are closely related to the predictions of the models that have motivated
PT’s study. For example, the models that are most popular in the literature suggest that
electoral rules, in particular, how broad or narrow districts are, should aﬀect both the
overall size of government, the composition of spending and the extent of political rents.
These are confirmed by the empirical results in the book. In addition, models based
on the importance of separation of power, such as Persson, Roland and Tabellini (1997,
2000), suggest that presidential systems where there is typically greater separation of
powers should have smaller governments, which is also pattern that PT find in the data.
These are remarkable results. Only a very brave or uninformed scholar could attempt
to write on comparative political economy without seriously studying this book, and
only a very stubborn researcher would have his or her posteriors remain unchanged after
studying it. PT have already achieved something very few scholars can: a body of work
for not only the current generation of researchers, but also for the next generation. In
fact, the impact of the book might even be greater than this discussion suggests. If the
results indeed correspond to the causal eﬀects of the form of government and electoral
rules on policies and economic outcomes as PT claim, we have learned more with this
book than from the entire comparative politics literature of the past fifty years.
Despite these remarkable results, there are reasons to question whether this research
has successfully uncovered causal eﬀects. The OLS and matching estimates ultimately
rely on the exogeneity of political institutions. Nevertheless, political institutions are
equilibrium outcomes, determined by various social factors that are not fully controlled
for in the empirical models. This makes me believe that although the OLS results
11

uncover interesting patterns, they will not typically identify causal eﬀects. For causal
eﬀects, we have to turn to estimates using the exclusion restrictions. Here PT’s work is
again the state-of-the-art, but the exclusion restrictions are not necessarily compelling,
making it unlikely that the IV estimates are uncovering causal eﬀects either. The next
three sections discuss these problems in greater detail.
5
5.1

Identification in Political Economy

General Issues

PT have put identification of causal eﬀects as the primary objective of their work. In this
they are not alone. Much recent research of political economy is about understanding
the eﬀects of various policies or institutional features on economic development. The
issues of identification are therefore at the forefront. I will argue that even though PT
have undertaken a careful and thorough investigation of the questions at hand, they
may have not estimated the causal eﬀect of the constitutional features on the outcomes
of interest. Moreover, the identification problems that arise in this work are shared by
many other studies in political economy.
Let us start by recalling that the basic approach is to understand diﬀerences in
policies and economic outcomes as a function of the underlying political institutions of
societies. This methodological approach builds on the notion that agents have induced
preferences over policies because they recognize the implications of these policies for their
well-being. Although I wholeheartedly agree with this methodology, I also think that
there is an immediate next step that one can (and should) take. By exactly the same
token, agents should have induced preferences over political institutions. This is because
diﬀerent political institutions will generate diﬀerent policies, and thus lead to diﬀerent
economic outcomes, and rational economic (and political) agents should understand not
only the implications of diﬀerent policies but also the implications of diﬀerent political
institutions. The logic of political economy therefore forces us to also think of political
institutions as endogenous.
This leads to an important issue: while a large body of empirical literature argues
that political institutions are "predetermined" or given by history and treats them as
exogenous, the reasoning of the political economy approach implies that these institutions are also endogenous and likely determined by the same factors that make policies
unappealing variables to treat as exogenous.

12

This point has featured in one way or another in the comparative politics literature.
It is emphasized in its most general form by the Charles Beard’s classic 1913 study,
An Economic Interpretation of the U.S. Constitution, where he argues that the primary
objective of the government and the constitution is to ensure favorable economic conditions for those holding political power, and the form of government should be seen as a
(secondary) feature serving the same objective–by "secondary" Beard does not mean
less important, but chosen in the same way and for the same objectives as the overall
structure of political power. He writes: (1913, p. 13)
“Inasmuch as the primary object of a government, beyond the mere repression of physical violence, is the making of the rules that determine the
property relations of society, the dominant classes whose rights are thus to
be determined must perforce obtain from the government such rules as are
consonant with the larger interests necessary to the continuance of their
economic processes, or they must themselves control the organs of government. In a stable despotism the former takes place; under any other system of government, where political power is shared by any portion of the
population, the methods and nature of this control become the problem of
prime importance–in fact, the fundamental problem in constitutional law.
The social structure by which one type of legislation is secured and another
prevented–is a secondary or derivative feature arising from the nature of
the economic groups seeking positive action and negative restraint.”
If Beard is correct in his assessment, then many features of constitutions will be
influenced by factors that also have a direct impact on policy and economic outcomes.
To illustrate this possibility, imagine a world consisting of some politically powerful
elite and citizens. The elite oppose redistribution, while the citizens favor it. When
the elite are more powerful, they will be able to limit the amount of redistribution
and the size of government. Imagine also that the elite prefer presidential systems to
parliamentary systems. In this case, when the elite are more powerful, the equilibrium
form of government is more likely to be presidential. If, in addition, the strength of
the elite is persistent, there will be an empirical correlation between presidentialism
and smaller governments, not only at the time the constitution is written, but also in
the subsequence decades. But this correlation would not necessarily reflect the causal

13

11
eﬀect of presidentialism on equilibrium
´policies. In terms of the econometric discussion
³

above, the requirement that Cov S̃i , ũi = 0 in equation (2), is violated because there is
an omitted factor, like L̃i in equation (4), in this case the political strength of the elite,

aﬀecting both the form of government and the outcomes of interest. The same concerns
generalize to the other potential outcome variables.
In this light, the OLS (non-IV) estimates of the causal eﬀects of the form of government and electoral systems should not be interpreted as causal. Instead, they likely
correspond to interesting robust correlations in the data. For causal estimates, we have
to rely on IV approaches.
5.2

The Instrumental Variables Approach in Practice

PT attempt to estimate the causal eﬀects of the form of government and electoral systems
by using a simple IV approach. Their potential instruments are three constitutional
dating variables, indicating whether a country adopted its current form of government
and current electoral rule after 1981, between 1951-80, between 1921-50, with before 1921
as the omitted category; two language variables, indicating the fraction of the population
in the country speaking one of the major European languages, and the fraction speaking
English as a native language; and latitude (distance from the equator).
Although the IV approach adopted by PT is important on methodological grounds, I
will argue that it is unlikely to be estimating the causal eﬀect of the form of government
and electoral rules on policy and economic outcomes for two reasons: first, because
the three constitutional timing variables have little eﬀect on the endogenous regressors,
identification ultimately relies on the fraction of the population with European language
as native tongue and latitude, which are not convincing instruments for institutional
features in general; second, even if they were valid for some general institutional features,
by implication they could not be valid instruments for specific institutional features such
as the form of government or electoral rules.12 In this subsection, I show the importance
11

A similar argument, though with the opposite implication, is suggested by another major figure
in comparative political science, Stein Rokkan. Rokkan argued in his 1970 book that the emergence
of proportional representation in Continental Europe was a result of the previous elites’ attempts to
manage the transition to democracy in a manner that was consistent with their interests. He suggests
that a key objective of the proportional representation system was to make the emergence of a socialist
majority more diﬃcult. If Rokkan is correct, then because proportional representation emerged in
societies where the elites were more powerful, we may expect a negative correlation between proportional
representation and redistribution, as opposed to the positive correlation documented by PT.
12
Another potential problem is that, as discussed in Section 3, a successful IV strategy also requires
E (Xi ui ) = 0, i.e., the covariates that are treated as exogenous to be orthogonal to the error term.

14

of the language and latitude instruments for identification, and also briefly look at the
implications of not including second stage covariates in the first stage.
Let us begin with the reasoning for these instruments. The three timing variables
could be relevant for the form of government and in electoral system because there
may have been waves (or "fads") in the type of constitutions, and diﬀerent countries
fell into diﬀerent waves depending on when they adopted their constitution or declared
their independence. The two language variables and latitude are included as proxies
for "European influence" following the arguments in Hall and Jones (1999). Hall and
Jones use these variables as instruments for the overall quality of institutions (social
infrastructure), and PT argue that these could also have aﬀected the form of government
and electoral rule. The reasoning for these Hall-Jones instruments is discussed in the
next section.
These potential instruments are highly correlated with the form of democratic institutions. Typically, countries farther away from the equator and those with a greater
fraction of the population speaking English as a native language (but not those with
other European languages) are less likely to have presidential systems. For majoritarian
systems, the eﬀects of English and other European languages are reversed. There is some
eﬀect from the constitutional dating variables, but these are typically weaker, and less
consistent (depending on what covariates are included in the first and second stages).
The general pattern suggests that with only the constitutional variables, there is
no first stage for the instrumental variable strategy.13 This is illustrated in Table 1
where I use PT’s data to replicate and further investigate their first-stage relationships.
Columns 1a and 1b are identical to the first two columns of PT’s Table 5.1, and separately estimate OLS first-stage relationships with dummy variables for presidential
and majoritarian systems on the right-hand side (respectively PRES and MAJ). Both
columns include seven variables; three dummies for the dates of the adoption of the
constitution, latitude, fraction of the population speaking English and fraction of the
population speaking another European language as native languages, and age of democracy (the latter is included as a covariate in the second stage equations as well, while
the others are excluded instruments). They also report F-tests for joint significance of
These covariates here include income per capita and trade, which are jointly determined with the
size and composition of government spending, and their inclusion in the equation may lead to biased
estimates. Nevertheless, reestimating PT’s IV models excluding income per capita and trade leads to
results similar to their baseline IV estimates.
13
Lack of a first-stage relationship even at the conventional significance levels is an extreme form of
the weak instruments problem mentioned in footnote 7.

15

all the excluded instruments and the constitutional variables at the bottom.
These two columns show a reasonably strong first-stage relationships, which are then
used by PT in their 2SLS estimation (the R2 is 0.48 in the first column and 0.40 in the
second column). However, we can see that the major determinants of the endogenous
regressors are the Hall-Jones instruments, not be constitution timing dummies. In both
columns 1a and 1b, the six instruments are jointly significant at less than 1 percent,
but the three constitutional dummies are only significant at 2% in column 1a (for the
presidential dummy) and very far from statistically significant in column 1b (for the
majoritarian dummy).
Columns 2a and 2b show that the joint significance of the excluded instruments, and
especially of the constitutional variables, is significantly reduced when the second-stage
covariates are also included in the first stage. Recall that these second-stage covariates
are log income per capita, the proportions of the population between the ages of 15 and
64, and over the age of 65, the sum of exports plus imports divided by GDP, the average
of political and civil liberties indices of Freedom House, and dummies for a federal
structure and OECD (see PT, especially Table 6.2 and the data appendix for details).
As discussed above, PT include these covariates in the second stage, but not in the
first-stage relationship. Once they are also included in the first stage, the constitutional
dummies are no longer jointly significant for either presidential or majoritarian dummies.
I will argue in greater detail in Sections 6 and 7 that latitude and European languages
may not be valid instruments for the form of government and electoral rules. In this light,
it is important to understand whether they are essential in the first-stage relationships
reported by PT. Columns 3a,b and 4a,b show that they are, and that once these variables
are left out, there is a very weak or no first-stage relationship left. Without the secondstage covariates, the constitution dummies are significant at 3% and 5% respectively
in columns 3a and 3b, and when the second-stage covariates are included, they are
insignificant.
This implies that an instrumental-variables strategy relying only on the constitutional
timing dummies would not achieve identification.
Table 2 shows the corresponding 2SLS estimates of the form of government and
the electoral system on the size of government. Column 1 replicates PT’s results (the
corresponding first stages are in columns 1a,b of Table 1). Column 2 shows that the
estimates are slightly less precise when the second-stage covariates are included in the
first stage, though the dummy for a presidential system continues to be statistically
16

significant. This shows that leaving the second-stage covariates out of the first stage is
unlikely to have caused a major bias in this case.
Columns 3 and 4 exclude the Hall-Jones instruments and show that there is no
longer a significant eﬀect of the form of government or the electoral system on the size
of government. For example, the coeﬃcient on the presidential dummy in column 3 is
-2.01 (standard error = 5.11) as compared to -8.65 (standard error = 3.61) in column 1.
Evidently, the Hall-Jones instruments are essential for PT’s instrumentation strategy.
Table 3 shows the 2SLS results for the other major outcome variable that PT look at
in their Chapter 6, the composition of spending, proxied by the share of social spending
and welfare in GDP. The structure of this table is identical to that of Table 2. It also
shows that the IV estimates of the eﬀect of constitutional features on policy outcomes are
sensitive to excluding the Hall-Jones instruments. Furthermore, in this case, including
the second-stage covariates in the first stage also matters to some extent, and the eﬀect
of a majoritarian electoral system is no longer significant at 5% in column 2.
This brief discussion illustrates the importance of the Hall-Jones instruments for PT’s
identification strategy,14 (and also touches upon the importance of including second-stage
covariates in the first stage of the IV estimation). The implication is that the IV strategy
in PT’s book heavily relies on the validity of the Hall-Jones instruments. Could these
instruments be valid in the current context?
I believe there are two fundamental reasons for these instruments not to be valid.
The first is that the Hall-Jones instruments are unlikely to be valid for the overall quality
of institutions. The second is that even if these instruments were valid for the overall
quality of institutions, they would by implication be invalid for a specific feature of
the institutional structure such as presidentialism or a majoritarian electoral system. I
discuss these two issues in the next two sections. This discussion is not only relevant to
PT’s work, but also to a number of recent papers adopting similar strategies.
14

PT are upfront about this issue, and argue that "Admittedly, these [Hall-Jones] variables could be
correlated with other unobserved historical determinants of fiscal policy or corruption... [As] we are
confident about the exogeneity of the time dummies for constitutional adoption, we can test the validity
of the additional instruments by exploiting the overidentifying restrictions." (page 131). In addition, the
parametric selection models that they report also yield very similar estimates to the linear IV estimates.
Nevertheless, these checks are unlikely to be suﬃcient to validate the IV estimates. The overidentifying
restrictions have very little power, since, as we saw above, the constitutional timing variables have little
explanatory power in the first stage. The parametric selection models, on the other hand, also use the
same exclusion restrictions in addition to the parametric restrictions, so the similarity in the results is
not too surprising.

17

6

Are the Hall-Jones Variables Valid Instruments for Institutions?

Robert Hall and Charles Jones wrote a very important and influential article emphasizing
the importance of social infrastructure, or institutions on aggregate productivity and
economic growth. Hall and Jones suggested that the origins of good institutions around
the world lie in Europe, so "proximity" to Europe, as measured by fraction of those
speaking European languages and latitude, can be used as instruments for the quality
of institutions.
Hall and Jones’ paper has already become a classic. It is not only cited extensively,
but their arguments are often invoked to use latitude and the fraction of the population
speaking European languages as native tongues as instrument for various institutional
features in the recent empirical literature.
This makes it useful to reconsider the theoretical justification of these instruments.
What is the theory underlying the Hall-Jones instruments? In broad strokes, Hall and
Jones’ theory is as follows. "Good institutions" originated in Western Europe and spread
from there to other countries. Therefore, a potential determinant of the quality of institutions is the extent to which a country has been influenced by Europe’s culture, values
and institutions. Hall and Jones isolate two channels of European influence. The first
is through a shared language, and the second is through geography. Consequently, they
argue, countries with a greater fraction of the population speaking European languages
and those farther from the equator, which were less densely populated and geographically
more similar to Europe hence more conducive to European migration, have benefited
from a benign/beneficial European influence. Based on this theory, they use the fractions of the population speaking European languages and distance from the equator
(latitude) as instruments for the overall quality of institutions.
Some studies, including PT, cite my work with Simon Johnson and James Robinson
as supporting this view. Nevertheless, the theory, and therefore the instrumentation
strategy, in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (AJR, 2001) is diﬀerent. First, in AJR
we focus on former European colonies where European powers had a large eﬀect on institutional development, often by imposing the institutions and running these areas as
colonies. Second, we do not argue that European influence was positive (or negative).
Instead, the argument is that Europeans had very diﬀerent eﬀects on diﬀerent colonies
depending on what was the most attractive colonization strategy. In places where they
faced high mortality rates, they could not settle, and they were more likely to opt for

18

an extractive strategy, with associated extractive/bad institutions. In places with low
mortality rates, they were more likely to settle, and good institutions were more likely
to emerge, because these were institutions that Europeans themselves would live under. This contrast is illustrated by a comparison of the United States or Australia to
the European colonies in Central America, the Caribbean, South Asia, or Africa. In a
companion paper, AJR (2002), we documented the similar eﬀect of indigenous population density. Europeans were more likely to settle and less likely to pursue extractive
strategies in colonies that were less densely populated.
Let us now revisit the theoretical foundations of the Hall-Jones instruments in the
light of this discussion. Neither the results in these papers nor historical evidence support
the theory that European influence was generally beneficial (see also Engerman and
Sokoloﬀ, 1997). Indeed, the history of the Caribbean Islands clearly illustrates the
adverse eﬀects of Europeans, which set up repressive regimes based on slavery and
forced labor. Instead, the evidence is more consistent with the theory that European
influence could be either beneficial or harmful to institutional development. Whether or
not it was beneficial depended on the European powers’ colonization strategy.
Is it possible that the use of these instruments leads to consistent estimates, even
though the story for identification is not entirely substantiated? There is an argument
to be made here. For example, AJR (2001) show that in the sample of former European
colonies, once mortality of European settlers is used as an instrument for institutions,
latitude has no additional eﬀect on income per capita today. It may then be argued that
latitude could be used as an instrument and would capture the same sort of variation
as settler mortality. This argument is not compelling, however, mostly because latitude
is being used as an instrument for the whole world sample whereas the "experiment" in
question, European colonization, applies only to the former European colonies. There
is no valid theoretical argument for extending this experiment to the entire world (and
for the sample of former European colonies, there is no reason to use latitude instead of
settler mortality). For example, for other countries not aﬀected by European colonization, geographic considerations may have had other, diﬀerent eﬀects, which may or may
not be orthogonal to omitted determinants of the outcome variables (see, for example,
AJR, 2004, on the changing eﬀect of access to the Atlantic for European nations during
the early modern period). Consequently, there is no justification for using latitude, or
for that matter anything to do with settler mortality rates, in a sample that includes
countries that were themselves European or were never European colonies.
19

Overall, the theoretical foundations of the Hall-Jones instruments are not entirely
compelling, especially when used for the entire world, and consequently, there are good
reasons to suspect that they may not be excludable from the regressions of interest.
7

Cluster of Institutions Versus Specific Institutions

The above discussion centered around the question of whether the Hall-Jones variables
are valid instruments for the overall quality of institutions. I now turn to a discussion
of the problems involved in using these variables as instruments for specific institutions.
This has become a common practice in the newly-flourishing empirical political economy
literature. PT also follow this practice and use these variables as instruments for the
form of government and electoral rules (indicators of presidential or majoritarian systems). I will argue that there are serious problems in this procedure because of inherent
complementarities between diﬀerent types of institutions.
To develop this argument, let us put aside the concerns raised in the previous section
and suppose that the Hall-Jones instruments (or perhaps settler mortality rates in the
former European colonies sample) are valid for the overall quality of institutions (or
the broad cluster of institutions). This means we now suppose that they are excludable from a second-stage regression of economic outcomes (such as aggregate output or
productivity) with the broad measure of institutions as the endogenous regressor.
Here the distinction between a broad cluster of institutions and specific institutions
is crucial. In AJR (2001), we defined a broad cluster of institutions as a combination of
economic, political, social and legal institutions that are mutually reinforcing. For example, it is impossible to think of a system like the plantation economies in the Caribbean
Islands until the 19th century together with democratic political institutions. This is
because a set of economic institutions, like the plantation system, that lead to a very
unequal distribution of income and wealth cannot easily survive with a set of political
institutions that distribute political power equally. Those with political power would
be greatly tempted to use their power to redistribute income and change the economic
institutions in line with their interests. Economic institutions that lead to a very unequal distribution of income and wealth are only consistent with a similarly unequal
distribution of political power, i.e., with dictatorships and other repressive regimes. In
this case, sources of variation that aﬀect a broad cluster of institutions (e.g., economic
and political institutions together) would not be useful in identifying the role of specific
institutional features.
20

As an example of the diﬃculty of this type of strategy to estimate the eﬀect of
specific institutions, consider the quasi-natural experiment due to international politics,
the division of Korea into North and South. The two parts of Korea before the division
were ethnically, culturally, economically and socially very similar. But because of the
geopolitical balance between the United States and Soviet Union, the South ended up
largely capitalist, while the North became communist. In the following 40 years, we
witnessed a large divergence between these two countries. This is a good source of
variation to understand the eﬀect of the broad cluster of institutions at the level of
"quasi-capitalist" versus "communist" systems. Suppose now that we try to use this
source of variation to understand the eﬀect of some specific institutional feature, say
financial development, on economic growth. It should be clear that this strategy will
lead to a highly biased estimate. It is true that South Korea is financially more developed
than North Korea. It is also true that the reason for this is the division in 1946 (had it
not been for the division, the North and the South would probably have similar levels
of financial development). But this does not make the division a good experiment to
understand the eﬀect of financial development, because this division also caused many
other institutional changes. It is a good laboratory for the study of broad institutions,
but not for a study of the specific institutions.
Another example directly related to PT’s empirical work may also be useful. In the
first-stage relationships shown in Table 1, the fraction of the population speaking English
is a strong predictor of a majoritarian system, and this fraction may be a predetermined
variable, shaped, for example, by colonial history. Nevertheless, this is not suﬃcient for
it to be an excludable instrument in estimating the causal eﬀect of majoritarian systems,
even if as Hall and Jones claim, English influence is conducive to the development of good
institutions overall. For example, as we know from La Porta et al. (1998), countries
more influenced by the English heritage also have more developed financial markets.
So the correlation between majoritarian electoral systems (instrumented by fraction of
the population speaking English) and the size of government may reflect the eﬀect of
financial development, which is omitted from the regressions.
To make these issues a little more precise, consider the following structural model:
Yi = αGi + X0i β + ui ,

(7)

where Yi denotes the outcome of interest, β is again a vector of coeﬃcients associated
with X, which is now assumed to stand for a set of non-institutional covariates. Gi is
21

a measure of a broad "cluster of institutions". Moreover, suppose that there are K > 1
specific institutions, each denoted by S k , and
Gi =

K
X

ν k Sik + µi

(8)

k=1

where ν k denotes the eﬀect of specific institution S k on the cluster of institutions. Sup¡
¢
pose that Cov(ui , µi ) 6= 0 and/or Cov ui , Sik 6= 0 for some k, so that equation (7) cannot

be estimated consistently by OLS.

Next, suppose that we have an instrument Zi , in particular a country-specific variable, which is potentially related to each of the specific institutions, i.e.,
Sik = ζ k Zi + υ ki ,

(9)

and is a valid instrument for the cluster of institutions, Gi , i.e., Cov(Zi , ui ) = 0. So if
we have a good measure of Gi , equation (7) can be estimated consistently by IV.
However, the objective here is to estimate the eﬀect of specific institutions. To sim¡
¢
¡
¢
plify the discussion, also assume that Cov(Zi , µi ) = 0, and Cov µi , υ ki =Cov Zi , υ ki = 0
¢
¡
for all k and Cov υ ki , υ ji = 0 for all j 6= k. Note that Sik ’s are correlated even if υ ki ’s

are independent, since they are all aﬀected by Zi . This correlation is at the root of the
identification problems facing IV estimates of the impact of specific institutions.
In the last section I questioned whether latitude could play the role of Zi to estimate
the structural relationship in (7). Now let us put aside the issues raised there, and
suppose that indeed Cov(Zi , ui ) = 0. Can we then use Zi as an instrument for a specific
institution, say S 1 ? The answer is no. If we were to do this, all of the S k ’s would also
load onto S 1 .
More explicitly, we are now estimating
Yi = α1 Si1 + X0i β1 + u1i
with IV using Zi as the excluded instrument. Given (7) above, the true value of α1 is
α1 = αζ 1 . Moreover, from equations (8) and (9),
u1i = ui + α

K
X

ν k Sik + αµi .

(10)

k=2

We can now see that since, by construction,

PK

k=2

22

γ k Sik is correlated with Z̃i , plimα1,IV 6=

α1,IV . In particular
plimα1,IV

´
³
Cov Z̃i , ũ1i
³ ´
= α1 +
ζ 1 Var Z̃i
³ ´
PK k k
α k=2 ν ζ Var Z̃i
³ ´
= α1 +
ζ 1 Var Z̃i
P
k k
α K
1
k=2 ν ζ
,
= α +
ζ1

where the second equality exploits (10) and the fact that Cov(Zi , ui ) = Cov (Zi , µi ) = 0
Note that in the most extreme case where ζ 1 → 0, even though Cov(Zi , ui ) = 0, we

can get arbitrarily biased estimates of the eﬀect of S 1 on the outcome of interest.

This discussion also makes it clear that the problem of instrumenting for a specific
institution, such as Si1 , is in many ways similar to the omitted variable bias, since other
specific institutions that make up the cluster of institutions, Gi , are omitted from the
regression. Even if we include proxies for some of them, unless we can correctly estimate
the causal eﬀects of all of those, IV regressions will fail to estimate the causal eﬀect of
the specific institution of interest, Si1 , consistently.
For the identification strategy of using Zi as an instrument for S 1 to be valid, we
need in addition that ζ k = 0 for all k = 2, .., K. Consequently, even if we were convinced
that the Hall-Jones instruments are valid for the broad cluster of institutions, there
is little justification for using them as an instrument for specific institutions such as
presidential or majoritarian systems. This discussion implies that in IV approaches in
political economy, there is often a first-order question of unbundling, meaning going
from an understanding of the role of a broad cluster of institutions to pinpointing which
specific institutions are more important for the economic outcomes of interest. I discuss
this problem further below.
8

What Have We Learned?

I have so far argued that some of the common empirical strategies in the political economy literature will have diﬃculty in uncovering the causal eﬀect of specific institutions.
Relatedly, PT’s work may not have estimated the causal eﬀect of majoritarian and
presidential systems on the amount of redistribution, political rents and aggregate productivity. So one might argue that judged on the basis of their strong objective of
23

estimating causal eﬀects, the book is only a partial success. This would be the wrong,
and uncharitable, conclusion, however.
When the body of work in the book is taken as a whole, it is a tremendous success. The correlations that PT document between the form of government and electoral
systems and various economic outcomes are very important. Few comparative political
economy papers can be written from now on that do not take these stylized facts seriously. PT have not necessarily estimated the causal eﬀects of the form of government
and electoral systems. But even non-causal but robust relationships are important and
valuable inputs into our thinking and into our models.
Therefore, I believe that overall PT have largely achieved their ambitious aim of
revolutionizing comparative political economy, and this book is the most significant
contribution to this field since Lipset’s work almost 50 years ago. PT have not only
pushed comparative political economy forward, but they have provided a set of findings
that will challenge all economists and social scientists, and likely pave the way for a
large body of new work in this area. With such an important contribution, it is then
the right time to wonder what will (and perhaps should) come next.
9

Unbundling Institutions

I argued above that a source of variation in the broad cluster of institutions is not suﬃcient to separately estimate the eﬀects of specific institutional features. In other words,
we can find clever instruments, from history, sometimes from geography, or international
politics, that aﬀect the whole social organization of a society, but this is only the first
step. It does not enable us to conclude that one specific institution is more important
than another.
However, what we want to know in practice is not only that "institutions" (defined
as a broad cluster, and therefore almost necessarily as a black box) matter, but which
specific dimensions of institutions matter for which outcomes. It is only the latter
type of knowledge that will enable better theories of institutions to be developed and
practical policy recommendations to emerge from this new area. Consequently, the issue
of "unbundling institutions," that is, understanding the role of specific components of
the broad bundle, is of first order importance.
We therefore need to find other strategies, even more clever instruments, or other,
perhaps new, econometric techniques to decide which specific dimensions of these institutions matter. I believe that there is going to be a lot of exciting research in this area
24

in the next 10 years. Let me discuss a couple of potential questions, and in some cases,
potential avenues for investigation.
1. Contracting institutions versus property rights institutions: a key question that
emerges from works that emphasize the importance of institutions concerns the
relative importance and specific eﬀects of institutions that regulate interactions
between private citizens ("contracting institutions") and those that constrain the
behavior of political and economic elites ("property rights institutions"). Evidence
that a broad cluster of institutions matters for long-run economic development is
consistent with the primary role for both types of institutions. Moreover, there
are many reasons to expect societies that have better property rights institutions
to also have better contracting institutions, so these two types of institutions are
likely to covary in practice.
Acemoglu and Johnson (2004) attempt this type of unbundling. The idea is to
combine the strategy in AJR (2001, 2002), which exploits the eﬀect of local conditions at the colonies on institutional development together with the strategy of
LaPorta et al. (1998), which exploits diﬀerences in the identity of the colonizer.
While local conditions, in particular the disease environment and the indigenous
population density at the time of colonization, aﬀect the property rights institutions, the identity of the colonizer is important for the legal origin and therefore for
the contracting institutions. We show that there are almost perfectly "separable"
first-stages whereby the identity of the colonizer has almost no eﬀect on property
rights institutions, while local conditions have no eﬀect on contracting institutions.
This enables a multiple IV strategy to separately identify the eﬀects of both types
of institutions. The results suggest that while property rights institutions have
a first-order impact on all aspects of economic and financial development, contracting institutions mainly aﬀect the formal financial intermediation (and have
no eﬀect on long-run economic growth, on investment and on the overall amount
of financial development).
2. Financial development versus contracting institutions: a similar unbundling issue
arises in evaluating the role of financial development (and financial institutions)
and economic development. A large literature surveyed in Levine (1997, 2004) documents a robust correlation between financial development and economic growth.
But is this the eﬀect of financial development, or the direct eﬀect of better con25

tracting institutions that enable financial development in the first place? More explicitly, better contracting institutions will lead to better non-financial contracts
(such as between downstream and upstream firms, firms and workers, etc.) as
well as to improved financial contracts, so in the data when we see a society with
greater financial development, it will also have better non-financial contracts. This
makes it diﬃcult to identify the eﬀect of financial development.
A potential strategy for unbundling in this context might be to investigate the
eﬀect of purely financial reforms that do not change the scope for non-financial
contracts. Reforms in capital accounts that are imposed (or "encouraged") by the
IMF or other international bodies, without other reforms, could provide one useful
source of variation.
3. Economic versus political institutions: an even more formidable task is to separately identify the aﬀect of economic and political institutions. There is a clear
complementarity between these two types of institutions. For example, an economic system like slavery or forced labor cannot be sustained in a democratic
society. Nevertheless, many relevant theoretical and policy questions require the
potential eﬀects of economic and political institutions to be unbundled. For example, what would be the eﬀects of improving economic institutions under a given
set of political institutions, for example as in China? This is an area for future
research.
4. Diﬀerent types of economic institutions: the question is which economic institutions matter more. Entry barriers? Labor market regulations? Property rights
enforcement? Limits on government corruption? These are important, but also
very diﬃcult questions. It seems that these questions will be almost impossible to
answer with cross-country data alone, and micro data investigations, for example,
exploiting diﬀerences in regulations across markets and regions appear to be a most
promising avenue. Interesting recent work using within-country variation to look
at some of these issues include, among others, Besley and Burgess (2004), who
look at the implications of diﬀerent labor market regulations across Indian states,
Holmes (1998), who investigates the implications of union laws on the location of
manufacturing plants in the United States, and Bertrand and Kramartz (2002),
who look at labor market eﬀects of credit market regulations, and Svensson (2003),
who exploits diﬀerences across industries to investigate the amount of bribes that
26

firms in Uganda have to pay to oﬃcials
5. Formal versus informal political institutions: finally, returning to the theme of
PT’s book, how important are formal institutions? PT’s work suggests that they
are essential. However, in practice, formal and informal institutions are highly
correlated, and one may conjecture that changing constitutions or formal rules of
political decision-making might have limited eﬀects if society at large expects the
changes not to be durable or not to be obeyed. The important results in this book
notwithstanding, this is also an important area for future research.
10

Weakly-Institutionalized Polities

Another area for future research is what might be referred to as politics in "weaklyinstitutionalized polities". The body of work that PT have surveyed and developed further in their two books is largely for the analysis of "strongly-institutionalized polities,"
where political institutions make politicians, at least partially, accountable to citizens. It
is not surprising that this has been the first focus of Western academics, who almost all
live in strongly-institutionalized polities. But the same is not true for a large fraction of
the population of the world. The situation in many countries in Africa, Central America
and the Caribbean corresponds much more clearly to one of "weakly-institutionalized
polities," where state-society relations are fundamentally diﬀerent. Examples of this
include, but are not limited to, the extreme kleptocratic regimes of Mobutu in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire), Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic, the
Duvaliers in Haiti, the Somozas in Nicaragua, Charles Taylor in Liberia and Ferdinand
Marcos in the Philippines.
Much historical evidence suggests that a systematic study of the political economy of
such regimes must depart from some of the modeling approaches of politics in stronglyinstitutionalized polities. While in strongly-institutionalized polities, formal political
institutions, such as the constitution, the structure of the legislature, or electoral rules,
place constraints on the behavior of politicians and political elites, and directly influence
political outcomes, the same does not appear to be the case in weakly-institutionalized
polities. Instead, the nature of politics appears to be diﬀerent between strongly and
weakly-institutionalized polities. Most importantly, when institutions are strong, citizens have the power to punish politicians by voting them out of power; when institutions
are weak, politicians pursue clientelistic policies that punish citizens who fail to support

27

them (see Jackson and Rosberg, 1982, and Acemoglu, Robinson and Verdier, 2004).
In modeling politics in weakly-institutionalized polities, the first question that emerges
is theoretical: how can we understand policy-making and collective decisions in such societies? There are only a few papers that attempt to develop answers this question. In
Acemoglu, Robinson and Verdier (2004), we construct a dynamic model of politics in
weakly-institutionalized polities based on the idea of "divide and rule". The key focus
is to understand how kleptocratic regimes that impoverish their citizens can remain in
power for so long.15 The answer we suggest is that, owing to the absence of strong
institutions, rulers can deploy strategies, in particular "divide-and-rule", to defuse opposition to their regime. The logic of the divide-and-rule strategy is to enable a ruler to
bribe politically pivotal groups oﬀ the equilibrium path, ensuring that he can remain in
power against challenges. By providing selective incentives and punishments, the divideand-rule strategy exploits the fragility of social cooperation in weakly-institutionalized
polities: when faced with the threat of being ousted, the kleptocratic ruler intensifies the
collective action problem and destroys the coalition against him by bribing the pivotal
groups.
A diﬀerent and innovative answer is given by Padro-i-Miquel (2004), who also constructs a dynamic model of politics. Ethnic divisions are the key feature in his model.
Each ethnic group is afraid of replacing their own leader when in power, because this
increases the probability of a switch of power from their own ethnic group to a rival group. This makes the standard method of controlling political elites in stronglyinstitutionalized polities ineﬀective, and enables leaders to not only exploit other ethnic
groups but also their own ethnic group. Padro-i-Miquel shows how this framework can
account for a puzzling feature of African politics first highlighted in Robert Bates’ classic study Markets and States in Tropical Africa (Bates, 1981): the simultaneous use of
ineﬃcient transfers to and taxes on the same group.16 In the logic of Padro-i-Miquel’s
model, this strategy makes sense because leaders needs to keep their own group happy
to remain in power. This sets a limit on the amount of net taxes they can impose on
15

Models of strongly-institutionalized polities would suggest that poorly performing leaders should
be replaced more often. In contrast, many disastrous kleptocracies last for long periods; Mobutu ruled
for 32 years, Trujillo for 31, and the Somozas for 42 years. This longevity is made even more surprising
by the fact that many kleptocratic regimes lack both a core constituency of supporters and a firm
command of the military.
16
Bates described the web of ineﬃcient transfers and policies in eﬀect in many parts of Africa, but
most notably in Ghana and Zambia. For example, the Ghanaian government heavily taxed cocoa
producers, while at the same time subsidizing their inputs of seeds and fertilizers.

28

their own group. However, taxes across groups are linked, since much lower taxes on
one group will encourage other groups to switch economic activity. This then motivates
leaders to ineﬃciently subsidize their own ethnic group so that they can increase the tax
rate on their own ethnic group, and consequently tax other groups more intensively.
A second crucial area is to construct models to understand how weak institutions can
be strengthened. Although there is now a number of formal models of the creation and
consolidation of democracy (see a literature review in Acemoglu and Robinson, 2004),
many of these models are still motivated by the practice of strongly—institutionalized
polities.
Finally, there is almost no work on how changes in formal political institutions aﬀect
policy and economic outcomes in weakly- institutionalized polities. These are all fruitful
areas for future research.
11

Conclusion

This book is an important landmark in political economy. It takes a body of theoretical
literature seriously and carefully confronts their predictions with data. PT set themselves
the very ambitious goal of estimating causal eﬀects of constitutions, in particular, the
form of government and electoral rules.
Bearing in mind the diﬃculties of estimating causal eﬀects in social sciences, especially in cross-country data, the book is a tremendous success. It documents important
and robust correlations between the form of government and electoral systems, on the
one hand, and various policy and economic outcomes, on the other. It also uses stateof-the-art econometric techniques to estimate causal eﬀects.
I argued above that these methods may not have been suﬃcient to arrive at causal
eﬀects, both because of certain conceptual and practical problems. Nevertheless, the
achievement here should not be underestimated. Even non-causal robust relationships
are rare in comparative political economy, and those documented by PT appear to
be highly robust and of central importance for our theoretical understanding. Few
political economy papers can be written from now on that do not take this book, both
its methodological and empirical contributions, seriously.
Equally important, with the addition of this book, (comparative) political economy
has taken one more step towards establishing itself as a major field of economics, and it
oﬀers exciting and important research areas for further inquiry.

29

12

References

Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua D. Angrist (2000) "How Large Are Human
Capital Externalities? Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws, NBER Macroannual
2000, pp. 9-59.
Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson (2003) “Unbundling Institutions” NBER
Working Paper No. 9934.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2001) “The
Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American
Economic Review, December, 91, 5, 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2002) “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income
Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, November, 1231-1294.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2004) Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, forthcoming Cambridge University Press.
Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson and Thierry Verdier (2004) "Kleptocracy and Divide-and-Rule: A Model of Personal Rule, The Alfred Marshall Lecture",
Journal of the European Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, April-May 2004,
volume 2, pp 162-192.
Angrist, Joshua and Guido Imbens (1995) “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimates
of Average Causal Response in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity,” Journal of
the American Statistical Association,
Angrist Joshua D., Guido Imbens and Donald B. Rubin (1996) "Identification and Causal Eﬀects Using Instrumental Variables" Journal of the American
Statistical Association, volume 91, pp 444-455.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger (1991) “Does Compulsory School
Attendance Aﬀect Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 9791014.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger (1991) “Empirical Strategies in Labor
Economics,” chapter 23 in volume 3A of The Handbook of Labor Economics, edited by
Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, Elsevier, pp 1278-1357.
Arrow, Kenneth J. (1951) Social Choice and Individual Values, New York; Wiley.
Austen-Smith, David and Jeﬀrey S. Banks (1999) Positive Political Theory
I: Collective Preferences, Ann Arbor; University of Michigan Press.

30

Bates, Robert H. (1981) Markets and States in Tropical Africa, Berkeley: University of California Press.
Barro, Robert (1997) Determinants of Economic Growth, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Bertrand, Marianne and Francis Kramartz (2002) "Does Entry Regulation
Hinder Job Creation? Evidence from the French Retail Industry" Quarterly Journal of
Economics, volume 117, pp 249-275
Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess (2004) “Can Labor Regulation Hinder
Economic Performance: Evidence from India” Quarterly Journal of Economics, volume
119, pp 91-134.
Beard, Charles A. (1913) An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the
United States, New York; The Free Press.
Black, Duncan (1948) “On the Rationale of Group Decision-making,” The Journal
of Political Economy, 56, 23-34.
Bourguignon, François and Thierry Verdier (2000) “Oligarchy, democracy,
inequality and growth,” Journal of Development Economics, 62, 285-313.
Dixit, Avinash, Gene M. Grossman, and Faruk Gul (2000), “The Dynamics
of Political Compromise.” Journal of Political Economy 108, pp 531-568.
Downs, Anthony (1957) An Economic Theory of Democracy, New York; Harper
& Row.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloﬀ (1997) “Factor Endowments,
Institutions, and Diﬀerential Paths of Growth among New World Economies,” in S.H.
Haber ed. How Latin America Fell Behind, Stanford University Press, Stanford CA.
Ferejohn, John (1986) “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control,” Public
Choice 50: 5-25.
Hansen, Christian, Jerry Hausman and Whitney Newey (2004) "Weak
Instruments, Many Instruments and Microeconometric Practice" MIT mimeo.
Heckman James J. (1976) "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample Selection and Limited and Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator
for Such Models" Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, volume 5, pp 475-492.
Heckman James J. (1979) "Sample Selection Bias As a Specification Error"
Econometrica, volume 47, pp 153-161.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones (1999) “Why Do Some Countries Produce
so Much More Output per Worker than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
CXIV, 83-116.
31

Hall, Robert E. (1978) "Stochastic Implications of the Lifecycle Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence" Journal of Political Economy, volume 86,
971-988.
Hansen, Lars P. and Kenneth J. Singleton (1982) "Generalized Instrumental
Variable Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models" Econometrica, volume
50, 1269-1286.
Holmes, Thomas (1998) "The Eﬀect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence from State Borders" Journal of Political Economy, volume 106, pp
667-705.
Hotelling, Harold (1929) “Stability in Competition,” Economic Journal, 39, 4157.
Jackson, Robert H. and Carl G. Rosberg (1982) Personal Rule in Black Africa,
Berkeley: University of California Press.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert
W. Vishny (1998) “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1113-1155.
Levine, Ross (1997) “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and
Agenda,” Journal of Economic Literature, June, 35, 688-726.
Levine, Ross (2003) “Finance and Growth: Theory, Evidence, and Mechanisms,”
Handbook of Economic Growth, forthcoming, March draft.
Lindbeck, Assar and Jörgen Weibull (1987) “Balanced-Budget Redistribution
as the Outcome of Political Competition,” Public Choice, 52, 272-297.
Padro-i-Miquel, Gerard (2004) "The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies:
Politics of Fear"MIT mimeo.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Explaining
Economic Policy, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003) The Economic Eﬀects of Constitutions: What Do the Data Say? MIT Press, Cambridge.
Person, Torsten, Gerard Roland and Guido Tabellini (1997) “Separation
of Powers and Political Accountability” Quarterly Journal of Economics, volume 112,
1163-1202.
Persson, Torsten, Gerard Roland and Guido Tabellini (2000) “Comparative
Politics and Public Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 108, 1121-1161.
Rokkan, Stein (1970) Citizens, Elections, Parties; Approaches to the Comparative
study of the Processes of Development, McKay; New York.
32

Staiger, Douglas and James Stock (1997) "IV Regression with Weak Instruments" Econometrica volume 65, 557-586.
Stigler, George J. (1970) "Director’s Law of Public Income Distribution" Journal
of Law and Economics, volume 13, 3-21.
Stigler, George J. (1972) "Economic Performance and Political Competition"
Public Choice, volume 13, 91-106.
Stock, James, Jonathan Wright and Motohiro Yogo (2002) "A Survey of
Weak Instruments and Weak Identification in GMM" Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics, volume 20, pp 518-529.
Svensson, Jacob (2003) "Who Must Pay Bribes and How Much? Evidence from
a Cross-Section Firms" Quarterly Journal of Economics, volume 113, 207-230.
Wooldridge, Jeﬀery M. (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel
Data, MIT Press; Cambridge.

33

Policy Preferences

Economic
Outcomes

Constitutional
Rules

Political
Outcomes

Markets

Policy Decisions

Figure 1: The Policymaking Process (Figure 1.1, page 3).

34

Table 1
Constitution Selection: First Stage Estimates
Persson and Tabellini (2003) Sample
Cross-Section OLS
(2b)
(3a)
Dependent Variable is Constitution
MAJ
PRES
-0.132
0.095
(0.161)
(0.145)

(1a)

(1b)

(2a)

PRES
-0.039
(0.138)

MAJ
-0.161
(0.162)

PRES
-0.070
(0.149)

CON5180

-0.120
(0.182)

0.074
(0.236)

-0.095
(0.220)

0.302
(0.248)

CON81

0.266
(0.203)

0.055
(0.252)

0.161
(0.245)

0.238
(0.263)

LAT01

-1.366
(0.335)

-0.884
(0.388)

-0.786
(0.520)

-0.410
(0.619)

ENGFRAC

-0.692
(0.119)

0.916
(0.122)

-0.644
(0.127)

1.035
(0.174)

EURFRAC

0.425
(0.113)

-0.349
(0.134)

0.431
(0.153)

-0.409
(0.186)

AGE

0.540
(0.308)

0.197
(0.295)

0.703
(0.320)

NO

NO

F-test on all constitution variables

3.66
[0.02]

F-test on all instruments

CON2150

Second stage covariates

Observations
R-squared

(3b)

(4a)

(4b)

MAJ
-0.323
(0.153)

PRES
0.022
(0.132)

MAJ
-0.319
(0.169)

0.277
(0.167)

0.169
(0.152)

0.197
(0.165)

0.131
(0.222)

0.589
(0.205)

0.004
(0.183)

0.358
(0.206)

-0.029
(0.272)

0.083
(0.245)

0.280
(0.401)

0.150
(0.329)

0.602
(0.326)

0.358
(0.413)

YES

YES

NO

NO

YES

YES

0.52
[0.67]

1.23
[0.30]

1.35
[0.27]

3.35
[0.02]

2.61
[0.06]

1.09
[0.36]

2.20
[0.10]

24.39
[0.00]

26.69
[0.00]

7.97
[0.00]

12.07
[0.00]

78
0.48

78
0.40

77
0.55

77
0.48

78
0.18

78
0.07

77
0.41

77
0.23

Robust standard errors in parentheses. F-test on all constitution variables refers to the F-statistic for the joint test that the coefficients on CON2150, CON5180, and CON81 are each zero. F-test on all
instrumental variables refers to the F-statistic for the joint test that the coefficients on CON2150, CON5180, CON81 , LAT01, ENGFRAC, and EURFRAC are each zero. P-value for the F-statistic is in
brackets. Columns 2a, 2b, 4a, and 4b include but do not report LYP, TRADE, PROP1564, PROP65, GASTIL, FEDERAL, and OECD. PRES is a dummy variable which is equal to 1 in presidential
regimes and zero otheriwse. MAJ is a dummy variable which is equal to 1 if all the lower house is elected under plurality rule and zero otherwise. See Persson and Tabellini (2003) for data and
definitions.

Table 2
Size of Government and Constitutions: Second Stage Instrumental Variable Estimates
Persson and Tabellini (2003) Sample

PRES

MAJ

Cross-Section 2SLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Dependent Variable is Central Government Expenditure as %
GDP
-8.653
-11.292
-2.005
-4.098
(3.614)
(4.713)
(5.108)
(9.183)
-3.901
(3.448)

-4.233
(3.466)

-9.384
(6.900)

-9.194
(7.896)

Constitution instruments in first stage

YES

YES

YES

YES

Hall-Jones instruments in first stage

YES

YES

NO

NO

Second stage covariates in first stage

NO

YES

NO

YES

Observations

75

75

75

75

Standard errors in parentheses. All columns include but do not report AGE, LYP, TRADE, PROP1564, PROP65, GASTIL, FEDERAL, and OECD in
the second stage. All columns include CON2150, CON5180, CON81, and AGE in the first stage. Columns 1 and 2 include LAT01, ENGFRAC,
EURFRAC in the first stage. Columns 2 and 4 include all second stage covariates in the first stage. See Table 1 for first stage regressions. PRES is a
dummy variable which is equal to 1 in presidential regimes and zero otheriwse. MAJ is a dummy variable which is equal to 1 if all the lower house is
elected under plurality rule and zero otherwise. See Persson and Tabellini (2003) for data and definitions.

Table 3
Composition of Government Spending and Constitutions: Second Stage Instrumental Variable Estimates
Persson and Tabellini (2003) Sample

(1)

PRES

MAJ

Cross-Section 2SLS
(2)
(3)

(4)

Dependent Variable is Central Government Expenditure on Social
Services and Welfare as % GDP
0.296
0.527
0.615
1.585
(1.791)
(2.609)
(2.461)
(4.734)
-3.633
(1.663)

-3.645
(1.928)

-3.920
(2.493)

-3.857
(3.041)

Constitution instruments in first stage

YES

YES

YES

YES

Hall-Jones instruments in first stage

YES

YES

NO

NO

Second stage covariates in first stage

NO

YES

NO

YES

Observations

64

64

64

64

Standard errors in parentheses. All columns include but do not report AGE, LYP, TRADE, PROP1564, PROP65, GASTIL, FEDERAL, and OECD in
the second stage. All columns include CON2150, CON5180, CON81, and AGE in the first stage. Columns 1 and 2 include LAT01, ENGFRAC,
EURFRAC in the first stage. Columns 2 and 4 include all second stage covariates in the first stage. See Table 1 for first stage regressions. PRES is a
dummy variable which is equal to 1 in presidential regimes and zero otheriwse. MAJ is a dummy variable which is equal to 1 if all the lower house is
elected under plurality rule and zero otherwise. See Persson and Tabellini (2003) for data and definitions.

