                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           BIRTHS, DEATHS, AND NEW DEAL RELIEF
                              DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION

                                            Price V. Fishback
                                            Michael R. Haines
                                             Shawn Kantor

                                          Working Paper 11246
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11246


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Price V. Fishback, Michael R. Haines, and Shawn Kantor. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Births, Deaths, and New Deal Relief during the Great Depression
Price V. Fishback, Michael R. Haines, and Shawn Kantor
NBER Working Paper No. 11246
March 2005
JEL No. I38, J11, N32

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impact of New Deal relief programs on infant mortality, noninfant mortality
and general fertility rates in major U.S. cities between 1929 and 1940. We estimate the effects using
a variety of specifications and techniques for a panel of 114 cities for which data on relief spending
during the 1930s were available. The significant rise in relief spending during the New Deal
contributed to reductions in infant mortality, suicide rates, and some other causes of death, while
contributing to increases in the general fertility rate. Estimates of the relationship between economic
activity and death rates suggest that many types of death rates were pro-cyclical, similar to Ruhm’s
(2000) findings for the modern U.S.. Estimates of the relief costs associated with saving a life
(adjusted for inflation) are similar to estimates found in studies of modern social insurance programs.


Price V. Fishback
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu

Michael R. Haines
Department of Economics, 217 Persson Hall
Colgate University
13 Oak Drive
Hamilton, NY 13346
and NBER
mhaines@mail.colgate.edu

Shawn Kantor
School of Social Sciences, Humanities and Arts
University of California, Merced
P.O. Box 2039
Merced, CA 95344
and NBER
skantor@ucmerced.edu
                                                                                                               3


                 Births, Deaths, and New Deal Relief during the Great Depression


I.      Introduction

        How well do social welfare programs mitigate the effect of economic disasters on demographic

outcomes? To answer this question, we examine the effect of New Deal relief programs on fertility, infant

deaths, noninfant deaths, suicides, homicides, and other causes of death during the Great Depression.

During the 1930s Americans experienced an economic disaster that lasted an entire decade.

Unemployment rates peaked at well over 20 percent of the labor force and real GNP fell by roughly one-

third between 1929 and 1933. Real GNP did not reach its 1929 level again until the end of the decade and

the unemployment rate remained over 10 percent throughout the decade. The numbers do not reveal the

full devastation experienced during the 1930s, as many people stood in bread lines, lost their homes, their

jobs, and their hope for the future. Such a dramatic economic shock was likely to contribute to substantial

shifts in demographic outcomes. The sharp reductions in income and consequent inadequate access to

nutrition, housing and medical care put infants and people of all ages at greater risk of death and disease.

Economic problems potentially fueled psychological depression that contributed to more suicides and

social and economic stresses that led to more homicides. Meanwhile, the greater uncertainty about the

future led many families to delay child-bearing.

        To combat the Depression, the federal government expanded its social welfare spending in a

dramatic and unprecedented fashion. As the economy slid toward the trough of the Depression in the early

1930s, the burden of providing relief rested on state and local governments and private charitable

organizations. As the lower levels of government were overwhelmed by the scope of the problem, the

Hoover administration provided loans through the Reconstruction Finance Corporation so that state and

local governments could fund relief in the latter part of 1932. Per capita relief spending rose from $3.90 in

1930 to $18.70 in 1932 (constant 1967 dollars). It was Roosevelt’s New Deal, however, that

revolutionized welfare spending both in the short term and the long term. The federal government poured

resources (sometimes in partnership with state and local governments) into the provision of emergency
                                                                                                                4


work relief and direct relief during the First New Deal (1933-1935). After 1935 through the beginning of

World War II, the federal government continued providing emergency work relief. Under the Social

Security Act enacted in 1935, the Roosevelt administration established a federal/state/local partnership to

provide public assistance to dependent children, the blind, and the aged that replaced the much smaller

state and local programs that had existed prior to the New Deal. Federal involvement in relief efforts led to

dramatic increases in spending, as per capita relief expenditures increased by about 160 percent between

1932 and 1933. By 1940 per capita relief expenditures were almost three times the 1932 level even though

the unemployment rates were substantially below the 1932 level.

        One way to measure the success of these programs is to examine how they influenced

demographic outcomes. Economists have become increasingly interested in using a broad range of

demographic measures, in addition to income, to determine economic welfare. Infant mortality rates, for

example, have been incorporated in alternative assessments of well-being that supplement comparisons of

real per capita GDP across countries.1 In many situations, including the 1930s in America, we cannot

obtain good estimates of the incomes of the poor. Meanwhile, numerous studies show that mortality rates

and fertility are strongly associated with socioeconomic status, broadly defined.2    Because the relief

programs of the New Deal – and welfare programs more generally – were designed to help people in the

lower tail of the income distribution, fertility and mortality rates can serve as important indicators of the

programs’ effectiveness.

        Studies of modern U.S. data can give us only limited guidance as to the impact of major

Depressions. Christopher Ruhm’s (2000) study of the U.S. from 1972 to 1991 finds that mortality rates

tend to fall during downturns, but the period he examines does not include downturns of the scale of the

Great Depression, and studies of other times and places do not find such a pro-cyclical relationship.

Meanwhile, a growing body of research has explored the impact of various modern social programs on the

health and development of children.3 Focusing on relatively recent expansions in various programs’

benefits or the cross-state differences in these benefits, the research has produced a mixed assessment of

the effectiveness of modern public assistance.    The modern debates over the effect of welfare benefits on
                                                                                                              5


fertility have focused in particular on teen pregnancies and out-of-wedlock births in an economic

environment with relatively mild fluctuations (Haveman and Wolfe 1994, ch. 6; Blank 1995; Mellor 1998;

Grogger and Bronars 2001; Schultz 1994). The Depression of the 1930s was so harsh and the introduction

of large scale federal spending so new that the effect of social welfare spending was more likely to have

encouraged marriage and married couples to return to more normal fertility patterns.

        To analyze the impact of the relief programs, we developed a new panel data set that enables us to

measure the relationships between relief spending and birth and death rates in 114 cities annually from

1929 through 1940. The U.S. Children’s Bureau published annual information on public assistance for

1929 through 1935 (Winslow 1937) and the U.S. Social Security Board updated the series and carried the

data forward through 1940 (Baird 1942). To this rich data set on relief spending, we then matched

information on demographic outcomes in the cities, as well as socioeconomic variables (see the Data

Appendix for details). Thus, the data that we have assembled not only captures the dramatic increase in

relief spending that accompanied the New Deal’s introduction in the early 1930s, but it also allows us to

measure the effectiveness of the relief spending at a relatively low level of aggregation. Analysis of the

data using fixed effects to control for heterogeneity and instrumental variables to control for endogeneity

suggest that the New Deal relief programs had a substantial influence on demographic outcomes during the

1930s. Greater spending was associated with lower infant mortality, lower suicide rates, fewer deaths from

diarrhea and infectious diseases, and higher birth rates. The New Deal relief programs essentially helped

contribute to returning society toward more normal demographic patterns in the heart of the worst

Depression in American history.



II.     Demographic Trends and the Depression

        The Great Depression not only damaged the economy, but it had a significant demographic impact

as well. Birth rates were depressed and death rates elevated relative to the trends seen between 1915 and

1930. Figures 1 and 2 show the national rates from 1915 to 1940, as well as trend lines derived from

linear regressions of the rates on year for the period 1915-1917 and 1919-1929. We eliminated 1918 in
                                                                                                              6


determining the trend due to the sharp spike associated with the Great Influenza and U.S. participation in

World War I during that year.4

        The Great Depression has always been seen as a period of low fertility, as marriages were delayed

and plans for children postponed. This description of the 1930s as the nadir of the birth rate has been

driven partially by the rise in fertility during World War II and the baby boom that followed. However, the

Depression contributed to lower fertility even if we focus on the trend established between 1915 and 1929.

As seen in Figure 1, the general fertility rate (GFR), defined as the number of live births per female aged

15-44, displayed a downward trend between 1915 and 1929. The GFR fell below the earlier trend by the

late 1920s and continued to fall even further below the trend until 1933. From 1933 forward the GFR was

around 80 live births per thousand before rising strongly through the 1940s and afterward.

        The national trends of the infant mortality rate (IMR), defined as the number of deaths of infants

under age 1 per thousand live births, show long-term declines prior to the 1930s (Cutler and Meara 2001).

The IMR in Figure 1 continued downward through 1932 along the 1915-1929 trend line, yet as the

Depression reached bottom in 1933, the IMR rose slightly in 1933 and 1934 and then remained well above

predictions from the pre-Depression trend for the rest of the 1930s. Table 1 shows that the general trends

experienced nationwide during the 1930s were also experienced in the major U.S. cities which are

represented in our data set.5

        Part of the decline in the IMR prior to the 1930s may have been associated with a decline in

mortality rates for all ages. The non-infant death rate (NDR), the number of deaths of people over one year

old per 1,000 people in the population, also displayed a marked downward trend between 1915 and 1929.

Between 1930 and 1933 the NDR matched predictions based on the earlier trend. As the economy

recovered, the NDR rose to a peak near 11 deaths per thousand in 1936 before dropping back to 10 in the

late 1930s. In a rough sense the NDR displayed the same kind of pro-cyclical behavior that Christopher

Ruhm (2000) documented for the U.S. between 1972 and 1991. The fluctuations in the 1920s and 1930s

were negatively correlated with national unemployment rates.

        The national averages disguise substantial variation across cities for relief spending and
                                                                                                                 7


demographic outcomes over the course of the decade. The variation shows up in levels across cities. For

example, the average infant mortality rate for the 1930s ranged from a low of 30.1 infant deaths per 1,000

live births in Newton, Massachusetts to a high of 104.5 in El Paso, Texas. Further, there is substantial

variation across cities in the changes in demographic outcomes and in the changes in relief spending per

capita across cities associated with the introduction of the New Deal relief spending in 1933. Figure 3

shows for each city the difference between the average infant mortality rate for the years 1930 through

1932 and the average infant mortality for 1933 through 1940 plotted against the difference in average per

capita relief spending for the two time periods. The range across cities in the differences in average infant

mortality rates is between 8 per thousand and -30 per thousand, while the changes in average relief

spending per capita ranged from $8 to $70 per capita. In a preview of one of our findings, there is a

significant negative relationship between infant mortality rates and per capita relief spending. The

differences in relief spending and the differences in infant mortality rates are negatively correlated ( =-

0.22). A regression of the change in average infant mortality rates from 1930-1932 to 1933-1940 on the

change in average per capita relief led to a statistically significant coefficient of -0.094. Infant mortality

rates for cities in the top quartile of the change in relief spending fell by an average of 11.7, compared with

average falls of 10.5 in the third quartile, 9.35 in the second quartile, and 10.3 in the bottom quartile.6



III.    Relief Spending During the Great Depression

        The relief programs of the 1930s were designed to bolster the incomes of the unemployed and the

non-working poor. Increased relief spending provided immediate access to financial resources that would

have enhanced the material well-being of families and their children. Increases in spending on such

critical items as food, housing, clothing, or health care likely led to lower infant mortality and perhaps non-

infant death rates. The presence of a stronger financial safety net might have contributed to families

feeling more secure in returning to their normal fertility behavior.

         When the Great Depression struck, provision of welfare and social insurance was the primary

responsibility of local governments, with some specific support from state programs. Families in dire
                                                                                                                  8


circumstances might have turned to various sources for assistance. A number of cities provided shelter and

food in almshouses, while some cities provided relatively small amounts of cash assistance and in-kind aid

to the poor. Private charities often distributed various forms of aid, of which a significant portion was

funded by local governments. Nearly all states had established mothers’ pensions for women who had lost

their spouses and who had dependent children. Injured workers’ were covered under workers’

compensation laws established during the 1910s. An increasing number of states during the early 1930s

instituted old-age pensions that provided limited cash benefits to the elderly and about half the states

offered cash benefits to the blind. Some governments tried to provide work for the unemployed through

limited public works projects. The aid was administered by social workers, charities, and local officials

who tried to assess the recipients’ needs and to some extent their “moral worthiness.” Prior to 1933 the

federal government played almost no role in providing relief spending beyond some aid to veterans (see

Skocpol, 1992, ch. 2).

         As the unemployment rate rose and income and tax revenues dropped between 1929 and 1933,

state and local social welfare resources were quickly overwhelmed. During the fall of 1932 the Hoover

administration provided loans through the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to help some cities

temporarily fund their relief budgets. Faced with national unemployment rates near 25 percent in 1933,

the Roosevelt administration argued that the economy had become a national problem and thus the federal

government should accept much greater responsibility for providing relief. In fact, by 1935 the federal

government’s share of total relief spending had risen to 79 percent from 2 percent in 1932 (see Table 1).

Not only did the federal government virtually take over the provision of relief, but the amount of spending

jumped markedly. As reported in Table 1, average per capita relief spending in 114 major cities rose from

$18 in 1932 to $48 in 1934 (1967 dollars), the first full year the federal New Deal was in operation. Table

1 also reports the relative generosity of the relief benefits. For the typical family on relief, benefits never

exceeded 42 percent of annual manufacturing wages. So while relief was extremely generous in historical

perspective, a private sector manufacturing job certainly would have been more lucrative.

        Between July 1933 and June 1935 the primary relief agency was the Federal Emergency Relief
                                                                                                                9


Administration (FERA). Federal FERA officials distributed funds to state governments through an opaque

process in which the revealed distribution suggests that they paid attention to the level of economic distress

in the state, the state’s entreaties to FERA administrators, the state’s own efforts to fund relief, and to some

extent the political situation. State governments then distributed the funds internally to local

governments.7 Once established, the FERA offered both direct relief and work relief.8 Direct relief

included programs that had no specific work requirements and assistance was provided in cash or in-kind,

including subsistence items, such as food, shelter, clothing and household necessities, or medical care and

hospitalization. Work relief, as the name connotes, required a labor contribution in return for the benefit.

FERA set a series of broad guidelines for its programs, but relied heavily on state and local officials to

administer them and to determine the appropriate amounts of relief that individuals would receive.

Applicants for relief applied to local offices, where officials met with them personally and determined their

eligibility for relief based on a “budget-deficit” principle. That is, local officials determined the deficit

between the family’s total income and a hypothetical budget for a family of that size. This budget-deficit

served as the basis for the family’s direct relief benefits or the amount that would be paid for work on a

FERA project. The amount of relief actually distributed to a family in many cases fell short of the budget-

deficit if FERA funds in the local area were limited, as local officials sometimes decided to stretch their

limited resources by funding more relief cases at less generous amounts.

        In response to a harsh winter and high levels of unemployment, FERA activities were

supplemented temporarily by the Civil Works Administration (CWA) work relief program from November

15, 1933, through March 1934. Large numbers on the FERA relief rolls were transferred to CWA

employment, where they received wages that were not based on the budget-deficit principle. At its peak in

January 1934 the CWA employed four million workers, but the program was shut down in March 1934

and many of the workers were shifted on to FERA work relief projects that were soon established.9

          In mid-1935 the Roosevelt administration redesigned the federal government’s role in providing

relief. The federal government continued to provide work relief for the unemployed who were

“employable” through the Works Progress Administration (WPA), but returned much of the responsibility
                                                                                                               10


for direct relief of “unemployables” to state and local governments. Applicants for aid were certified by

state and local officials, who still considered a family’s budget-deficit when assessing its need for relief

employment (Howard 1943, 380-403). It was the federal WPA then that hired people from the certified

rolls. Dissatisfied with its lack of control over work relief under the FERA, the WPA was administered

more centrally by the federal government. The WPA, like its FERA predecessor, specified no hard and

fast set of rules for distributing the funds. Econometric studies of the distributions of funding across

counties suggest that the WPA administrators paid attention to local economic distress, the lobbying of

state and local governments, presidential politics, and the memberships of key congressional committees

(see Howard 1943, Fleck 1999a, 1999b, and 2001a, Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis 2003).

        The federal government was not completely absent from providing direct relief to

“unemployables,” as the Social Security Act of 1935 introduced joint state-federal versions of some earlier

state programs, such as old-age assistance, aid to dependent children (replacing mothers’ pensions), and

aid to the blind. Beginning in 1936, federal grants-in-aid became available on a matching basis to states

administering approved plans under the Social Security Act. By the end of 1938, all but 8 states were

receiving federal grants. The shift in focus of the federal relief efforts and the eventual reductions in

federal emergency work relief programs caused the federal share to slowly decline to 57 percent by 1940.

        In performing the analysis we focus on the combined value of all forms of relief rather than try to

examine the impact of particular relief programs for two reasons. First, households had access to a variety

of sources of relief, and many received funds from multiple programs over the course of the 1930s.

Consider a widow with small children. She was eligible for state mother’s pensions through most of the

1930s, but she could also apply for aid through the New Deal agencies that determined eligibility by

comparing the household’s actual income to a target income that relief administrators believed could

sustain the family. Since state mothers’ pensions were not very generous, and a number of states were

slow to adopt the legislation enabling the federal ADC program, it was likely that one-parent households

received the bulk of their relief from these other New Deal programs. These interactions with multiple

relief programs suggest that any focus on specific programs would mis-measure the impact of relief.
                                                                                                                 11


         Second, categorical programs like ADC are too narrowly focused when matched with our

measures of demographic outcomes. It has been suggested that the natural focus of the study of relief and

infant mortality should be on Aid to Dependent Children and mothers’ pensions. In many states mothers’

pensions were limited to widows with children, while the federal/state ADC program provided relief for

children in households with at least one parent missing. Yet, only 7 percent of the households with infants

under age one would have been eligible for ADC or mothers’ pensions.10 The remaining households with

infants, which composed the substantial majority of the households in the infant mortality figures were

receiving their relief from other programs.



IV.      An Empirical Model of the Demographic Effects of the New Deal

         Our goal is to examine the relationship between relief spending and various demographic

outcomes, infant mortality rates, noninfant death rates, cause-specific death rates, and the general fertility

rate. We use the same basic modeling procedures for each type of demographic outcome with some

changes in choice of correlates to reflect specific situations. Since we believe that infants were the most

vulnerable to the impact of the economic downturn and thus infant mortality was more likely to be

improved by relief spending, we work through the analysis for the infant mortality rate first to establish the

template for the analysis. We then examine the remaining demographic outcomes with adjustments for

their specific situations.

         We estimate the following infant mortality equation:

         IMRit = f (Rit, Yit, Xit, eit)                                                                   (1),

where IMRit, the number of infant deaths per 1,000 live births in city i in year t, is modeled as a function of

relief spending in city i in year t (Rit), economic activity (Yit), a vector of demographic characteristics (Xit),

and random error. Because income data at the city level do not exist for the 1930s, we use per capita retail

sales in the county in which the city was located as our measure of economic activity. Retail sales are

clearly an important measure of macroeconomic activity because even today the U.S. Bureau of Economic

Analysis uses retail sales figures to create annual estimates of personal consumption of durable and
                                                                                                                12


nondurable goods for the National Income and Product Accounts (U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis

1987, 11). Comparisons of annual national aggregates of retail sales and all personal consumption

expenditures over the period 1929 through 1969 show correlations above .99 for the levels of the series (in

both real and nominal terms), .96 for first differences of the nominal values, and .91 for first differences of

the real values (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1975, series T79, G416, G417, G418, and E135). Retail sales

also are strongly related to personal income. Correlations of state-level per capita personal income and

retail sales for the years 1929, 1933, 1935, and 1939 are .87, .89, .88, and .90, respectively. The X vector

contains a series of demographic factors that were likely to influence infant mortality patterns. These

include the percent black, percent foreign-born, and percent illiterate to capture ethnic and racial

differences in income and cultural practices toward raising infants. To control for the differences in health

and maturity among the potential child-bearing population in the infant mortality and general fertility

equations, we include the percentages of women in their prime child-bearing years, separated into age

categories 15-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, and 35-44. In the equations for noninfant deaths and the various

causes of death we controlled for the influence of age differences for the entire population by including the

percentages of the population ages 10-19, 20-30, 30-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, and 65 and up. Finally, we

also include the percent urban for each observation. For a number of observations, the district covered in

the reporting of relief was the entire county in which the city was located. In those counties, therefore, we

used county information for infant mortality as well. Some of these counties contained rural populations

and, thus, it was important to control for the extent of urbanization within the county. In other

observations, city-level relief data were reported and the level of urbanization in these cases was obviously

100 percent.

        The relationship between per capita relief spending per capita and the infant mortality rate is

negative under a variety of econometric estimation procedures. Table 2 reports the coefficients and t-

statistics of the relief variable under a variety of specifications, and also includes the number of standard

deviations by which infant mortality changed in relation to a one-standard-deviation (OSD) increase in per

capita relief. Changes of one standard deviation are fairly common events, and thus the OSD measure is a
                                                                                                                 13


good measure of the historical explanatory power of changes in relief spending. The coefficients and t-

tests for all of the correlates in the OLS specification with and without city and year effects are reported in

Table 3.

           The baseline OLS coefficient suggests that a $1 increase in per capita relief was associated with a

0.32 reduction in the infant mortality rate.   The addition of a series of controls for economic activity

(retail sales per capita) and demographic differences across cities causes a reduction in the coefficient to -

0.27.

           Yet, there still remain a large number of unmeasured factors, like public health and sanitation

programs, that varied across cities in ways that likely are biasing this coefficient in the negative direction.

Our sense is that cities with better public health and sanitation were also more likely to spend on relief

themselves and lobby more effectively for relief spending from the federal government. The combination

of the positive correlation between public health and relief programs and the negative correlation between

public heath activity and the infant mortality rate would bias the OLS coefficient downward. We therefore

include city effects to control for the time-invariant components of public health and sanitation, as well as

local customs and attitudes, regional diets, availability of medical care, cost of living, climate, or other

factors within the city that did not change over time. We also incorporate year effects to control for shocks

to the national economy or technological changes in health care, like new vaccines, that all cities

experienced. The results in Table 2 show that the addition of the fixed effects substantially reduces the

magnitude of the coefficient to -0.032, and is statistically significant at the 10 percent level in two-tailed

tests. A one-standard-deviation (OSD) increase in relief spending reduced the infant mortality rate by 0.05

standard deviation.

           The long-term downward trend in the national infant-mortality rates raises the possibility that the

impact of the rise of relief spending in the 1930s on infant mortality in the cities may be capturing just a

continuation of the downward trend from the 1920s. Following work by Werner Troesken (2004), we

have addressed this issue by developing city-specific predictions of the trend in the IMR based on the

patterns displayed between 1921 and 1928 in each city. Linear regressions of the infant mortality rate on
                                                                                                               14


the year were run in each city with four or more observations for the period 1921 through 1928 to develop

trend rate predictions for infant mortality rates in each city from 1929 through 1940. Due to lesser

coverage of the death and birth registration areas in the 1920s, the trends could be determined for only 97

cities.11 Of the 97 cities, 87 displayed negative trends between 1921 and 1928, of which 81 trends were

statistically significant at the 10 percent level. Table 2 shows the fixed effects results for 1929 through

1940 for this group of 97 cities both excluding and including the predictions from the prior trend.

Controls for the prior trends in the various cities have little impact on the estimates of the impact of relief.

In the subsample of 97 cities, the relief coefficient is -0.037 without the trend control and -0.036 when the

trend control is included; and both coefficients are similar to the fixed effect coefficient for the entire

sample. The addition of controls for prior time trends had little effect on the relief coefficients and

hypotheses tests in all of the various estimation procedures for infant mortality rates, general fertility rates,

and noninfant death rates that follow. Since the control for prior trends have little impact on the relief

coefficients and inclusion reduces the sample of cities substantially, we focus on the results without the

time-trend controls in the rest of the paper. Results with the time-trend controls are available from the

authors.12

        Even after controlling for the fixed effects and prior trends, there might remain another channel for

endogeneity. Although the retail sales measure controls for changes in general economic activity during

the 1930s, we still may be missing differential shocks to incomes and other factors for the poorest segment

of the income distribution. People in the lower tier of the income distribution, in particular, were more

likely to experience health problems in response to negative shocks given their low starting level of

income. Studies of more recent data within the United States (Kaplan, et. al,1996, and Kennedy, Kawachi,

and Prothrow-Stith 1996) find that greater income inequality is associated with worse health outcomes and

risky behaviors. If the absence of an income inequality measure were to create problems with endogeneity

bias in the OLS with fixed effects analysis, there would need to be variation in poverty across time within

cities and/or across cities for a specific year in ways unrelated to the retail sales measure. Such

unmeasured shocks for the poor were likely to be associated with greater relief spending and also with
                                                                                                            15


higher infant mortality and death rates. The combination of these two positive correlations would be likely

to lead to a positive bias in the relief coefficient in the fixed effects equation that would cause the

coefficient to understate how much relief spending lowered the death rate. To address this potential

channel for endogeneity, we have developed an instrumental variables approach.

        Decisions about the extent of relief spending during the 1930s were made in a complex interaction

between federal, state, and local decision-makers. Unlike the modern federal system with precisely

specified rules for distributions, New Deal administrators distributed funds through an opaque process.14

As a result, an extensive literature on the political economy of New Deal spending has developed to try to

understand the factors that influenced the distribution of New Deal funds (see, e.g., Wright 1974, Wallis,

1998, 2001, Couch and Shughart 1998, Fleck 1999a, 1999b, and 2001b, and Fishback, Kantor and Wallis

2003). We have used this literature to guide our choice of instruments. One key finding in the literature

has been that the Roosevelt administration appears to have used the distribution of funds to enhance its re-

election chances. A variety of presidential voting measures have been explored in these studies, but nearly

every one finds that the Roosevelt administration distributed New Deal funds in an attempt to attract swing

voters who were needed to ensure re-election. The typical measure of swing voting that has been used is

the standard deviation of the percent voting for the Democratic candidate in presidential elections over an

extended period of time. Robert Fleck (1999b) used this variable as an instrument in studies of the

marginal effect of relief spending on county unemployment rates. A higher standard deviation suggests

greater volatility in voters’ support for the Democrats and an indication that a larger percentage of the

voting population could be swayed to switch party loyalties from year to year. Since New Deal

administrators updated relief spending decisions periodically, they likely updated their estimates of the

volatility of Democratic support after each election. We therefore update the swing-voting measure after

each presidential election. Thus, for observations from years up to and including 1932, we calculate the

standard deviation of Democratic voting using the election years from 1896 through 1928. For

observations from the years 1933 through 1936, we calculate the standard deviation from the elections

from 1896 through 1932. Observations in years 1937 through 1940 use election results from 1896 through
                                                                                                                 16


1936.

        In addition to the presidential swing measure, we have included measures of the influence of

politicians in Congress and at the state level. Gary Anderson and Robert Tollison (1991) suggest that

Congressional representatives on key committees were likely to influence the distribution of funds.

Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis (2003, 299 note 21) find that members of the Labor committee in the House

of Representatives, in particular, influenced the distribution of federal relief monies across counties. The

Labor committee was the primary committee that was devoted to unemployment issues during the New

Deal. We explored inclusion of measures of representation on the Appropriations and Ways and Means

committees that controlled the purse-strings and taxing authority in the House, but neither of these

committees contributed any explanatory power to the first-stage regressions.

        To capture political influences at the state level, we created a dichotomous variable that takes the

value 1 if the governor was a Democrat and zero otherwise. In lobbying for federal relief funds, governors

from Roosevelt’s party were likely to have better access to funds and Democratic governors, controlling for

the South, historically were more likely to advocate greater social insurance spending.

        For the instruments to be effective, they must have an impact on the distribution of per capita relief

even after controlling for other measurable exogenous variables in the system and they must be

uncorrelated with the error term in the second-stage death rate (or fertility rate) equation after controlling

for the other measured correlates. It is certainly possible that any of the political variables could display

raw correlations with death rates and fertility rates. However, the controls for economic activity, ethnic

minorities, age distributions, city, and year are already capturing many of the avenues through which we

would normally expect election outcomes to be correlated with death rates and fertility. One worry is that

the measures of political activity would be correlated with the unmeasured poverty that we believe may be

contributing to endogeneity. The political measures are unlikely to be correlated with unmeasured poverty

for the following reasons. First, numerous electoral studies suggest that the poor tend not to have much

political clout in elections either because they often choose not to vote or are implicitly or explicitly

disfranchised (see Kousser 1974, Lijphart 1997). Thus, unmeasured income shocks to the poor were likely
                                                                                                               17


well down the list of the major issues that were decisive in presidential, gubernatorial, and congressional

elections. Second, we have chosen instruments with either temporal, spatial, or institutional distance from

the city for each city-year. The information on presidential voting is for a long string of years prior to the

observation year to avoid temporal simultaneity bias. The gubernatorial instrument focuses on the state’s

political climate and not the specifics within the city. House committee representation has institutional

distance due to the committee assignment process in the House of Representatives. Since we cannot be

sure that the unmeasured factors are not correlated with the instruments, we seek to allay concerns further

by performing tests of whether the instruments have been inappropriately omitted from the second-stage

equation in a statistical sense.

        We have explored the use of a variety of potential instruments that have been discussed in the New

Deal literature, but we focused on the presidential swing-voting, House Labor committee, and Democratic

governor instruments because they meet the following criteria in estimations of the model with fixed

effects. First, as discussed above, we believe that the instruments are exogenous and not themselves

influenced by relief spending or infant mortality. Second, the coefficients of the instruments have the

predicted positive signs in the first-stage relief regression and the effects are both economically and

statistically significant. Third, using a Hausman (1983, 433; see also Greene 2003, 413-14) test we could

not reject the hypothesis that the group of identifying instruments were uncorrelated with the 2SLS

estimates of the error term in the second-stage infant mortality equation. The test results suggest that the

identifying instruments have not been inappropriately omitted from the second-stage infant mortality

equation.15

        Table 3 shows the first-stage relief and the second-stage infant mortality regressions. Under both

specifications the coefficients for the three instruments have the expected positive signs. More relief funds

were distributed to cities with greater volatility in their support for Democratic presidential candidates,

with more representation on the House Labor committee during the New Deal, and located in states with

Democratic governors. The coefficients of these variables are statistically significant, and the F-statistic

for the joint hypothesis that all three coefficients are zero is 17.17. The results of the Hausman tests are
                                                                                                               18


consistent with the view that the identifying instruments have not been inappropriately omitted from the

infant mortality equation.16

        The relief spending coefficient in the 2SLS estimation is statistically significant at the 10 percent

level and negative. An additional dollar of per capita relief spending was associated with a reduction of

0.16 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, while an OSD increase in relief spending per capita reduced infant

mortality by 0.27 standard deviation. The difference between the OLS and 2SLS fixed-effects coefficients

is consistent with the predicted positive endogeneity bias in the OLS estimates associated with unmeasured

economic shocks that hit the poor in ways that were not fully measured by the retail sales variable. Thus, it

appears that the OLS fixed-effects estimate of -0.032 is a lower bound of the inverse effect of relief

spending on infant mortality rates.

        In one sense the results in Tables 2 and 3 can be considered reduced-form estimates from a

structural demographic model in which the infant mortality rate is also a function of the general fertility

rate and the non-infant death rate. In a number of settings demographers have found positive relationships

between the infant mortality rate and the fertility rate and non-infant death rate, respectively. Increases in

birth rates may lead to reductions in intervals between births with the consequence of less maternal care

available per child and shorter durations of breast feeding, both of which contribute to poorer infant

health.17 Infant and non-infant death rates are likely to be positively related to the extent that the two age

groups were struck by the same contagious diseases or faced similar environmental hazards.18 Thus, it is

possible that the omission of the non-infant death rate and the birth rate from the specification causes the

relief coefficient to capture the effects of changes in these other demographic variables that may have also

contributed to declines in infant mortality.

        To investigate this issue further, we re-estimated the models with the fertility rate and the non-

infant death rate included as controls to isolate the impact of relief on infant mortality outside the birth rate

and non-infant death rate channels.19 To aid in comparing the results, we have included in Table 2 all the

coefficients and t-statistics of the relief spending variable from specifications with and without the birth

and non-infant death rates. Comparisons of the results show little difference in the impact of relief
                                                                                                                   19


spending on infant mortality whether or not we control for the birth and non-infant death rates. In each

comparison, except for the OLS comparisons with no controls for any other factors, the difference in

coefficients is substantially less than 8 percent. Thus, it appears that the finding that relief spending

reduced infant mortality is not driven by a secondary influence of relief spending on birth rates or non-

infant death rates.

        Although the magnitudes vary, each specification suggests that relief programs were successful in

alleviating the economic and resulting physical hardship for infants that resulted from the Great

Depression. This finding is similar to our earlier findings that the federal relief programs and public works

programs contributing to lowering infant mortality in the southern states, particularly in black families

(Fishback, Haines, and Kantor, 2001). In that earlier study we did not have measures of state and local

relief funding and thus could examine the impact of all forms of relief spending.

Noninfant Death Rates

        To the extent that infants are more vulnerable to changes in economic circumstances than the rest

of the population, we do not anticipate that relief spending will have as large an effect on the noninfant

mortality rate. The rate is measured as the number of deaths of people over one year old per thousand

people in the city. The results in the top two rows in Table 4 show the OSD effects and the t-statistics

associated with the relief coefficients when we follow the same estimation procedures found in the infant

mortality analysis. Since the rate is for the entire population, the age controls have been changed to reflect

the shares of the entire population at ages 10-19, 20-29, 30-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, and 65 and up.

        The baseline OLS result without other correlates shows that increased relief spending was

associated with lower non-infant death rates. An OSD increase in relief spending was associated with a

0.116 standard deviation reduction in the non-infant death rate. As in the case of infant mortality, as more

correlates and fixed effects are added, the size of the relief effect is reduced. In the OLS analysis with city

and year effects, the relief coefficient is statistically significant in two tailed tests at only the 15 percent

level, and an OSD increase in relief spending would have reduced the death rate by only .026 standard

deviation. When we perform the 2SLS analysis, the coefficient increases in absolute magnitude, such that
                                                                                                                20


the OSD effect increases in magnitude to –0.099. However, we cannot reject the hypothesis of no effect.

        Some of the impact of relief on the noninfant death rate may have been operating through changes

in fertility rates and infant mortality rates. For example, higher fertility rates meant that more women were

at risk of maternal mortality and there may have been contagion cross-effects from infant mortality rates.

When we add controls for these rates (see rows 3 and 4), the coefficient of relief spending is no longer

negative and statistically significant in any of the specifications. In the fixed effects analyses the relief

coefficient is extremely small. Meanwhile the 2SLS analysis suggests a very strong but statistically

insignificant effect of relief on the noninfant death rate.

The Impact of Relief and General Economic Activity on Specific Causes of Death

        The lack of statistically significant effects of relief spending on the non-infant death rate is likely

to arise because the non-infant deaths include a wide variety of causes of death. Some causes of death are

less likely to be reduced by the better access to nutrition, housing, health information, or medical care that

relief payments afforded. For example, most studies suggest that death rates due to cardiovascular disease

are not reduced much for people with higher incomes. In fact, an increase in income might have led to

higher death rates because the person might be more likely to overeat, eat more fatty foods, or drink more

alcohol (Ruhm, 2000). Non-infant deaths included deaths from motor vehicle accidents, on which relief

might have had conflicting effects. The resources provided for relief might have lowered the death rate for

motoring accidents as the person now had more resources to better maintain the safety of the automobile.

On the other hand, more resources might have allowed the person to drive more often, thus exposing him

to a greater risk of having a fatal accident during the course of the year.

        To explore the impact of relief spending on specific causes of non-infant deaths, we examine death

rates for specific causes of death for the period 1929 through 1937. We could not extend the data set to

1940 because the census stopped reporting the cause of death data for individual cities when it revamped

its publications in 1938. There is likely to be more measurement error in the estimation of the effect of

relief because the cause of death data was available only for the cities, while the relief spending

information for roughly half the sample was for the county in which the city was located. The causes of
                                                                                                              21


death are grouped into 11 categories: homicides; suicides; respiratory tuberculosis; other infectious and

parasitic diseases; neoplasms (malaria and cancer and other malignant tumors); cardiovascular disease; a

grouping of influenza, bronchitis and pneumonia; diarrheal diseases; degenerative diseases; deaths in

motor vehicle accidents; and maternal mortality.

        Suicides and homicides are of particular interest in this list because, unlike nearly all of the other

causes of death, they are based directly on specific decisions, rational or irrational, that individuals made.

Suicide focuses specifically on mental health issues for the people who take their own lives, while the

taking of another life in a homicide is often stimulated by stresses within families, neighborhoods, or

locations that can be economic in nature. Recent studies of modern data for the U.S. and other economies

suggest that suicide rates are lower in areas with better economic opportunity and less inequality. A

number of studies, but not all, find the same result for homicides. 20 To the extent that relief spending

provided replacement income and jobs on work projects, they were likely to ease some of the economic

tensions and material inequality that might have led to more homicides and suicides. On the other hand,

the social stigma of having to rely on relief might have contributed further to the stresses and strains related

to lost work and income in ways that potentially offset such benefits.

        Table 4 shows the results of OLS, OLS fixed effects, and 2SLS with fixed effects estimation for

the various causes of death. In the simplest comparisons where the death rate is estimated as a function

only of per capita relief spending, we find a negative relationship for all the causes of death except for

deaths due to neoplasms and cardiovascular disease. Once the city and year effects control for differential

access to long-term sanitation and public health facilities across cities, negative relationships are still

present for roughly half of the disease categories, including homicides, suicides, diarrheal diseases,

degenerative diseases, motor vehicles, and influenza, bronchitis, and pneumonia. As in the infant mortality

section, there may be worries that the inability to fully control for the shocks to the very poor might lead to

a positive bias in the relief coefficients. Modern studies show that homicide rates, for example, are

associated with greater poverty and we expect that more poverty was associated with greater relief

spending.21 As expected, the negative impact of relief on homicides and suicides increases when using
                                                                                                                22


2SLS estimates to try to control for this potential bias. The 2SLS estimates suggest that an OSD increase

in relief spending lowered the homicide rate by 0.21 standard deviation, although the relief coefficient in

the homicide analysis is only statistically significant at around the 15 percent level. The OSD effect for

suicides was substantially larger at –0.85 standard deviation and the effect is statistically significant. When

we consider that suicides and homicides are relatively extreme manifestations of the strains and pressures

associated with economic Depressions and that the programs were not targeted specifically toward mental

health or crime problems, relief appears to have had a material influence on the poor’s well-being.

        Only two other causes of death were reduced by greater relief spending in the 2SLS estimation,

deaths from infectious and parasitic diseases and diarrheal deaths. The 2SLS OSD effects of relief

spending were –0.576 and –0.383, respectively. Relief spending may have staved off death for those

struck by the diseases by providing better nutrition, access to medicine, and protection against the

elements. To the extent that relief spending allowed people to stay in better housing, it allowed

households to isolate the victims of disease and thus limit its spread to other family members. Both

diseases are considered by demographers to be acute diseases that would likely be responsive to immediate

reductions through greater relief spending, while many of the remaining diseases were degenerative or

long-term diseases that would have been less responsive.

        Although we have focused on the impact of relief spending, the analysis also offers the opportunity

to look at the impact of retail sales, our measure of economic activity, on the various death rates. Table 5

shows the OSD effects of retail sales per capita on the various causes of death for both the OLS fixed

effects and the 2SLS analyses above. Some caution should be used in interpreting these results because we

have made no attempt to control for potential endogeneity between the death causes and retail sales per

capita. However, we do not anticipate that there was a strong direction of causation that ran from death

rates to retail sales per capita. If there were any, it is likely that the coefficient would have a negative bias.

 The coefficient estimates of the impact of retail sales per capita are positive and statistically significant for

the non-infant death rate, the homicide rate, respiratory tuberculosis, neoplasms, infectious and parasitic

diseases, neoplasms, degenerative diseases, maternal mortality, and motor vehicle accidents. Suicides were
                                                                                                                23


the exceptions to the rule, displaying negative and statistically significant relationships with retail sales per

capita. These pro-cyclical findings for most causes of death and the counter-cyclical findings for suicide

rates are similar to Ruhm’s (2000) findings for a much later period in the twentieth century. The findings

for both the milder changes in the 1970s and 1980s and in the Great Depression lend credence to the

possibility that many death rates may have been procyclical throughout the course of the century.22

        Comparisons of the signs of the effects for retail sales per capita and for relief per capita suggests

that the mechanism by which relief spending reduced death rates differs from just simply increasing

income for society as a whole. Infant mortality rates were not influenced by changes in general economic

activity but they were reduced by relief spending targeted at the unemployed and the poor. Similarly, the

non-infant death rate and homicide rates increased in response to general economic activity while declining

to some extent in response to relief spending. Of the key rates we have identified, only suicide rates

appeared to respond in the same manner to increases in general economic activity and relief spending.



V.      Relief Costs per Life Saved

        One way to measure the effectiveness of relief in reducing death rates is to calculate the magnitude

of relief spending associated with saving a life and compare it to economic measures of the value of a life.

Table 6 contains estimates of the relief cost per life saved for the various death rate measures where the

OLS fixed effects and/or the 2SLS fixed effects estimates are negative and statistically significant at the 20

percent level.

        We illustrate the derivation of the measure using the infant mortality rate, which requires more

complicated calculations than the non-infant death rates or the death rates for specific causes of death.

Consider the 2SLS coefficient with fixed effects for the entire sample from Panel A in Table 2, which

suggests that an additional per capita dollar of relief spending would have lowered the number of infant

deaths by 0.163 per 1,000 live births.

        The number of infant deaths (I) can be written as

        I(r) = IMR(r) * GFR * W1544 * P                                                                  (2),
                                                                                                                24


where IMR is the infant mortality rate, GFR is the general fertility rate (births per women aged 15 to 44),

W1544 is the share of the total population composed of women aged 15 to 44, P is the total population,

and r is per capita relief spending. Differentiating with respect to r,

        dI/dr = dIMR(r)/dr * GFR * W1544 * P                                                           (3),

gives a measure of the direct effect of added relief spending on infant deaths. After rearranging terms and

setting dI equal to 1, we can determine the amount of relief spending associated with a reduction of one

infant death (dR), the change in per capita relief spending (dr) times population (P),

        dR = dr P = 1/(dIMR(r)/dr) * GFR * W1544).                                                     (4)

Using the 2SLS with fixed effects coefficient for dIMR/dr of –0.163 and sample means for the other

variables in equation (3), an additional $153,045 of relief spending (1935 dollars) – or roughly $1.95

million when adjusted to year 2000 dollars – would have been associated with saving an infant’s life. The

estimate of the relief cost per life saved is higher at $8.61 million when we focus on the OLS with fixed

effects estimate.

        The relief costs per life saved based on the 2SLS coefficients for the population over one year old

and for specific causes of death are in the same ballpark as the costs per infant life saved. The relief cost

per life saved is $4.5 million for homicides, $1.9 million for suicides, $840 thousand for infectious and

parasitic diseases, and $1.76 million for diarrheal diseases. As was the case for the infant mortality rates,

the OLS fixed effects coefficients imply much higher relief costs per life saved, which might be considered

an upper-bound on the relief cost per life saved.

        The estimates based on the 2SLS coefficients are roughly comparable to modern estimates of the

market valuations of life, which range from about $1 million to $9.5 million.23 Some care must be

exercised in making comparisons to market values of life for infant lives saved because these estimates

have been calculated for working adults. Thus, it is useful to compare the costs to other social welfare

programs that more directly target children. Currie and Gruber (1996b) estimated that targeted changes in

the modern Medicaid system that lowered the eligibility requirements for specific groups spent $840,000

to save an infant life. Of course, this estimate focused on specific changes in Medicaid that would have
                                                                                                              25


had a direct impact on children’s health. When Currie and Gruber examined the impact of broader

changes in the Medicaid program not specifically targeted at high-risk groups, the cost per life saved was

about $4.2 million. These comparisons suggest that during the economic crisis of the Great Depression,

the flood of relief spending was roughly as cost effective in saving infant lives as modern Medicaid

spending.

        It is important to remember that the purpose of relief spending during the Great Depression was

not simply to prevent infant deaths, suicides, homicides, or other deaths. This outcome was one of a

number of welcome effects associated with alleviating economic hardship among the unemployed. For

example, Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (forthcoming, 2005) find that an additional dollar of federal relief

and public works grants in a county was associated with an 84 cent rise in income. Once these other

benefits of relief spending are taken into account, in comparison to the modern Medicaid program, it

appears that relief spending during the 1930s was relatively effective in enhancing the material well-being

of infants.

        One way to make comparisons with the targeted programs is to consider what share of the relief

population was at risk of an infant death, a homicide, or a suicide. As an example, we consider here the

infant population, which is much easier to measure than the population at risk of homicides or suicides.

Given that people of all ages were experiencing significant problems during the Depression, a relatively

small percentage of the relief spending was likely to have been devoted to infants. In an October 1933

census of relief families conducted by the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (1934, 122-43),

roughly 1.5 percent of the people whose families were on relief in cities with populations over 100,000

were under the age of one. The infants’ share of the relief population in large cities was roughly the same

as their share of the overall city population in the 1930 population census. Since relief administrators

based the amount of relief on deficits in household budgets, it seems reasonable to assume that infants

were allocated a share of overall relief spending equal to their share of the relief population. Under this

assumption, infants on relief would have received about 1.5 cents from each additional per capita relief

dollar spent in a city. Multiplying this 1.5 percent share by the relief dollars spent per infant life saved, we
                                                                                                              26


find that of the $1 to $9 million (in year 2000 dollars) in general relief funds needed to save an infant life,

only $15,000 to $135,000 in targeted relief funds was likely to have been necessary in saving a baby’s life.



VI.     General Fertility Rates

        While relief generally had negative effects on death rates, it was associated with higher birth rates.

The issues relating relief spending and fertility rates were in many ways different from the modern

discussions of welfare and fertility. The modern literature often focuses on tests of the impact of welfare

generosity on the fertility behavior of teens and young adults and finds relatively small effects (Haveman

and Wolfe 1994, ch. 6; Blank 1995; Mellor 1998; Grogger and Bronars 2001; Schultz 1994). Never-wed

single mothers faced much greater social ostracism in the 1930s and had limited access to public funds.

The state mothers’ pension programs in many states made few provisions for never-wed mothers, focusing

instead on widowed mothers (Skocpol 1992). As seen in Figure 1, the drastic declines in economic

activity during the early 1930s coincided with a sharp drop in the general fertility rate, the number of live

births per woman aged 15 to 44. The average general fertility rate in our sample of cities followed a

similar pattern, falling from 69.4 in 1930 to 56.7 in 1933 as real GDP fell drastically, as marriages were

postponed.24 As the economy began to recover and per capita relief spending increased, the general

fertility rate returned to around 62 by 1940. We anticipate that the effect of relief spending in this

environment was likely to encourage couples to return to their normal fertility decisions than it was to give

incentives to single women to have children.

        The bottom part of Table 4 shows the results from the same series of estimation procedures and

specifications (OLS, OLS and fixed effects, and 2SLS with fixed effects) that we had used for the infant

mortality equations. Estimates are reported with and without controls for the infant mortality rate and the

noninfant death rate. The one difference in the 2SLS specifications was that the instrument set was limited

to the presidential voting volatility and the House Labor committee measures. We removed the

Democratic governor instrument from the analysis because in all cases when it was included the Hausman

test rejected the hypothesis that the error in the second-stage general fertility equation was uncorrelated
                                                                                                                   27


with the instruments. When the governor variable was excluded, the Hausman test no longer rejected the

hypothesis.

         Although the rise in relief spending coincided with an increase in the general fertility rate at the

national level, the baseline OLS coefficient with no correlates for our city sample suggests a negative

relationship. A negative cross-sectional relationship between relief spending and the general fertility rate

appears to be causing this negative relationship. Once we control for city and year fixed effects, the relief

coefficient becomes positive and statistically significant at the 10 percent level, although it has relatively

little explanatory power, as an OSD change in relief per capita only raises the general fertility rate by 0.05

standard deviation. The 2SLS estimates lead to coefficients that are statistically significant and larger and

positive. The impact of a one-standard-deviation increase in relief per capita was associated with a 0.82

standard deviation increase in the general fertility rate. The impact of more relief spending on the general

fertility rate is likely operating through the same channel as an improvement in general economic activity.

OSD changes in retail sales per capita also have a large and positive effect on the general fertility rate of

between 0.35 and 0.41 standard deviations. Thus, the combination of an improving economy and a more

substantial social insurance net contributed significantly to the leveling off of the fertility rate in the late

1930s.

         The sharp increase in the relief coefficient in moving from fixed effects to 2SLS is likely driven in

part by two negative endogeneity biases in the OLS fixed effects estimates. First, as was the case for the

death rates, the absence of good measures for the impact of the Depression on the poor might lead to

negative endogeneity bias in our estimates of the impact of relief on the general fertility rate. Unmeasured

negative shocks to the poor were likely to lead to lower birth rates at the same time as they would lead to

more relief spending. Second, the 1930s saw rapid growth in the family planning movement. Many of the

obstacles to birth control and family planning were eliminated by the end of the 1920s and the number of

family planning clinics nationwide rose from 28 in 1929 to 374 by 1938 (McCann 1994, 215-217 and

Chapter 6). Although we have not been able to obtain information on the timing of the introduction of the

clinics across cities, the literature on family planning suggests that a significant number of social workers
                                                                                                             28


who became New Deal relief workers were interested in family planning; therefore, we anticipate a

positive correlation between the clinics and relief spending and a negative relationship between the clinics

and the general fertility rate that combined would lead to the negative bias that was eliminated by the use

of the 2SLS procedure.



VII.    Concluding Remarks

        The Great Depression of the 1930s provides a unique opportunity to test the impact of social

welfare spending on demographic outcomes because the economic crisis was so severe and the

government’s response was equally unprecedented. Given the depth of the depression from 1929 to 1933

and the unusually high unemployment rates throughout the decade, the decade could well have become a

demographic disaster with rising infant mortality and non-infant death rates and declining fertility

throughout the decade. The national aggregates show, however, that the infant mortality rate stopped

falling temporarily in the mid 1930s before continuing on a downward trend. The non-infant death rate

stayed on trend through the early 1930s and then rose above trend in the late 1930s, while the general

fertility rate fell below trend in the early 1930s before leveling out in the late 1930s. What can explain

these puzzling patterns?

        A key factor in the explanation of all three patterns is the sharp increase in relief spending during

the 1930s when the federal government stepped in to combat the problems of the unemployed and the

poor. In essence, federal relief spending provided a safety net for the unemployed and the poor that

contributed to a decline in mortality rates for infants under age one, the population most vulnerable to the

effects of economic downturns.25 Similarly, increased relief spending was associated with increases in the

general fertility rate that allowed households to return to more normal fertility patterns.

        Relief spending had no statistically significant impact on overall non-infant death rates because the

effects of economic downturns and social insurance varied for different causes of death. Increased relief

spending contributed to reductions in the suicide rate, deaths due to infectious and parasitic diseases, and

deaths from diarrheal diseases. There is also evidence that greater relief spending reduced homicide rates
                                                                                                             29


although the effects are less precisely estimated. Increases in relief spending had little or no negative effect

on many causes of death where improvements in the standard of living had little impact.

        The effect of fluctuations in economic activity during the 1930s mimicked a pattern found by

Ruhm (2000) for the modern U.S. economy. The overall non-infant death rate and the fatality rates for

homicide rates, infectious and parasitic diseases, cancers, degenerative disease and motor vehicles all

displayed pro-cyclical patterns, falling when the economy plunged and rising during the recoveries. A key

exception during the 1930s and the modern era was the suicide rate, which tended to be counter-cyclical.

        The differences in impact of relief and broader measures of the economy for many of the death

rates show that relief spending, which was targeted at the poor and unemployed, had effects that went

beyond just improving the general economy. Spending more on relief reduced infant mortality, diarrheal

death rates, homicides, and infectious and parasitic diseases, when none of these rates were reduced by

changes in our measure of broader economic activity. Only in the case of suicide rates did relief spending

and broader improvements in the economy have the same negative effect during the 1930s. One measure

of the success of relief spending is the relief cost per life saved. In cases where relief spending lowered a

specific cause of death, comparisons show that the relief costs per life saved were similar to modern

economic estimates of the value of life. Even though relief programs were targeted at a broad range of

social and economic problems, they display similar costs per life saved as modern programs that are

targeted more specifically at reducing mortality, such as Medicaid. Thus, it appears that relief programs

during the 1930s succeeded in a relatively cost effective manner at offsetting the worst features of the

demographic outcomes associated with the Great Depression.
                                                                                                                  30


                                                Data Appendix

        The sample consists of annual observations for 114 cities between 1929 and 1940. The sample

constituted the specific 114 cities because information on relief spending each year from 1929 through

1940 were available in a unique source. The sample includes 49 of the top 50 cities and 87 of the top 100

cities in terms of population. The smaller cities added for geographical balance tended to be outside of the

Northeast. The data collection project was initiated in 1929 at the Russell Sage Foundation and was later

transferred to the U.S. Children’s Bureau, which collected the relief information and published a volume

covering the period 1929 through 1935 (Winslow 1937). The project was transferred again to the Social

Security Board, which updated the series and carried the data forward through 1940 (Baird 1942). The

aggregate population of the sample cities accounted for 37 percent of the total U.S. population and 66

percent of the total urban population.

        The city-level relief information was then matched to data on infant and non-infant mortality and

birth rates from U.S. Bureau of the Census (1934a, b, c; 1936a, b; 1937; 1938; 1939; 1940; 1941; 1942).

The relief spending for a number of the urban areas was reported for the entire county in which the city

was located, but just for the city in other cases. Since we had both city and county information on

mortality and births rates, we were able to use city infant mortality rates for the cities that reported relief

spending only for the city and county information for urban areas that reported relief spending for the

entire county.

        We sought an effective method of controlling for the substantial changes in income that occurred

during the time period. In the absence of estimates of per capita income at the city level, we chose retail

sales per capita in the county or counties in which the city was located as a proxy. As discussed in the text,

retail sales are strongly correlated with consumption and with income, particularly in urban areas, and we

had retail sales information for the counties in which the cities were located for 1929, 1933, 1935, and

1939. Retail sales from 1929 and 1939 are from ICPSR file number 0003, as amended and corrected by

Michael Haines. Retail sales in 1933 and 1935 are from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of

Foreign and Domestic Commerce (1936, 1939). The population estimate used to create the per capita
                                                                                                               31


measure was based on straight-line interpolations between 1920, 1930, and 1940 data from the amended

ICPSR file 0003. We interpolated values of per capita retail sales in the intervening years using estimates

of state personal income from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (1989). For each year between 1930

and 1940, we divided state personal income by an estimate of state population. Then to interpolate per

capita retail sales between the benchmark years of 1929, 1933, 1935, and 1939, we used a formula like the

one below for 1931:

        R31 = S31 * (0.5 * R29 / S29 + 0.5 * R33/S33),

where Rt is per capita retail sales in year t for the county in which the city was located and St is per capita

state personal income in year t.

        We sought to control for other demographic characteristics of the cities, such as ethnicity, nativity,

illiteracy, and the extent of urbanization. Given the nature of the available data, these variables are

measured at the county level. The exception is that if the relief data was reported for a specific city, and

not just the county containing the city, we set the percent urban equal to 100. The information for 1930 and

1940 is from the amended ICPSR file number 0003. The measures of the age distribution at the county

level are from Gardner and Cohen (1992). We used straight-line interpolations to create the values

between 1930 and 1940. In fixed effects specifications, the coefficients of the demographic characteristics

should be interpreted as the impact of city-specific trends for each characteristic.

        We examined a variety of instruments in the first-stage relief equations relating to the political

atmosphere in the cities or their states. The three instruments selected were the updated long-term

volatility of the vote for president, representation on the House committee for Labor, and a Demcratic

Governor dummy. The long-term presidential voting volatility was the standard deviation of the percent

voting Democrat over the period from 1896 through the prior election, and we used voting information for

the county in which the city was located from ICPSR file number 0001. For observations up to and

including 1932, we calculated the standard deviation of Democratic voting using the election years from

1896 through 1928; for observations from years 1933 through 1936, the standard deviations are calculated

from 1896 through 1932 election results; and for observations in years 1937 through 1940, the volatility
                                                                                                                32


measure uses election results from 1896 through 1936. We also explored using information on the

percentage voting Democrat and the turnout in the most recent election from the same source. The

variable measuring representation on the House labor committee for the county in which the city was

located are from U.S. Congress (various years).

        The Democratic governor variable is from Congressional Quarterly Inc. (1995, 639-63). There

were three situations in which governors were from nontraditional parties. Minnesota Free-Labor party

governors and Wisconsin Progressive party governors are treated as if they were Democrats in this

comparison based on our reading of state histories of the 1930s. Oregon Independent governor Julius

Meier is given a value of 0.5 because it appears that he was a centrist gubernatorial candidate. At the end

of his term both parties sought to have him represent them in the next election.

         We also explored the use of the party composition of the state legislatures and the timing of

mayoral elections. The information on the percent Democrat in each state legislature comes from

legislative manuals, state bluebooks, and House and Senate journals for each state from the collection

housed at the Wisconsin State Historical Society. In many of the southern states the legislatures were

overwhelmingly Democratic and many of the bluebooks did not bother to list party affiliations. To fill in

any gaps we encountered, we used information from the New York Secretary of State, Manual, for the

years 1925-1940. Information on gubernatorial election years is from the Congressional Quarterly Inc.

(1995, 639-63), from the World Almanac and Book of Facts (1930, 313), and from searches on the internet

when there were inconsistencies. To determine the timing of mayoral elections we used information on

term lengths from the Municipal Yearbook in 1934 (Ridley and Nolting, 1934, 107-112) and matched it

with information on the date the mayors’ terms expired in the World Almanac and Book of Facts in tables

entitled, “Mayors of American Cities” in the volumes spanning the years 1926 through 1940. When there

were inconsistencies and discrepancies in the timing between the two sources, we searched for listings of

mayors in the specific city on the internet and contacted libraries and officials in the city in question. If

terms expired in January we assumed the election was in the preceding year. For terms expiring later than

March we assumed the election was in the same year that the term expired.
                                                                                                               33


        The death rates by specific causes through 1937 were reported in U.S. Department of Commerce,

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1932, 1934, 1935a, 1935b, 1936a, 1936b, 1937, 1938, 1939). The published

sources did not print city-specific information for 1938 through 1940. We aggregated the information on

specific causes of death into larger categories based on the Preston, Keyfitz, and Schoen (1972) framework

in the following ways: respiratory tuberculosis, suicides, and homicides are their own categories; other

infectious and parasitic diseases include typhoid and paratyphoid fever, smallpox, measles, scarlet fever,

whooping cough, diphtheria, erysipelas, epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis, tuberculosis of the meninges,

other forms of tuberculosis, syphilis, poliomyelitis and polioencephalitis, and acute rheumatic fever;

neoplasms include malaria, cancer, and other malignant tumors; cardiovascular disease includes cerebral

hemorrhage and softening and diseases of the heart; influenza, bronchitis, pneumonia are combined into

one category; diarrheal diseases include diarrhea and enteritis; certain degenerative diseases include

rheumatism, diabetes mellitus, cirrhosis of the liver, nephritis, appendicitis and typhlitis, hernia, intestinal

obstruction, chronic rheumatism, osteoarthritis, and gout; maternal mortality includes puerperal septicemia,

and other puerperal causes; and motor vehicle accidents include automobile accidents and accident in

collision with railroad trains and street cars. The specific death rates were reported only for cities and not

for the counties.

        The sources for the relief spending actually included 116 cities. We lacked critical information on

key variables for Washington, DC. Further, Allentown, PA and Bethlehem, PA, which were reported

separately in the relief data, were combined into one city-observation because of other data constraints.

Information on infant mortality and births was not available for Texas cities and counties until 1932.

Information on the Texas cities for causes of death were reported in the mortality statistics volumes

(although not for the counties), so the Texas cities appear for the whole period in the panel for city-specific

causes of death.    Whenever we used the percent of state legislators that were Democrats, the following

cities had missing information because Minnesota’s legislature was non-partisan: Duluth, MN;

Minneapolis, MN; and St. Paul. MN. When we controlled for pre-existing trends for 1921 through 1928,

the sample of cities is reduced to 97 because some states were late in joining the registration areas. The
                                                                                                     34


cities eliminated are Kansas City and St. Louis in Missouri; Birmingham and Mobile in Alabama; New

Orleans and Shreveport in Louisiana; Knoxville, Memphis, and Nashville in Tennessee; Atlanta, Georgia;

Dallas, El Paso, Fort Worth, Houston, and San Antonio in Texas; Tulsa, Oklahoma, and Denver, Colorado.
                                                                                                                35


FOOTNOTES


1
    See, for example, Morris (1979) and OECD (2001).
2
    See Antonovsky and Bernstein (1977), Clifford and Brannon (1978), Waldmann (1992), and Haines

(2000). For a more general discussion of how socioeconomic status of parents affects the treatment of

children, see Paxson and Waldfogel (1999). For a discussion of how childhood health affects adulthood

economic outcomes, see Case, Fertig, and Paxson (2003).
3
    For recent studies that have examined how modern social programs affect the status of children, see

Conley and Springer (2001), Grossman and Jacobowitz (1981), Currie and Cole (1993), Haveman and

Wolfe (1994), Currie and Thomas (1995a and 1995b), Currie and Gruber (1996a, 1996b, and 2001),

Duncan and Brooks-Gunn (1997), Joyce (1999), and Blau (1999). Moreover, see Moffitt and Ver Ploeg

(2001) for an extensive discussion of the current research underway examining the economic and social

consequences of the 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act that

overhauled the modern welfare system.
4
    Inclusion of 1918 in the trend calculation has almost no effect on the general fertility rate trend, but

makes the trends for both infant mortality and non-infant mortality even more negative than the trends in

Figures 1 and 2. Thus, the inclusion of 1918 would make our claims that the Depression changed the

trends even stronger.
5
    The discussion in this section focuses on the national aggregates. Estimates adjusted for changing

registration areas over the period are very strongly correlated with the national estimates. The series for the

national aggregates track closely with an aggregation of the 114-city sample. Correlations for the period

1930-1940 between the rates for our city sample and the national rate is .982 for the infant mortality rate,

.966 for the non-infant death rate, and .954 for the general fertility rate. The infant mortality rate in the

city sample is on average about 5.5 deaths per thousand live births lower than for the national rate. The

general fertility rate in the city sample is on average about 19 births per 1000 women lower than for the

national sample.
                                                                                                                36



6
    Given the downward trend in infant mortality rates prior to the 1930s, there remains the possibility that

the negative relationship between the changes in infant mortality and the changes in relief spending are

simply reflecting a pattern where cities that received an increase in relief spending in the 1930s were the

ones experiencing steeper drops in infant mortality prior to 1933. We explore this issue more fully in the

econometric analysis and find that it does not hold. In addition, we collected city-level infant mortality

data for the period 1927 to 1929, and then examined the correlation between the difference in average per

capita relief from 1930-1932 to 1933-1940 and the difference in average infant mortality from 1927-1929

to 1930-1932. The correlation between the change in infant mortality between 1927-1929 and 1930-1932

and the change in relief spending between 1930-1932 and 1933-1940 is positive ( =.165); therefore, we do

not expect that pre-existing trends in infant mortality is imparting a spurious bias toward finding that

changes in relief spending contributed to lower infant mortality during the 1930s.
7
    For an empirical analysis of the FERA distribution, see Fishback, Kantor and Wallis (2003) and Fleck

(1999c). For discussions of the administrative details of relief provision, see Brown (1940) and U.S.

National Resources Planning Board (1942).
8
    Our relief measure includes some privately administered relief spending, which accounted for roughly

one-quarter of relief spending prior to 1933, but less than one percent thereafter. Privately administered

relief in many cases came from government sources. More detailed breakdowns for urban areas can be

found in Baird (1942). Several programs that might be considered public assistance were not included in

the reported relief data. For example, FERA emergency education, student aid, and transient programs

were omitted. There is no information on the Civilian Conservation Corp, which provided employment in

more isolated areas for many youths who came from urban areas. Spending on the National Youth

Administration was omitted, as was the distribution of federal surplus commodities, which were bought

from farmers as an agricultural relief measure. This form of relief did not account for a large share of aid

in urban areas, but was important in rural areas. Also, information on earnings under the Public Works

Administration was not included. But these projects tended to hire more skilled workers and, thus, the
                                                                                                               37



program’s exclusion probably does not affect our conclusions regarding the effect of relief on the urban

poor.
9
    For discussions of the FERA and CWA policies, see Brown (1940, 218-98) and U.S. National Resources

Planning Board (1942, 26-97).
10
     We based this calculation on households reported in the IPUMS from 1940.
11
     The cities eliminated were generally western and southern cities and include Atlanta, Birmingham,

Denver, El Paso, Fort Worth, Houston, Kansas City MO, Knoxville, Memphis, Mobile, Nashville, New

Orleans, San Antonio, St. Louis, and Tulsa.
12
     In the 2SLS analysis of infant mortality rates the relief coefficient estimates without and with the

predicted trend are -0.1185 and -0.1196 and the t-statistic changed by 0.02. Similar results hold when we

control for the general fertility rate and the noninfant death rate in the analysis. In analysis of the general

fertility rate later in the paper, 90 of 97 cities displayed negative trends for 1921-1928, of which 81 were

statistically significant. The OLS fixed effects coefficient for relief per capita changed from 0.0208 to

0.0207 and the t-statistics changed from 1.91 to 1.89 with the inclusion of the control for the prior trends;

the 2SLS coefficient changed from 0.2523 to 0.2539 and the t-statistics changed from 3.97 to 3.99.

Similar small changes occurred when we added controls for the infant mortality rate and the non-infant

death rate. The non-infant death rates generally displayed no trends in most cities for 1921 to 1928 with

only 8 negative trends and 15 positive trends that were statistically significant at the 10 percent level out of

97 cities. Control for these prior trends in the fixed effects analysis for noninfant death rates changed the

coefficients from -0.0014 to -0.0011 and the t-statistics from -0.92 to -0.73. In the 2SLS analysis the

coefficient changed from -.0.0006 to -0.0036 and the t-statistics changed from -0.74 and -0.45.

           We also considered adding city-specific time trends. However, the correlates for the age

distribution, ethnic percentages, and other census based variables are interpolated between census years

using straight-line interpolations and thus would be perfectly collinear with a separate city-specific time

trend. The coefficients on these census variables in the fixed effect specification are capturing the effect of
                                                                                                                38



the time trends for each of those variables within the city.
14
     In some cases matching rules were established in the original legislation but these were jettisoned soon

after the distributions began (see Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis 2003 and sources cited there).
15
     We have explored the possibility of using several other instruments that have been proposed in other

settings. For example, in his unemployment study, Robert Fleck (1999b) used both a measure of

Democratic loyalty and a measure of voter turnout as instruments; therefore, we tried the percentage voting

for the Democratic presidential candidate in the election prior to the year of the observation and the

percentage turning out to vote in the prior presidential election (measured as a percentage of the 1930

population). We have also explored using the percentage of legislators that were Democrat in the upper

house and lower house of the state legislatures. In studying modern crime, Steven Levitt (1997) has

suggested the use of a dummy variable for election years as an instrument on the grounds that spending

patterns might be influenced by the electoral cycle, but that the timing of elections, which are set by

constitutions and charters, are unrelated to current socioeconomic phenomena. Therefore, we explored the

use of gubernatorial and mayoral election years as potential identifying instruments.      These additional

instruments failed to meet one or more of our criteria for inclusion. In many cases when we added each

potential instrument to the swing-voting, House labor committee, and Democratic governor instruments,

the added instrument’s coefficient in the first stage was either statistically insignificant or had an

unexpected sign. The inclusion of the additional instruments produced estimates of the effect of relief on

infant mortality and the various causes of death that are roughly comparable to the 2SLS results reported in

the tables in the paper.
16
     As was the case for the fixed effects estimates, inclusion of the 1921-1928 trend in the 2SLS analysis

with fixed effects had virtually no impact on the relief coefficient and the coefficient on the prior trend

prediction was statistically insignificant.
17
     To the extent that families were seeking a target family size, higher death rates among infants might have

led to increased fertility rates. This same link may exist between the non-infant mortality and fertility rates.
                                                                                                                  39



There is evidence from other sources that about .6 to .8 of each child death was replaced in the United

States around 1910. Only about .25 of this effect can be attributed to direct replacement, however, the rest

seems to have been precautionary “hoarding” by parents trying to avoid the risk of having too few

surviving children (Haines 1998, Table 7.6). There might be some replacement effect associated with the

non-infant death rate, but most childhood deaths occurred in infancy. The proportion of all deaths below

age 5 that occurred between the ages of 1 and 4 was 24.4 percent in 1932 and 17.8 percent in 1940. The

proportion of deaths for children aged 1 to 4 relative to all non-infant deaths was 3.9 percent in 1930 and

1.8 percent in 1940.
18
     Preston (1976, 106) points out that 80 to 90 percent of the variance in the death rate of any particular age

group can be “explained” by the variation in the death rate among all age groups. In other words, if there

were an unusual surge in non-infant deaths, infants deaths would follow suit.
19
     In these analyses the infant mortality rate was positively related to the non-infant death rate, while the

general fertility rate is positively related to infant mortality in some specifications and tends to be

statistically insignificant and negative in others. Results are available from the authors.
20
     See Brainerd (2001) and Ruhm (2000) and Cutler, Glaeser and Norberg (2000) for the impact of income

on suicides. Fajnzylber, Lederman, and Loayza (2002a and 2002b) find that improvements in economic

growth reduce homicides. Ruhm (2000), on the other hand, finds that homicides in the U.S. are procyclical

in the 1970s and 1980s.
21
     Fajnzylber, Lederman, and Loayza (2002a and 2002b), Kennedy, Kawachi, and Prothrow Stith (1996),

Kaplan, et. al. (1996), and Potter (1991) find that reductions in poverty reduce homicides.
22
     Table 5 shows no strong positive relationship between infant mortality and retail sales. However,

Dehejia and Lleras-Muney (2004) find a selection effect with modern data that shows better health of

babies during periods of high unemployment.
23
     Market values of life are from Moore and Viscusi (1990, 14) with adjustments to year 2000 values using

the GDP Deflator (Council of Economic Advisors 2001, 282).
                                                                                                               40



24
     For example, the number of marriages declined from 1,233,000 in 1929 to 982,000 in 1932. The

number of live births declined from 2,618,000 in 1930 to 2,307,000 in 1933 (U.S. Bureau of the Census,

1975, Series B 1-4).
25
     Over the course of the 1930s, the population-weighted average infant mortality rate in the city sample

fell by 20.4 per thousand, from 59.8 in 1930 to 39.4 in 1940. During the same period per capita relief

spending rose by approximately $49.19, from $3.74 in 1930 to $52.93 in 1940 (in constant 1967 dollars).

Based on the 2SLS with fixed effects coefficient of –0.163, this increase in relief spending was associated

with a reduction of 8 infant deaths per thousand live births. Given the 20.4 decline in average infant

mortality rates in the sample cities over the decade, the rise in relief spending can account for roughly 39

percent of the decline in infant mortality in the 1930s.
                                                                                                       41


                                            REFERENCES

Antonovsky, Aaron, and Judith Bernstein, “Social Class and Infant Mortality,” Social Science and Medicine
         11 (May 1977), 453-70.
Baird, Enid, Public and Private Aid in 116 Urban Areas, 1929-38, with Supplement for 1939 and 1940,
         U.S. Federal Security Agency, Social Security Board, Public Assistance Report No. 3
         (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1942).
Blank, Rebecca, “Teen Pregnancy: Government Programs Are Not the Cause,” Feminist Economics 1
         (Summer 1995), 47-58.Blau, David M., “The Effect of Income on Child Development,” Review of
         Economics and Statistics 81 (May 1999), 261-76.
Brainerd, Elizabeth. “Economic Reform and Mortality in the Former Soviet Union: A Study of the
         Suicide Epidemic in the 1990s.” European Economic Review 45 (2001): 1007-1019.
Brown, Josephine C., Public Relief, 1929-1939 (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1940).
Case, Anne, Angela Fertig, and Christina Paxson, “From Cradle to Grave? The Lasting Impact of
         Childhood Health and Circumstance,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper
         9788 (June 2003).
Clifford, William B., and Yevonne S. Brannon, “Socioeconomic Differentials in Infant Mortality: An
         Analysis Over Time,” Public Use Data 6 (Jan. 1978), 29-37.
Congressional Quarterly Inc., Guide to U.S. Elections, third edition (Washington, DC: Congressional
         Quarterly Inc., 1995).
Conley, Dalton1 and Kristen Springer, “Welfare State and Infant Mortality.” American Journal of
         Sociology 107 (November 2001): 768-807.
Couch, Jim, and William Shughart, The Political Economy of the New Deal (New York: Edward Elgar,
         1998).
Council of Economic Advisors, Economic Report of the President, January 2001 (Washington, DC:
         Government Printing Office, 2001).
Currie, Janet, and Nancy Cole, “Welfare and Child Health: The Link between AFDC Participation and
         Birth Weight,” American Economic Review 83 (Sept. 1993), 971-85.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber, “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and Child
         Health,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 11 (May 1996a), 431-66.
_____, “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant
         Women,” Journal of Political Economy 104 (Dec. 1996b), 1263-96.
_____, “Public Health Insurance and Medical Treatment: The Equalizing Impact of Medicaid
         Expansions,” Journal of Public Economics 82 (Oct. 2001), 63-89.
Currie, Janet, and Duncan Thomas, “Does Head Start Make a Difference?” American Economic Review
         85 (June 1995a), 341-64.
_____, “Medical Care for Children: Public Insurance, Private Insurance, and Racial Differences in
         Utilization,” Journal of Human Resources 30 (Winter 1995b), 135-62.
Cutler, David M., and Ellen Meara, “Changes in the Age Distribution of Mortality Over the 20th Century,”
         National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8556, October 2001.
Cutler, David, Edward and Karen Norberg. “Explaining the Rise in Youth Suicide.” National Bureau of
         Economics Research Working Paper Number 7713 (2000).
Dehejia, Rajeev and Adraina Lleras Muney. “Booms, Busts, and Babies’ Health.” The Quarterly Journal
         of Economics 119: 1091-1130.
Duncan, Greg J., and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, eds., Consequences of Growing Up Poor (New York: Russell
         Sage Foundation, 1997).
Eckberg, Douglas Lee. “Estimates of Early Twentieth-Century U.S. Homiced Rates: An Econometric
         Forecasting Approach.” Demography 32 (February 1995): 1-16.
Fajnzylber, Pablo, Daniel Lederman, and Norman Loayza. “Inequality and Violent Crime?” Journal of
         Law and Economics 45 (April 2002a): 1-40.
                                                                                                       42


Fajnzylber, Pablo, Daniel Lederman, and Norman Loayza. “What Causes Violent Crime?” European
        Economic Review 46 (2002b): 1323-1357.
Federal Emergency Relief Administration. Unemployment Relief Census, October 1933, Report Number
        One (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1934).
Fishback, Price V., Michael R. Haines, and Shawn Kantor, “The Impact of New Deal Programs on Black
        and White Infant Mortality in the South,” Explorations in Economic History 38 (Jan. 2001), 93-
        122.
Fishback, Price V., William C. Horrace, and Shawn Kantor, “Federal Programs in Times of Crisis: The
        Impact of the New Deal on Local Economies during the Great Depression,” National Bureau of
        Economic Research working paper 8108 (revised June 2003).
Fishback, Price V., Shawn Kantor, and John Joseph Wallis. “Can the New Deal’s Three R’s Be
        Rehabilitated? A Program-by-Program, County-by-County Analysis,” Explorations in Economic
        History 40 (July 2003), 278-307.
Fleck, Robert K., “Electoral Incentives, Public Policy, and the New Deal Realignment,” Southern
        Economic Journal 63 (Jan. 1999a), 377-404.
_____, “Inter-party competition, intra-party competition, and distributive Policy: A Model and Test using
        New Deal Data,” Public Choice 108 (July 2001a), 77-100.
_____, “The Marginal Effect of New Deal Relief Work on County-Level Unemployment Statistics,”
        Journal of Economic History 59 (September 1999b), 659-87.
_____, “Population, Land, Economic Conditions, and the Allocation of New Deal Spending,”Explorations
        in Economic History 38 (April 2001b), 296-304.
_____, “The Value of the Vote: A Model and Test of the Effects of Turnout on Distributive Policy,”
        Economic Inquiry 37 (October 1999c), 609-23.
Gardner, John, and William Cohen, Demographic Characteristics of the Population of the United States,
        1930-1950: County Level, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, file
        number 0020, 1992.
Greene, William H., Econometric Analysis, fifth edition (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003).
Grogger, Jeff and Stephen G. Bronars. “The Effect of Welfare Payments on the Marriage and Fertility
        Behavior of Unwed Mothers: Results from a Twins Experiment.” Journal of Political Economy
        109 (2001): 529-545.
Grossman, Michael, and Steven Jacobowitz, “Variations in Infant Mortality Rates Among Counties of the
        United States: The Roles of Public Policies and Programs,” Demography 18 (Nov. 1981), 695-
        713.
Haines, Michael R., "The Population of the United States, 1790-1920," in Stanley Engerman and Robert
        Gallman, eds., The Cambridge Economic History of the United States, Volume II (New York:
        Cambridge University Press, 2000), chapter 4.
_____, “The Relationship between Infant and Child Mortality and Fertility: Some Historical and
        Contemporary Evidence for the United States,” in Mark R. Montgomery and Barney Cohen, eds.,
        From Death to Birth: Mortality Decline and Reproductive Change (Washington, DC: National
        Academy Press, 1998), 227-53.
Hausman, Jerry A., “Specification and Estimation of Simultaneous Equations Models,” in Zvi Griliches
        and Michael D. Intriligator, eds., Handbook of Econometrics (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1983).
Haveman, Robert H., and Barbara S. Wolfe, Succeeding Generations: On the Effects of Investments in
        Children (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1994).
Howard, Donald S., The WPA and Federal Relief Policy (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1943).
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, Historical, Demographic, Economic, and
        Social Data: The United States, 1790-1970, file number 0003. The version has additions and
        corrections by Michael Haines, Department of Economics, Colgate University, Hamilton, NY.
_____, United States Historical Election Returns, 1824-1968, file number 0001.
                                                                                                      43


Jensen, Robert and Kaspar Richter. “Understanding the Relationship Between Poverty and Children’s
         Health.” European Economic Review 45 (2001): 1031-1039.
Joyce, Theodore, “Impact of Augmented Prenatal Care on Birth Outcomes of Medicaid Recipients in New
         York City,” Journal of Health Economics 18 (Jan. 1999), 31-67.
Kaplan, George, Elsie Pamuk, John Lynch, Richard Cohen, and Jennifer Balfour. “Inequality in Income
         and Mortality in the United States: Analysis of Mortality and Potential Pathways.” British
         Medical Journal 312 (April 1996): 999-1003.
Kennedy, Bruce P., Ichiro Kawachi, and Deborah Prothrow-Stith. “Income Distribution and Mortality:
         Cross Sectional Ecological Study of the Robin Hood Index in the United States.” British Medical
         Journal 312 (April 1996): 1004-1007.
Kousser, J. Morgan, The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the Establishment of the
         One-Party South, 1880-1910 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1974).
Levitt, Steven D., “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police on Crime,”
         American Economic Review 87 (June 1997), 270-90.
Lijphart, Arend, “Unequal Participation: Democracy’s Unresolved Dilemma,” American Political Science
         Review 91 (March 1997), pp. 1-14.
McCann, Carole R. Birth Control Politics in the United States, 1916-1945. Ithaca, New York: Cornell
         University Press, 1994.
McKeown, Thomas. The Rise of Population. London : Edward Arnold, 1976.
Meller, Jennifer. “The Effect of Family Planning Programs on the Fertility of Welfare Recipients:
Evidence from Medicaid Claims.” Journal of Human Resources 33 (Autumn 1998): 866-896.
Moffitt, Robert A., and Michele Ver Ploeg, Evaluating Welfare Reform in an Era of Transition
(Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2001)
Moore, Michael J., and W. Kip Viscusi, Compensation Mechanisms for Job Risk: Wages, Workers’
         Compensation and Product Liability (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990).
Morris, Morris David, Measuring the Condition of the World'    s Poor: The Physical Quality of Life Index
         (New York: Pergamon Press, 1979).
New York Secretary of State, Manual, various years, 1925-1940.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), Society at a Glance: OECD Social
         Indicators (Washington, DC: OECD, 2001).
Paxson, Christina, and Jane Waldfogel, “Parental Resources and Child Abuse and Neglect,” American
         Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 89 (May 1999), 239-44.
Potter, Lloyd B. “Socioeconomic Determinants of White and Black Males’ Life Expectancy Differentials,
         1980.” Demography 28 (May 1991): 303-321.
Preston, Samuel H., Mortality Patterns in National Populations with Special Reference to Recorded Causes
         of Death (New York: Academic Press, 1976).
Preston, Samuel; Nathan Keyfitz, and Robert Schoen. Causes of Death: Life Tables for National
         Population. New York: Seminar Press, 1972.
Ridley, Clarence E., and Orin F. Nolting, The Municipal Year Book, 1934 (Chicago: International City
         Managers’ Association, 1934).
Rogers, Richard, Rebecca Rosenblatt, Robert Hummer, and Patrick Krueger. “Black-White Differentials in
         Adult Homicide Mortality in the United States.” Social Science Quarterly 82 (September 2001):
         435-452.
Ruhm, Christopher. “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (May
         2000): 617-650.
Schultz, T. Paul. “Marital Status and Fertility in the United States.” Journal of Human Resources 29
         (Spring 1994): 637-669.
Skocpol, Theda, Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: The Political Origins of Social Policy in the United
         States (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press 1992).
Troesken, Werner, Water, Race, and Disease. Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press, 2004.
                                                                                                         44


U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Statistics for the Birth Registration Area of the United States, 1921,
       Seventh Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1923).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
       of the United States, 1922, Eighth Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office,
       1924).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
       of the United States, 1923, Ninth Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office,
       1925).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
       of the United States, 1924, Tenth Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office,
       1926).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
       of the United States, 1925, Eleventh Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing
       Office, 1927).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
       of the United States, 1926, Twelfth Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing
       Office, 1929).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
       of the United States, 1927, Thirteenth Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing
       Office, 1930a).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
       of the United States, 1928, Fourteenth Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing
       Office, 1930b).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
       of the United States, 1929, Fifteenth Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing
       Office, 1932).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
       of the United States, 1930, Sixteenth Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing
       Office, 1934a).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
       of the United States, 1931, Seventeenth Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing
       Office, 1934b).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
       of the United States, 1932, Eighteenth Annual Report (Washington, DC: Government Printing
       Office, 1934c).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Continental United
       States, The Territory of Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands, 1933, Nineteenth Annual Report
       (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1936a).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Continental United
       States, The Territory of Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands, 1934, Twentieth Annual Report
       (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1936b).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Continental United
       States, The Territory of Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands, 1935, Twenty-First Annual Report
       (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1937).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Continental United
       States, The Territory of Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands, 1936, Twenty-Second Annual Report
       (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1938).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Continental United
       States, The Territory of Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands, 1937, Twenty-Third Annual Report
       (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1939).
                                                                                                      45


U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Continental United
         States, The Territory of Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands, 1938, Twenty-Fourth Annual Report
        (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1940).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Continental United
         States, The Territory of Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands, 1939, Twenty-Fifth Annual Report
        (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1941).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Birth Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Continental United
         States, The Territory of Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands, 1940, Twenty-Sixth Annual Report
        (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1942).
U.S. Bureau of Census, Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970 (Washington,
        DC: Government Printing Office , 1975).
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1929, Thirtieth Annual
        Report, (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1932).
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1930, Thirty-First Annual
        Report, (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1934).
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1931, Thirty-Second
        Annual Report, (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1935a).
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1932, Thirty-Third
        Annual Report, (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1935b).
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1933, Thirty-Fourth
        Annual Report, (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1936a).
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1934, Thirty-Fifth Annual
        Report, (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1936b).
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1935, Thirty-Sixth Annual
        Report, (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1937).
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1936, Thirty-Seventh
        Annual Report, (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1938).
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Vital Statistics of the United States, 1937, Part
         1. (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1939).
U. S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, State Personal Income: 1929-1987 (Washington, DC: Government
        Printing Office, 1989).
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Public Provision for Pensions for the Blind in 1934,” Monthly Labor
         Review 41 (Sept. 1935), 584-601.
U.S. Committee on Economic Security, Social Security in America: The Factual Background of the Social
         Security Act as Summarized from Staff Reports to the Committee on Economic Security
         (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1937).
U.S. Congress, Official Congressional Directory, 73rd Congress 1st session through 76th Congress
        (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, various years).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, Consumer Market Data
         Handbook, 1936 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1936)
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, Consumer Market Data
         Handbook, 1939. (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1939).
U.S. National Resources Planning Board, Security, Work, and Relief Policies (Washington, DC:
         Government Printing Office, 1942).
Waldmann, Robert J., “Income Distribution and Infant Mortality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107
         (Nov. 1992), 1284-302.
Wallis, John Joseph. “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending Revisited, Again: With and Without
        Nevada,” Explorations in Economic History 35 (April 1998), 140-70.
_____, “The political economy of New Deal spending, yet again: A reply,” Explorations in Economic
         History 38 (April 2001), 305-14.
                                                                                                    46


Winslow, Emma A., Trends in Different Types of Public and Private Relief in Urban Areas, 1929-35, U.S.
        Department of Labor, Children’s Bureau Publication No. 237 (Washington, DC: Government
        Printing Office, 1937).
World Almanac and Book of Facts (New York: New York World and New York World-Telegram,
        various years).
Wright, Gavin, “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending: An Econometric Analysis,” Review of
        Economics and Statistics 56 (Feb. 1974), 30-38.
                                                                                                            47


                                               Table 1
Trends in Vital Statistics and Relief Spending in Major Cities, 1930 to 1940

Year     Infant        Non-     General         Per         Average          Federal
        mortality     infant    fertility     capita      annual relief      share of
          rate        death       rate         relief     benefits as a       relief
                       rate                 spending     percentage of      spending
                                             (1967 $)        annual
                                                         manufacturing
                                                            earnings
1930          59.6       11.4        69.3       $3.74
1931          58.7       11.3        64.3        9.06
1932          53.1       11.1        61.1       18.06                            2.1%
1933          52.2       11.0        56.7       29.71              21.7%          51.8
1934          52.9       11.2        57.4       47.93                31.2         78.9
1935          49.8       11.2        57.3       51.03                33.3         78.9
1936          49.6       11.7        56.8       61.78                42.4         74.7
1937          46.5       11.6        58.6       52.24                37.6         72.1
1938          42.3       10.9        60.5       69.61                39.3         62.0
1939          40.6       11.0        59.7       63.32                38.3         62.5
1940          39.2       11.2        62.8       52.93                34.9         57.4

Notes: The demographic variables are weighted by the populations of the counties in which the 114
sample cities are located. For 1930 to 1932, the averages do not include information for the Texas cities in
the sample because such data were not available. The infant mortality rate is the number of deaths of
children under age one per thousand live births in each year. The general fertility rate is the number of
births in each year per thousand women aged 15 to 44. The number of women aged 15 to 44 for the years
1931 through 1939 were determined by straight-line interpolations between the decennial censuses. The
non-infant death rate is the number of deaths of people aged 1 year and older each year per 1,000
population. The populations for 1931 through 1939 were determined by straight-line interpolations
between 1930 and 1940.
         The relief per capita measure is the total of all direct relief, work relief and private relief funds.
Direct relief includes direct relief under the FERA, by state and local governments, and categorical
assistance for dependent children, old-age assistance, and aid to the blind. Prior to 1935 the categorical
assistance categories refer to funds provided by state and local governments through mothers’ pensions,
old-age pensions, and state aid to the blind. Work relief includes payments to workers on state and local
government, FERA, CWA, and WPA projects. Private relief is the value of relief funds from private and
public sources administered by private agencies.
         Average annual relief benefits were calculated as the ratio of total relief expenditures per number
of households on relief. The data source reported the information monthly and we summed across months
for the annual estimate. The 1940 data were only reported through June, so we doubled the amount
reported to derive the annual estimate.
         We do not have information on the federal share of relief prior to 1932, but it was probably similar
to 1932’s value. The federal share of relief information includes the cost of administering the programs.
The 1932 federal figure includes $3.7 million in federal workers’ compensation payments. The state and
local expenditures include workers’ compensation, general relief, old-age assistance, aid to dependent
children, aid to the blind, and state shares of unemployment compensation, WPA, CWA, and the National
Youth Administration.
                                                                                                        48



Sources: For per capita relief and the demographic rates, see the Data Appendix. For federal share of
relief spending, see U.S. National Resources Planning Board (1942, 292, 598-603). Average relief
expenditures per household were calculated from data on households receiving relief and total
expenditures on relief in U.S. National Resources Planning Board (1942, 557-61). Average annual
manufacturing earnings are from U.S. Bureau of the Census Bureau (1975, 166).
                                                                                                            49


Table 2

Impact of Relief Spending Per Capita on Infant Mortality Rate, 1929-1940


 Specification                                               Relief      t-stat.    OSD1
                                                             Coeff.                 Effect
 Specifications without Non-infant Death Rate
 and General Fertility Rate
 OLS with no correlates and no fixed effects                 -0.3208     -23.91      -0.526
 OLS with correlates without fixed effects                   -0.2698     -19.87      -0.442

 OLS with correlates and fixed effects
  Full Sample                                                -0.0319       -1.78     -0.052
  Subsample for comparison with 1921-28                      -0.0368       -2.05     -0.060
 trend
  Subsample with 1921-28 trend included                      -0.0358       -2.01     -0.059

 2SLS with correlates and fixed effects
  Full Sample                                                -0.1628       -1.82     -0.267
  Subsample for comparison with 1921-28                      -0.1141       -1.44     -0.187
 trend
  Subsample with 1921-28 trend included                      -0.1146       -1.45     -0.188

 Specifications Including Non-infant Death Rate
 and General Fertility Rates
 OLS with no correlates and no fixed effect                  -0.2827     -24.26      -0.463
 OLS with correlates without fixed effects                   -0.2481     -20.18      -0.406

 OLS with correlates and fixed effects
  Full Sample                                                -0.0348       -2.18     -0.057
  Subsample for comparison with 1921-28                      -0.0438       -2.74     -0.072
 trend
  Subsample with 1921-28 trend included                      -0.0418       -2.64     -0.069

 2SLS with correlates and fixed effects
  Full Sample                                                -0.1699       -2.12     -0.278
  Subsample for comparison with 1921-28                      -0.1299       -1.82     -0.213
 trend
  Subsample with 1921-28 trend included                      -0.1297       -1.82     -0.213

Notes. The correlates are listed in Table 3. The t-statistics are based on robust White-corrrected standard
errors. In all 2SLS specifications, the identifying instruments in the first stage have coefficients that are
statistically significant at the 10 percent level individually. The t-statistics on the swing measure range
                                                                                                         50


from 3.30 to 5.20, on the house labor committee measures from 1.80 to 2.05, and on the Democratic
governor measure from 4.97 to 5.63. The F-statistics for the identifying instruments as a group are all 16.8
or higher. The results of Hausman over-identification tests in all cases are consistent with the hypothesis
that the identifying instruments have not been inappropriately omitted from the final stage equation.
1
 The OSD effect is the number of standard deviations by which the infant mortality rate is changed with a
one-standard-deviation increase in relief spending per capita.
                                                                                                           51


Table 3
Estimation Results, 1929-1940: OLS, OLS with City and Year Fixed Effects, 2SLS with City and
Year Fixed Effects

                                                                         2SLS with Fixed Effects
                                              OLS with Fixed       Infant Mortality
                               OLS                Effects                Rate        Relief per Capita
                          Coeff. t-stat.      Coeff. t-stat.        Coeff. t-stat.    Coeff.     t-stat.
Relief per capita          -0.270 -19.87       -0.034     -1.93        -0.163 -1.82 dependent
Instruments
Swing                                                                                         1.261   3.34
House Labor                                                                                   2.560   2.05
Governor Democrat                                                                             4.893   5.63
Correlates
Retail sales per capita      -3.990   -2.02       1.696     0.52        -0.242   -0.06      -15.218 -3.05
% black                       0.017    0.19      -0.534    -0.65        -0.356   -0.44        0.706 0.70
% illiterate                  3.069    7.75       0.880     1.03         1.634    1.71        5.125 4.68
% urban                       0.083    2.78      -0.144    -1.10        -0.091   -0.65        0.705 3.10
% foreign born               -0.682   -8.12      -0.499    -0.95        -0.828   -1.47       -2.600 -6.24
Percent of women 15-44
aged 15-19                   -0.133   -0.28       0.853     0.79         1.998    1.49         9.874 6.59
aged 20-24                    2.256    3.58       1.861     1.75         1.818    1.70        -0.515 -0.32
aged 25-29                   -2.432   -3.01      -3.178    -2.56        -2.144   -1.53         8.524 5.26
aged 30-34                    1.103    1.06       2.441     1.44         2.781    1.60         3.634 1.45
Constant                    41.836     1.60     43.948      0.77         2.319    0.04      -395.603 -4.79
City effects                                 included              included              included
Year effects                                 included              included              included
N. obs.                        1349                1349                   1349                  1349
R-squared                     0.587               0.862                  0.856                 0.878
The t-statistics are based on White-corrected robust standard errors.
                                                                                                             52


Table 4

Impact of Relief Spending per Capita on General Fertility Rates and Non-infant Death Rate, 1929-
1940 and Rates for Specific Causes of Death, 1929-1937.

          Rate                                   OLS            OLS with           OLS with    2SLS with
                                                                Correlates         Correlates Fixed Effects
                                                                                   and Fixed
                                                                                    Effects
Noninfant Death       OSD Effect                     -0.116             -0.087          -0.026         -0.099
Rate                  t-statistic                    (-4.36)            (-3.11)         (-1.42)        (-0.99)
Noninfant Death       OSD Effect                      0.178             -0.019          -0.001         -0.271
Rate controlling      t-statistic                     (6.59)            (-0.79)           (-0.1)       (-1.47)
for GFR and IMR
Homicides          OSD Effect                        -0.317             -0.119          -0.032)        -0.211
                   t-statistic                     (-13.73)             (-5.25)          (-1.42)       (-1.58)
Suicides           OSD Effect                        -0.148             -0.323           -0.123        -0.853
                   t-statistic                         (-4.9)           (-8.55)          (-2.14)       (-2.51)
Respiratory        OSD Effect                        -0.273             -0.057            0.010         0.154
Tuberculosis       t-statistic                       (-9.55)            (-1.75)           (0.41)        (1.01)
Infectious and     OSD Effect                        -0.339             -0.037            0.117        -0.576
Parasitic Diseases t-statistic                     (-13.67)               (-1.3)          (2.21)       (-2.24)
Neoplasms          OSD Effect                         0.369              0.113            0.051         0.265
                   t-statistic                        (13.2)               (3.4)          (1.51)        (1.47)
Cardiovascular     OSD Effect                         0.364              0.069            0.018            n.a.
Disease            t-statistic                      (12.42)              (2.47)           (0.73)
Influenza,         OSD Effect                        -0.260             -0.072           -0.134         0.321
Bronchitis, and    t-statistic                       (-8.62)            (-2.08)          (-3.06)        (1.26)
Pneumonia
Diarrheal          OSD Effect                        -0.317             -0.067          -0.085         -0.383
                   t-statistic                     (-12.66)             (-2.48)           (-2.6)       (-1.91)
Degenerative       OSD Effect                        -0.079             -0.137          -0.075          0.216
                   t-statistic                       (-2.69)              (-3.9)        (-2.07)         (1.15)
Maternal Mortality OSD Effect                        -0.350             -0.051          -0.010         -0.058
                   t-statistic                     (-12.85)             (-1.49)         (-0.19)        (-0.17)
Motor Vehicles     OSD Effect                        -0.151             -0.042          -0.214          0.191
                   t-statistic                         (-5.2)           (-1.15)         (-3.62)         (0.61)
General Fertility OSD Effect                         -0.169             -0.307           0.026          0.820
Rate               t-statistic                       (-5.51)            (-9.82)          (0.98)         (2.59)
General Fertility OSD Effect                         -0.018             -0.243           0.019          0.877
Rate controlling   t-statistic                      (-0.52)            (-8.02)          (0.72)          (2.78)
for NDR and IMR

Notes. The t-statistics are based on White-corrected robust standard errors. Correlates included in the
death rate analyses are retail sales per capita, percent black, percent illiterate, percent urban, percent
                                                                                                              53


foreign-born, percentages of population in the age groupings 10-19, 20-29, 30-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, 65-
74, 75 and over. The identifying instruments are the swing measure, democratic governor, and house labor
committee.
          In the non-infant death rate analysis there are 1349 observations covering the period 1929-1940.
The F-statistic on the instruments in the first stage for the noninfant death rate is 12.73 and the Hausman
Chi-square test suggests that the instruments have not been inappropriately omitted. In the subsample with
controls for the 1921-1928 trend, the results are similar between the estimates with and without the
controls for trends. In some specifications the t-statistic for the swing measure was statistically
insignificant in the first stage. When we remove it from the instrument list, the results are very similar to
what is reported here and the F-statistic on the instruments in the first stage rises to 19.03. In the analysis
of the non-infant death rate including controls for the general fertility rate and the infant mortality rate, the
instruments were the swing and house labor committee measures and the F-statistic on the instruments in
the first-stage was 5.66.
          In the specific cause of death regressions the sample there are 1027 observations for the period
1929-1937 for all but the maternal mortality, for which there were 1007. The difference arises because in
the sources the Texas cities reported causes of death but not births, which are the denominator in the
maternal mortality rates. The instruments in the first stage were the swing measure, House labor
committee, and democratic governor and the F-statistic for the grouping in the first stage was 8.03. For all
causes except the cardiovascular diseases, the Hausman Chi-square tests suggests that the instruments have
not been inappropriately omitted. In some specifications the t-statistic for the swing measure was
statistically insignificant in the first stage. When we remove it from the instrument list, the results are very
similar to what is reported here and the F-statistic on the instruments in the first stage rises to 12.
However, we start to have problems with some causes where the instruments appear to be inappropriately
omitted. This occurs for suicides, respiratory tuberculosis, and cardiovascular deaths. The death rates for
the death causes are scaled per 100,000 people, while the maternal mortality rate is scaled per 1000 live
births.
          In the general fertility analysis there are 1349 observations. Correlates included in the general
fertility rate analyses are the same as in the infant mortality analysis in Table 3. The identifying
instruments are the swing measure and the house labor committee. The F-statistics for the two identifiers
are 11.58 and 11.41, and Hausman overidentification tests suggest that they have not been inappropriately
excluded from the final stage equation. We excluded the Democratic governor variable because whenever
it was included we rejected the hypothesis that the identifiers were not inappropriately excluded.
                                                                                                        54


Table 5
OSD Effects of Retail Sales per Capita on Demographic Variables


                                                                 2SLS with Fixed
                                    OLS Fixed Effects                 Effects
                                    OSD                           OSD
                                    Effect   t-stat.*            Effect    t-stat.*
Infant Mortality                       0.022      0.520            -0.003      -0.06
Noninfant Deaths                       0.068      1.910             0.061       1.66
Homicides                              0.171      3.960             0.154       3.52
Suicides                              -0.168     -1.980            -0.235      -2.55
Respiratory Tuberculosis               0.063      1.570             0.076       1.74
Infectious and Parasitic
Diseases                                0.216         2.740          0.152       1.77
Neoplasms                               0.102         1.510          0.122       2.02
Cardiovascular Disease                  0.004         0.110          0.042        0.9
Influenza, Bronchitis, and
Pneumonia                              -0.128        -1.970         -0.087       -1.23
Diarrheal                               0.010         0.210         -0.017       -0.32
Degenerative                            0.133         2.690          0.160           3
Maternal Mortality                      0.150         1.620          0.145         1.5
Motor Vehicles                          0.252         3.030          0.289        3.18
General Fertility Rate                  0.357         6.970          0.410        6.63

Notes. The OSD effect is the number of standard deviations by which the infant mortality rate is changed
when retail sales per capita rose by one standard deviation. The t-statistics are based on White-corrected
robust standard errors. The OSD estimates are based on coefficients of retail sales per capita for each
demographic variable in the estimations with all correlates and fixed effects from the equations
that produced the relief spending effects. 2SLS refers to the use of instruments for the relief per
capita variable. The t-statistics are for the original coefficients.
                                                                                                          55



                                                 Table 6
                          Relief Cost per Death Prevented in Year 2000 Dollars


                                   Estimate Based on Coefficient from
                                              Specification
                                    OLS with
                                  Correlates and       2SLS with Fixed
                                  Fixed Effects             Effects
 Infant Mortality                  $8,614,412             $1,947,976
 Non-infant Death                  $2,482,176              $659,819
 Homicide                          $29,714,799            $4,547,812
 Suicide                           $13,389,218            $1,935,784
 Death from Infectious and
 Parasitic Disease                      n.a.                $840,014
 Deaths from Diarrhea               $7,944,865             $1,760,966

Notes. Values for all but the 2SLS estimate for Non-infant deaths are statistically significant at the 20
percent level in two-tailed tests. See Tables 2 and 4 for the t-statistics for the coefficients on which the
estimates are based. The estimates are based on coefficients from specifications that include correlates and
fixed effects. See text and footnotes for methods of calculation. The relief costs are insensitive to changes
in the population size. The relief costs for infant deaths are sensitive to changes in the ratio of women
aged 15 to 44 to the population and the general fertility rate. The coefficients were estimated with
monetary values based on the CPI with 1967 as the base year. Dollar values were converted to 2000
values by multiplying by 5.213. The 2000 values can be converted to 1935 values by dividing by 12.68.
                                                                                                                                         56



                                                                   Figure 1
                           Infant Mortality and General Fertility Rates, 1915-1940 and Trend Based on 1915-1917,
                                                                  1919-1929

                140.0



                120.0
                                                         General Fertility Rate


                100.0
                                                                                         General Fertility Rate Trend
Rate per 1000




                                                                                                                                 IMR
                                                                                                                                 GFR
                 80.0
                                                                                                                                 IMR Trend
                                                                                                                                 GFR Trend
                                 Infant Mortality Rate
                 60.0



                 40.0
                                                                                            Infant Mortality Rate Trend


                 20.0
                    1915                  1920                1925                1930                1935                1940
                                                                          Year
                                                                                                                      57



                                                                 Figure 2
                                  Non-Infant Death Rate 1915-1940 and Trend based on 1915-1917, 1919-1929

                        16.0


                        15.0

                                               Non-Infant Death Rate
                        14.0
Rate per 1,000 People




                        13.0


                                                                                                             DRAT
                        12.0
                                                                                                             DRAT Trend

                        11.0


                        10.0

                                                                                  Trend
                         9.0


                         8.0
                           1915        1920              1925             1930            1935        1940
                                                                   Year
                                                                                                                                                   58




                                                                                             Figure 3
                                                                                Plot of Differences in Differences
                                                                         Between 1930-32 and 1933-1940 for Sample Cities

                                                          10
Change in Annual Average Infant Mortality Rate, 1930-32




                                                           5


                                                           0
                                                                0   10      20            30             40             50              60   70   80
                                                           -5


                                                          -10
                     to 1933-40




                                                          -15


                                                          -20


                                                          -25


                                                          -30


                                                          -35
                                                                            Change in Annual Average Relief per Capita, 1930-32 to 1933-40
