                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     CORPORATE TAX AVOIDANCE AND FIRM VALUE

                                          Mihir A. Desai
                                       Dhammika Dharmapala

                                        Working Paper 11241
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11241


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2005




We would like to thank Alan Auerbach, Amy Dunbar, Sanjay Gupta, Mark Lang, Lillian Mills, John Phillips,
Joel Slemrod and John Wald for helpful discussions and comments. Desai acknowledges the financial
support of the Division of Research of Harvard Business School and Dharmapala acknowledges the financial
support of the University of Connecticut Research Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Mihir A Desai and Dhammika Dharmapala. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Tax Avoidance and Firm Values
Mihir A Desai and Dhammika Dharmapala
NBER Working Paper No. 11241
March 2005
JEL No. G32, H25, H26, K34

                                            ABSTRACT

How do investors value managerial actions designed solely to minimize corporate tax obligations?
Using a framework in which managers' tax sheltering decisions are related to their ability to divert
value, this paper predicts that the effect of tax avoidance on firm value should vary systematically
with the strength of firm governance institutions. The empirical results indicate that the average
effect of tax avoidance on firm value is not significantly different from zero; however, the effect is
positive for well-governed firms as predicted. Coefficient estimates are consistent with an expected
life of five years for the devices that generate these tax savings for well-governed firms. Alternative
explanations for the dependence of the valuation of the tax avoidance measure on firm governance
do not appear to be consistent with the empirical results. The findings indicate that the simple view
of corporate tax avoidance as a transfer of resources from the state to shareholders is incomplete,
given the agency problems characterizing shareholder-manager relations.

Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu

Dhammika Dharmapala
University of Connecticut
dhammika.dhamapala@uconn.edu
1.      Introduction

        While tax consequences are a motivating factor in many corporate decisions, managerial
actions designed solely to minimize corporate tax obligations are thought to be an increasingly
important feature of U.S. corporate activity.1 How do investors value such corporate tax
avoidance actions? The answer to this question is trivial if avoidance activities are costless to
investors. Traditionally, corporate tax avoidance has been viewed merely as a transfer of value
from the state to shareholders.

        In fact, corporate tax avoidance activity is costly on several margins. Aside from the
direct costs of engaging in such activities, managers typically have to ensure that these actions
are obscured from tax authorities. In the process, such machinations may afford managers
increased latitude to pursue self-serving objectives, and lead investors to doubt their value. Can
the latter effect be significant enough to change the simple answer that investors fully capture the
value of corporate tax avoidance activity?

        Two smaller sample studies indicate that the valuation of tax avoidance activities may not
conform to this simple story. First, corporate expatriations - transactions where U.S. firms invert
their corporate structure so that a subsidiary in a tax haven becomes the parent entity - provide
significant corporate tax savings with limited, if any, operational changes. While such
transactions should be viewed as value-enhancing, markets do not react in a strongly positive
fashion – and often react negatively – to U.S. firms announcing such moves. Second, an event
study of an episode of increased tax enforcement in Russia indicates that these enforcement
actions are associated with positive market reactions.2 Such evidence contradicts the simple view
of corporate tax avoidance as a transfer from the state to shareholders.

        The apparent proliferation of corporate tax avoidance activity more generally in the U.S.
suggests that a broader investigation of the value consequences of corporate tax avoidance is
warranted. The extensive literature on the effects of taxes on financing and investment decisions
(as surveyed in Auerbach (2002) and Graham (2003)) does not typically incorporate how agency
problems may complicate the valuation of, and response to, tax avoidance opportunities. Much


1
 See, for example, US Department of the Treasury (1999), Bankman (2004) and Slemrod (2004).
2
 See Desai and Hines (2002) and Cloyd, Mills and Weaver (2004) for evidence on expatriations and Desai, Dyck
and Zingales (2004) for evidence on market reactions to the Putin tax enforcement actions.


                                                      1
of the work on corporate tax avoidance emphasizes the legal distinctions and accounting
consequences of tax avoidance, without considering the basic finance question of how investors
value these actions.3

        This paper provides a conceptual framework for analyzing the conditions under which
corporate tax avoidance activity should be valued fully by the market and investigates the degree
to which such activity is valued by investors in a large sample of U.S. firms. A model that
incorporates a link between the technologies of managerial diversion and corporate tax
avoidance demonstrates that firm governance should be an important determinant of the
valuation of purported corporate tax savings. While the direct effect of tax avoidance is to
increase the after-tax value of the firm (regardless of its governance structure), these effects are
potentially offset in poorly-governed firms by the increased opportunities for rent diversion. In
contrast, managers of well-governed firms face more limited opportunities to engage in rent
diversion, so this offsetting indirect effect should be less pronounced among such firms. Thus,
the net effect on firm value should be greater for firms with stronger governance institutions.

        This hypothesis is tested using data from Standard and Poor’s Compustat and Execucomp
databases, merged with the index of governance institutions developed by Gompers, Ishii and
Metrick (2003). The sample consists of a large panel of firms over the 1993-2001 period. Firm
value is measured using Tobin’s q. Tax avoidance is measured by analyzing the difference
between income reported to capital markets and tax authorities – the book-tax gap – and
stripping accruals and other measures of earnings management from this gap. Firms’ taxable
incomes and book-tax gaps are inferred using the methodology of Manzon and Plesko (2002). In
addition, controls for changes in the structure of executive compensation, firm size, and the
volatility of the firm’s share price are employed.

        For the full sample, relying only on within-firm variation over time, the overall effect of
the tax avoidance measure on q is not significantly different from zero. This suggests that
corporate tax avoidance does not raise firm value on average. Consistent with the paper’s
hypothesis, the effect is significantly positive only for the subsample of well-governed firms and

3
 There is an extensive literature on tax avoidance and evasion by individuals (as surveyed in Slemrod and Yitzhaki
(2002)). In contrast, despite the differences between the individual and corporate contexts stressed by Slemrod
(2004), there has been relatively little theoretical modeling of tax compliance decisions by corporations, although
some recent papers (Chen and Chu, 2005; Crocker and Slemrod, 2005) analyze the nature of the optimal incentive
contract when managers can engage in tax evasion on behalf of the firm.


                                                         2
has no significant effect for less well-governed firms. These results are robust to the inclusion of
a variety of additional control variables, to the use of several alternative versions of the accruals
proxy for earnings management, and to a variety of extensions to the model, including the use of
a lag specification. The magnitude of the effect for the well-governed subsample suggests a
market expectation of a life of five to six years for a typical tax shelter which is consistent with
other emerging evidence on the use of corporate tax shelters.

        Two primary alternative explanations exist for the result that the valuation of tax
avoidance depends on the governance characteristics of firms. First, tax avoidance is difficult to
measure and the proxy employed may be mismeasured and may actually capture earnings
management. In short, removing various measures of accruals from the book-tax gap may not
sufficiently isolate tax avoidance from earnings management. If this is the case, then the results
presented could be interpreted as indicating that poorly-governed firms are penalized more
severely for earnings management. Second, rather than illustrating the links between tax
avoidance and suspicion of managerial diversion, the link between valuation of tax avoidance
and governance might indicate that poorly-governed firms are investing in riskier tax avoidance
technologies which are discounted more heavily. As discussed below, neither of these
alternative explanations appears to be consistent with the patterns of coefficients generated in the
empirical analysis.

        This evidence is consistent with agency costs mitigating the benefits to shareholders of
corporate tax avoidance. More broadly, this paper contributes to an emerging paradigm that
emphasizes the links between firms’ governance institutions and their responses to taxes. For
example, Chetty and Saez (2004) and Brown, Liang and Weisbenner (2004) both note that
managerial compensation patterns were an important determinant of firm responses to the 2003
dividend tax cut.4 Similarly, Perez-Gonzalez (2003) finds that payout policy is significantly
influenced by the tax characteristics of large individual shareholders. Morck (2004) points to a
very direct link between taxation and governance by highlighting the role of the double taxation
of intercorporate dividends in discouraging the formation of business groups through pyramidal


4
 Chetty and Saez (2004) show that increases in dividend payments in response to the tax cut were most pronounced
among firms with high levels of managerial ownership, as well as those with high levels of institutional ownership.
Managers with large stock option holding, however, were less likely to respond to the tax change (Brown, Liang and
Weisbenner (2004)).


                                                        3
ownership structures. Each of these papers indicates that tax incentives interact with ownership
and governance institutions in important ways.

        This paper is most closely related to recent examinations of these interactions that
emphasize how agency problems complicate the analysis of tax incentives. Desai, Dyck and
Zingales (2004) develop a model in which corporate tax sheltering activity and the diversion of
rents by managers are interrelated. Strong complementarities (or positive feedback effects) may
exist between the two activities because concealing income from the tax authorities through
complex transactions reduces the ability of shareholders to monitor manager behavior thereby
making diversion less costly for managers. Such relationships appear to be operative based on
evidence from Russia and cross-country differences in the way in which corporate tax revenues
respond to corporate tax rate changes. Desai and Dharmapala (2005) investigate the relevance of
these ideas in the U.S. setting by developing a conceptual framework for understanding how
changes in incentive compensation can change corporate tax avoidance activity. Desai and
Dharmapala (2005) find that the increased use of incentive compensation reduces tax sheltering
activity, consistent with the existence of strong complementarities. A conceptual framework
related to that in Desai and Dharmapala (2005) is employed in this paper. However, their focus is
on the determinants of corporate tax avoidance, while this paper analyzes the consequences of
this activity for firm value.

        Finally, by emphasizing the value implications of corporate tax avoidance, this paper
builds on the extensive literature in corporate finance on the determinants of firm value. Within
this literature, it has become standard since Demsetz and Lehn (1985) to use Tobin’s q to
measure firm value. A variety of firm characteristics have been analyzed as explanatory
variables, most notably the structure of ownership (Morck, Shleifer and Vishny, 1988), the
nature of executive compensation (Mehran, 1995), and the institutional framework of
governance (Gompers, Ishii and Metrick, 2003). This paper contributes to this literature by
investigating the role of firm tax avoidance strategies, as mediated by governance arrangements,
in determining firm value.

        In its emphasis on the valuation consequences of tax avoidance, this paper is related to
the large literature that examines how the tax treatment of transactions – for example, borrowing,
dividends, spinoffs or mergers – is valued by the market but differs by emphasizing transactions



                                                 4
that only have tax avoidance as their goal.5 There has been limited work on the empirical
determinants and consequences of such activities in the U.S. One notable exception is Graham
and Tucker (2005) who construct a sample of firms involved in 44 corporate tax shelter cases
over the period 1975-2000. By comparing these firms with a matched sample of firms not
involved in such litigation, they identify characteristics (such as size and profitability) that are
positively associated with the use of tax shelters, and argue that tax shelters serve as a substitute
for interest deductions in determining capital structure. In addition, their data on the average life
of corporate tax shelters is consistent with the results of this paper.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the hypothesis. Section 3
describes the data, methodology and empirical specification. Section 4 presents the basic results
and a series of extensions and robustness checks. Section 5 considers alternative interpretations,
and concludes.

2.      Hypothesis Development

        Desai and Dharmapala (2005) develop a conceptual framework for understanding
managerial decisions regarding tax avoidance activities. In particular, this choice is embedded
within a context in which managers also have the opportunity to divert rents from shareholders,
as in the literature on private benefits of control (e.g. Zingales, 1995). The hypothesis tested in
this paper is derived from this framework.

        Suppose that a firm generates a stream of (potential) income flows Yt (where t = 1, 2, ...).
In each period t, the manager chooses the level of income reported to shareholders (denoted YtS)
and the income reported to the tax authorities (denoted YtT), to maximize a weighted sum of the
after-tax value of the firm and her utility from rents. These choices define a level of diversion (Yt
– YtS) (the rents consumed by the manager), and a level of tax sheltering (Yt – YtT) in period t. Let
τt denote the corporate tax rate in period t, and assume that there are no other taxes. Then, the
after-tax present value of the firm (denoted V) is simply:
                                               ∞
                                         V = ∑ δ t −1 (Yt S − τ tYtT )                                 (1)
                                               t =1




5
 See Fama and French (1998), D’Souza and Jacob (2000), Gentry, Kemsley and Mayer (2003), Ayers, Lefanowicz
and Robinson (2003), and the references therein, as examples.


                                                      5
where δ is the discount factor. Obviously, increases in tax sheltering (i.e. decreases in YtT) will
always raise V, holding everything else constant. This is consistent with the view of tax
avoidance as a simple transfer from the state to shareholders (even though there are some agency
costs in this setup).

         However, the costs to the manager of engaging in diversion and sheltering may be
interdependent. These interactions can be represented by a loss function L(Yt – YtS, Yt – YtT) that
depends on the levels of both activities, so that the marginal cost to the manager of engaging in
one activity in a given period t may depend on the level of the other activity in that period. For
instance, when the manager is subject to a time or effort constraint, it might be expected that the
two activities may be substitutes – engaging in a higher level of sheltering will raise the marginal
costs of diversion, and so reduce the equilibrium level of the latter. In these circumstances, the
positive effect of an exogenous increase in tax sheltering on V will be reinforced by an increase
in the manager’s optimal YtS.

         On the other hand, it is also possible that there may exist positive feedback effects (or
“complementarities”) between the two activities. For instance, it may be the case that tax
sheltering involves complex transactions or the routing of income through offshore tax havens,
and that these features make it more difficult for shareholders to monitor managerial diversion
(and hence lowers the marginal cost of diversion from the manager’s point of view). Then, an
exogenous increase in tax sheltering would raise V, but would also induce a higher level of
diversion (i.e. lower YtS), so that the overall effect on V would be ambiguous.

         Of course, it is difficult to determine a priori whether sheltering and diversion are likely
to have positive or negative feedback effects. Desai and Dharmapala (2005) find that changes in
the structure of executive compensation that increase the weight placed by managers on firm
value lead to reduced levels of tax sheltering activity. This is consistent with the existence of
strong positive feedback effects between sheltering and diversion – the improved alignment of
incentives induces the manager to divert less, and this in turn increases the marginal cost of
sheltering, and so reduces the equilibrium level of tax avoidance activity.6


6
  Desai and Dharmapala (2004) also discuss a recent case related to the energy firm Dynegy, Inc. to demonstrate the
manner in which complementarities between tax avoidance and diversion exist. This information there is derived
from legal proceedings for fraud but the scope of the argument is more general, and does not rely on illegal
behavior, either with respect to diversion or tax sheltering. It is also interesting to note that a variety of popular


                                                          6
         When positive feedback effects exist, as argued above, the effect of tax sheltering on firm
value is ambiguous. It is possible, however, to make an unambiguous prediction about the
relative effects on firms with stronger and weaker governance institutions. In this setting, a
stronger governance environment is defined as one where it is more difficult for managers to
increase diversion. To illustrate the argument using a polar case, consider a firm that is
sufficiently well-governed that any increase in diversion is prohibitively costly for the manager.
A small exogenous increase in tax avoidance at such a firm will directly raise V; moreover,
because the manager is unable to raise the diversion level (even if the marginal cost of diversion
falls as a result of the increase in sheltering) the increase in V will not be offset by a decrease in
YtS. In contrast, a less well-governed firm where the manager faces the same degree of
complementarity between sheltering and diversion, provides a manager with greater scope for
increasing the level of diversion. The same exogenous increase in tax sheltering at this firm
would lead directly to the same increase in V, but would also induce a higher level of diversion
(i.e. lower YtS). Thus, the net increase in V would be smaller (or the decrease larger) than in the
case of the well-governed firm. This argument leads to the following hypothesis:

Hypothesis: With strong complementarities between tax sheltering and rent diversion, the effect
of tax avoidance activity on firm value will be larger (i.e. more positive or less negative) for
well-governed firms relative to the effect for less well-governed firms.

Note that this hypothesis is not about the effects of tax avoidance activity on firm value per se
but rather about the effects of the interaction between tax avoidance and governance institutions.

3.       Data and Empirical Specification

         The data used to test the hypothesis described above is drawn from three sources.
Financial accounting data is drawn from Standard and Poor’s Compustat database, executive
compensation controls (and certain other variables) from Standard and Poor’s Execucomp
database, and the index of governance institutions is the one calculated in Gompers, Ishii and
Metrick (2003). Merging these (with exclusions described below) leads to a dataset with 3,658

press accounts of tax shelters in the business press emphasize the complexity shelters introduce and discuss them
with skepticism and distrust. See, in particular, “The Corporate Tax Game” and “The Rise of the Wall Street Tax
Machine” in Business Week, March 31, 2003. Both articles discuss the degree to which opaque tax avoidance
strategies contribute to earnings increases at various firms and how tax avoidance strategies at Enron morphed into
opportunities for managerial wrongdoing. These articles ask if corporate tax shelters will become the “next big
scandal.”


                                                         7
observations at the firm-year level, on 687 firms over the period 1993-2001. These variables are
described in detail below; summary statistics are reported in Table 1.

3.1.     The Dependent Variable

         Tobin’s q is employed as the measure of firm value. This follows the practice in the study
of governance institutions and corporate finance (e.g. Demsetz and Lehn, 1985; Morck, Shleifer
and Vishny, 1988; Mehran, 1995). The definition of q used in Kaplan and Zingales (1997) and
Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2003) is employed with one modification. They define q as the ratio
of the market value of assets (defined as the book value of assets, plus the market value of
common stock, minus the book value of common stock, minus deferred tax expense) to the book
value of assets. Given the emphasis on the effects of tax avoidance activity on q, deferred tax
expense is not included in the calculation of the value of q used in our basic results.7 Current tax
avoidance activity may result in changes to future tax liabilities and thus create a mechanical
correlation between the dependent variable and the measure of tax avoidance.8

3.2.     Measuring corporate tax avoidance

         In order to construct a measure of tax avoidance, this analysis begins with a measurement
of the book-tax gap, makes adjustments for loss-making firms, and then controls for factors other
than tax avoidance that might create a gap between these reports.

         The difference between income reported to capital markets (using Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP)) and to the tax authorities – the so-called book-tax gap – has
attracted considerable interest in recent years and has been related to measures of corporate tax
avoidance.9 Given that tax returns are confidential, income reported to tax authorities cannot be
observed directly and must be inferred using financial accounting data, as described in Manzon
and Plesko (2002) and implemented in Desai and Dharmapala (2005). This approach uses firms’
7
  However, using the full definition leads to consistent results, as described in Section 4.
8
  Thus, using the Compustat data item numbers, we define qit for firm i in year t as follows:
                                                      (#6)it + ((#24)it * (#25)it ) − (#60)it
                                                qit =                                         .
                                                                     (#6)it
9
  See Manzon and Plesko (2002) and Desai (2003, 2004). Lev and Nissim (2004) and Hanlon (2005) investigate
how book-tax gaps predict the quality of future earnings. While related, this paper studies the response of firm value
to managerial efforts to shelter corporate income from taxes, with these efforts being proxied by the component of
the book-tax gap that is attributable to tax avoidance rather than earnings management. Lev and Nissim (2004) and
Hanlon (2005), on the other hand, consider book-tax gaps an alternative form of earnings management and analyze
the consequences of these managed earnings for subsequent accounting and market outcomes, without consideration
of the contemporaneous valuation of the tax avoidance component of those gaps.


                                                          8
reported current federal tax expense (Compustat item #63), and “grosses up” this tax liability by
employing the graduated structure of corporate tax rates in the U.S.10 The firm’s inferred taxable
income can simply be subtracted from the firm’s reported pretax (domestic US) financial income
(Compustat #272) to obtain the inferred book-tax gap. To control for differences in firm scale,
and because the dependent variable is deflated by a measure of firm size, this measure of the
book-tax gap is scaled by the lagged book value of assets (Compustat #6) to obtain the measure
of the book-tax gap, denoted BTi,t for firm i in year t, used in the analysis below.11

        Increases in tax avoidance are likely, at the margin, to be less valuable for loss-making
firms with no current tax liability (even though tax savings potentially have some value for such
firms through net operating loss carryforwards and carrybacks). Thus, the analysis below
restricts the sample to firm-years in which firms are estimated to have positive taxable income.
Another important reason for excluding such observations is that the appropriate marginal tax
rate to use in “grossing up” the tax expense is unclear when taxable income is zero or negative.

        In addition, inferred values of taxable income must incorporate the effects of tax
deductions resulting from stock option exercises by employees. A firm’s taxable income is
reduced by the value of the compensation at the time that employees exercise their options.
However, under current rules the reported tax expense is unaffected; instead, there is an increase
in contributed capital (see Manzon and Plesko (2002) for more details). Thus, even if
observations where inferred taxable income is zero or negative are excluded, the sample may
include some firm-years for which stock option deductions that exceed their income. As
discussed in Graham, Lang and Shackelford (2004), option activity is sufficiently widespread
that this effect is nontrivial. While the value of stock option deductions claimed by firms is not
directly observable, it is possible to observe the value of stock option exercises by each of the
firm’s top five managers, and to aggregate this across executives for each firm-year. The
estimate of taxable income can be recalculated using this figure to provide a more precise means
of identifying firms that are not paying taxes.12 In the results reported below, firm-years for

10
   The exclusion of foreign taxes and income from this calculation avoids problems associated with inferring the
applicable foreign tax rates.
11
   Of course, there are limitation imposed by the confidentiality of tax returns and this inference procedure. For
discussions of these limitations, see Hanlon (2003).
12
   Clearly, this is an underestimate of the firm’s total stock option deductions, as it only includes exercises by a
subset of employees. However, firm-years for which we infer negative taxable income using this approach will a
fortiori have negative taxable income in reality (when stock option deductions are taken into account). For example,


                                                         9
which this adjustment makes inferred taxable income zero or negative are also excluded (this
adjustment only affects a relatively small number of observations).

           While the effects of stock options are incorporated in the creation of the sample, they do
not alter the basic measure of the book-tax gap. Reported financial income is not reduced by
employees’ stock option exercises, and so the exclusion of stock option exercises from both tax
expense and financial income does not bias the measure of the book-tax gap (see Manzon and
Plesko (2002) for more details). Nonetheless, some concerns may remain that the valuation of
tax avoidance may be affected by the tax shield available to a firm from stock option exercises.
This concern is addressed by including the value of observed stock option exercises as a control
in robustness checks.

           The book-tax gap need not reflect corporate tax avoidance activity and so any measure of
corporate tax avoidance must control for other factors. Specifically, earnings management may
contribute to the measured book-tax gap. Studies of earnings management have argued that such
manipulation is most likely to occur through the exercise of managerial discretion in determining
accounting accruals (i.e. adjustments to realized cash flows that are used in calculating the firm’s
net income), as in Healy (1985). The computation of total accruals for firm i in year t (denoted
TAit) uses data on changes (between year (t - 1) and year t) in the following variables: current
assets (Compustat #4), current liabilities (Compustat #5), cash and short-term investments
(Compustat #1), and debt in current liabilities (Compustat #34), as well as the level of
depreciation and amortization in year t (Compustat #14). Like the book-tax gap, the accruals
measure is scaled by the lagged book value of assets (Compustat #6).13 Alternative measures of
earnings management are also employed and discussed below.14

           The basic intuition underlying this paper’s measure of tax avoidance is that book-tax gaps
are attributable either to earnings management or to tax avoidance activity. Accordingly,
adjusting for earnings management (using an accruals proxy) will isolate the component of the


aggregate stock option deductions estimated using this approach constitute about 6% of firms’ pretax income in our
full sample, compared to the corresponding 10% figure reported in Graham, Lang and Shackelford (2004) for a
sample of S&P 100 firms.
13
   More precisely, the measure of total accruals is given by:
       [(#4)it − (#4) i ,t −1 ] − [(#5) it − (#5) i ,t −1 ] − [(#1) it − (#1) i ,t −1 ] + [(#34)it − (#34) i ,t −1 ] − (#14) it
TAit =                                                                                                                          .
                                                               (#6)i ,t −1
14
     See also Leuz, Nanda and Wysocki (2003) for a discussion of alternative measures of earnings management.


                                                               10
gap that is due to tax avoidance. DD (2005) compute a direct measure of tax avoidance activity
by regressing BTit on TAit, with firm fixed effects. This direct measure is not required here, so
instead BTit is used as a proxy for tax avoidance activity, while earnings management is
controlled for by including TAit (or various alternative proxies) on the right hand side in the
regressions reported below.

3.3.     Governance Institutions

         As described above, the valuation of tax avoidance is hypothesized to depend on the
quality of firm governance. Gompers et al. (2003) develop a firm-level measure of governance
by combining data from the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC) on firms’ takeover
defenses with information on antitakeover provisions in state statutes to calculate an index that
reflects the extent to which the firm is protected from hostile takeovers. This measure (denoted
G) attempts to capture the degree of managerial entrenchment. The index is a count of the
number of applicable provisions and can take on integer values from 0 to 24. A lower value of G
(i.e. a smaller number of antitakeover protections) is associated with a better quality of
governance (see Gompers et al. (2003, Appendix 1) for more details).15

         While G is available for a number of different years since 1990, it is stable for most firms
over time. The value of G in 1998 is used here, as this ensures a wider coverage of firms than the
earlier years; this is firm-specific and time-invariant (i.e. Git = Gi). In addition, because some
antitakeover provisions may be more important than others but are given equal weight in the
determination of G, the cardinal properties of the index are difficult to interpret. Thus, an
indicator variable WELLGOVi is defined to partition the sample of firms into those that are
relatively well-governed (Gi ≤ 7) and those that are relatively less well-governed (Gi > 7).16 This
variable is interacted with time-varying variables in the analysis below, and so is not absorbed by
the firm fixed effects.

         To check the robustness of the basic results using G, an alternative measure of
governance characteristics - the fraction of the firm’s shares owned by institutional investors in a

15
   Using an alternative measure that captures a different aspect of governance characteristics - the fraction of the
firm’s shares owned by institutional investors in a given year (from the CDA Spectrum database), which is thought
to proxy for the degree of shareholder monitoring – leads to results that, while weaker, are broadly similar to those
using G.
16
   While the precise cutoff point of Gi ≤ 7 is arbitrary, similar results are obtained when alternative definitions of
WELLGOVi, using cutoff points close to 7, are used.


                                                          11
given year (from the CDA Spectrum database, based on Schedule 13F filings with the SEC by
large institutional investors) – is also used. This fraction (which is reported quarterly) is averaged
over each firm-year, and denoted by Ii,t є [0, 1]. The basic motivation behind this proxy is that
institutional investors have greater incentives and capacity to monitor managerial performance;
thus, it captures a quite different aspect of governance than does G. Nonetheless, using Ii,t leads
to broadly consistent results, as discussed in Section 4 below.

3.4.    Additional Controls

        In order to isolate how corporate tax avoidance is valued, other factors that may influence
firm value must be addressed. Because firm fixed effects are employed in the specification
described below, many of the sources of cross-sectional variation in q across firms that have
been discussed in the literature need not be relevant here. There is a substantial literature that
finds stock-based compensation to be a significant determinant of firm value, presumably
through incentive-alignment effects (e.g. Morck, Shleifer and Vishny, 1988; Mehran, 1995). In
addition, the structure of executive compensation plays a central role in DD (2005).
Accordingly, the analysis controls for the value of stock option grants to executives as a fraction
of total compensation. This variable, denoted STKMIXGRANTit, is calculated from data at the
manager-year level in the Execucomp database. For firm i in year t, the Black-Scholes value of
stock options granted (Execucomp variable BLKVAL), the salary (Execucomp variable SALARY),
and the bonus (Execucomp variable BONUS) are aggregated across all executives.
STKMIXGRANTit is the ratio of the sum of the values of stock options to total compensation
(defined as the sum of the value of stock options, salary and bonus).17

        Firm sales (Execucomp variable SALES) are employed to control for changes in firm size
over time.18 This control is particularly important because G is positively correlated with firm
size and negatively correlated with past sales growth (Gompers et al., 2003, Table V). The sales
control is intended to ensure that the distinctive effects for well-governed and poorly-governed
firms are due, not to changes in these factors over time, but to governance institutions per se. The


17
   This is similar to the stock-based compensation measures used in Mehran (1995) and in a large subsequent
literature. Using a measure based on stock option exercises (defined analogously) does not affect the results.
However, there are serious endogeneity concerns with this measure – an exogenous increase in q will induce
managers to exercise more options. Thus, the reported results use only STKMIXGRANTit as a control.
18
   Assets and market value enter into the definition of q and so would be mechanically correlated with the dependent
variable.


                                                        12
results are unchanged if the number of employees is used instead of, or in addition to, sales.
Finally, to control for changes over time in the risk associated with a firm’s stock price, a
measure of volatility (Execucomp variable BS_VOLATILITY, the standard deviation calculated
over a 60-month period) is included as a control.

3.5.       The Empirical Specification

           While the central claim of the paper concerns the interaction of governance institutions
and tax avoidance activity, the analysis begins with an investigation of whether tax avoidance
tends to be associated with increases or decreases in firm value within the full sample. This
question is addressed using the following specification:

           qi,t =    β1BTi,t + β2TAi,t + β3STKMIXGRANTi,t + β4SALESi,t + β5BS_VOLATILITYi,t

                     + Firm Fixed Effects + Year Effects + νi,t                                            (2)

where the variables BTit and TAit are as defined above, and νi,t is the error term (note that all
regressions reported in this paper use both firm fixed effects and year dummies). The coefficient
β1 can be interpreted as the marginal effect of tax avoidance activity on firm value.

           To test if the valuation of corporate tax avoidance is dependent on firm governance,
interaction terms for all independent variables (including the year dummies) are employed so
that the coefficient for each of the regressors is estimated separately for the well-governed and
poorly-governed subsamples:19

           qi,t =    β1BTi,t + β2(WELLGOVi*BTi,t) + β3TAi,t + β4STKMIXGRANTi,t + β5SALESi,t

                     + β6BS_VOLATILITYi,t + Other Interaction Terms + Firm Fixed Effects

                     + Year Effects + νi,t                                                                (3)

The coefficient of interest is β2, and the null hypothesis can be expressed as β2 = 0, while the
hypothesis in Section 2 implies that β2 > 0 (i.e. the effect of tax avoidance on firm value is
greater for well-governed firms than for poorly-governed firms).

4.         Results

4.1.       Basic Results


19
     The intercepts are firm-specific, and can differ not only across the subsamples, but across firms.


                                                             13
         Table 2 reports the results of the regression specified in equation (2), using the controls
and sample described above. The effect of the book-tax gap on firm value is insignificant (all
results reported in this paper use robust (White, (1980)) standard errors that are clustered at the
firm level). Given that earnings management has been controlled for using TAi,t, this suggests
that tax avoidance activity has no effect on firm value. The control variables have the expected
signs: for example, the use of more stock-based compensation raises q, which is consistent with a
substantial body of existing evidence (e.g. Mehran, 1995).

         The test of the hypothesis using Eq. (3) is reported in Column 2. Here, the coefficient on
the interaction term between the well-governed dummy and BTi,t is positive and significant. This
implies that, while the overall effect of tax avoidance on firm value is indistinguishable from
zero, this effect is significantly more positive for well-governed firms than for poorly-governed
firms, a finding that is consistent with the hypothesis that agency problems complicate the simple
interpretation of corporate tax avoidance as transferring value from the state to shareholders.

         The intuition can be reinforced by running Eq. (2) separately on the well-governed and
poorly-governed subsamples (Columns 3 and 4, respectively). For well-governed firms, the
effect of tax avoidance on q is positive and of borderline significance. In contrast, for poorly-
governed firms the effect is negative, though insignificant. Given positive feedback effects
between tax avoidance and diversion, the findings can be interpreted as follows. For poorly-
governed firms, increases in tax avoidance directly raise after-tax firm value, but also create
greater opportunities for managers to divert income from shareholders. These effects seem to
approximately offset each other in this sample. In contrast, the negative effect is less important
for well-governed firms, as by definition they have stronger institutional restraints on diversion.
Thus, the overall effect is positive for well-governed firms.20

         In Column 3, the coefficient of the book-tax gap measure is approximately 2 for the well-
governed subsample.21 As both q and the book-tax gap are deflated by assets, this coefficient can
be interpreted as follows. Suppose that the firm (unexpectedly) shelters an extra $1 from taxes


20
   The results, combined with those in DD (2005), also shed some new light on what Weisbach (2002) terms the
“undersheltering puzzle” (i.e. why firms do not avoid taxes to a far greater extent than they actually do, given the
wide availability of shelter schemes and the low or nonexistent risk of penalties). Undersheltering (at least for firms
that are less well-governed) may not be as puzzling as it first appears, given the zero or negative market response.
21
   This point estimate is quite robust, varying between 1.6 and 2, depending on the precise set of controls included
(see below for discussion of additional controls).


                                                          14
(holding everything else, including book income, fixed). This $1 increase in the book-tax gap
leads to a $2 increase in market value. As the current-year tax benefit (assuming a 35% marginal
rate) is only $0.35, this may seem to be a large effect. However, it is reasonable to assume that
the market will anticipate that the tax shelter will provide multiyear benefits. These expectations
will presumably be reflected immediately in the firm’s share price. Under these assumptions, and
using reasonable discount rates, the estimated coefficient implies an expected life for a typical
tax shelter of about 5 or 6 years. In the dataset on corporate tax shelter cases constructed by
Graham and Tucker (2005), both of the two most common shelters – corporate-owned life
insurance and transfer pricing devices – had an average active life of 5 years (see Graham and
Tucker (2005) Table 1, p. 33). The magnitude of the effect for well-governed firms is thus
consistent with what is known from other sources about corporate tax shelters.22

         While the results in Table 2 are consistent with the paper’s hypothesis, and the economic
magnitudes involved are reasonable, there are a number of possible measurement issues with the
variables, especially the measures of earnings management and the book-tax gap. In addition,
there are many other factors that could influence firm value, and so the changes in q may be
driven by some omitted variable. The following subsections of the paper seek to address each of
these issues in turn, and then discuss possible alternative explanations for the findings.

4.2.     Alternative Measures of Earnings Management

         The results in Table 2 use total accruals (TAi,t) as a proxy for earnings management
activity. Several alternative measures of “abnormal” or “discretionary” accruals (e.g. Jones,
1991; Dechow, Sloan and Sweeney, 1995; Dechow, Richardson and Tuna, 2003) have been
developed to better isolate the components of accruals that are truly under managerial control. In
short, some component of TAi,t is likely to be positive even in the absence of earnings
management, given that accruals perform an important function in providing information about a
firm’s economic position. Discretionary accruals are calculated by isolating the nondiscretionary
component of TAi,t (which managers have little opportunity to manipulate). The residual from a
regression (within each industry) of TAi,t on its nondiscretionary component is inferred to be a
measure of discretionary accruals DAi,t (Jones, 1991). The standard approach to computing DAi,t


22
  This finding is also consistent with portrayals of the tax shelter industry where cycles of innovation are fueled by
repeated crackdowns (e.g. Hines, 2004).


                                                          15
is based on the assumption that the change in revenue from sales (measured using Compustat
#12) is nondiscretionary; it involves regressing TAi,t on the change in sales and the value of plant,
property and equipment (Compustat #7), with each variable being scaled by the lagged book
value of assets, using industry effects at the 2-digit SIC level. Using DAi,t leads to results that are
highly consistent with those in Table 2, as reported in Table 3, Column 1.

         A refinement of the model described above involves excluding the change in credit sales
(measured using accounts receivable, Compustat #302) from the nondiscretionary component of
accruals (Dechow et al., 1995). The rationale for this “modified Jones” model is that managers
may exercise some discretion in determining the value of credit sales. The results using this
measure of discretionary accruals are reported in Column 2; they are also highly consistent with
those in Table 2. More recently, the modified Jones model has been refined further as follows
(Dechow et al., 2003). A measure of expected credit sales is included in the nondiscretionary
component of accruals, while lagged accruals are included in order to capture the predictable
component of TAi,t, and future revenue growth (using Compustat #12) is included to account for
increases in accruals that represent managers’ response to anticipated increases in sales. The
results using this “forward-looking” Jones model are reported in Column 3, and are generally
consistent with those in Table 2, although the interaction term is only of borderline
significance.23

4.3.     Robustness Checks for the Tax Avoidance Measure

         The results in Table 2 are based on the construction of the book-tax gap outlined in
Section 3.24 Several factors may lead to the mismeasurement of tax avoidance. Of particular
importance is the role of future tax liabilities. Recall that deferred tax expense was omitted from
the computation of q, while taxable income was inferred using current tax expense. Thus, the
analysis so far does not take any account of changes in future tax liabilities. This could be
important because current tax sheltering activity may take the form of deferring tax liabilities to
23
   The results are also robust to including a control for another measure of earnings management, proposed by
Phillips, Pincus and Rego (2003) - deferred tax expense (this variable is discussed in Section 4.3 below, using a
different motivation for its inclusion).
24
   This measure can be refined by adjusting for tax-deductible expenses (state and other income taxes, given by
Compustat #173 and #211) and by subtracting tax-exempt income (equity in earnings of nonconsolidated
subsidiaries – Compustat #55) – see Manzon and Plesko (2002). While missing values for these variables result in
the sample size falling by about a quarter of the observations when this adjusted book-tax gap is used, the results are
broadly consistent with those in Table 2, with the tax avoidance interaction term remaining positive and of very
similar magnitude.


                                                          16
the future. Also, a focus on current tax avoidance ignores current actions by the firm that reduce
its future tax liabilities, and hence increase the present value of the firm. To control for changes
in future tax liabilities, deferred tax expense (Compustat #74), scaled by the book value of assets,
is added to the model.25 This leads to essentially consistent results, as shown in Table 4, Column
1.

         Tax shields (such as interest payments on debt) can affect the value of engaging in tax
avoidance.26 Firms’ leverage is controlled for by including measures of debt, in particular, long-
term debt and debt in current liabilities, each scaled by the book value of assets. Adding these
controls does not affect the results for the tax avoidance interaction term, which remains positive
and significant, as shown in Table 4, Column 2. Another potential tax shield is provided by
deductions for employees’ stock option exercises (e.g. Graham, Lang and Shackelford, 2004).
This issue has already been partially addressed by excluding firm-years in which observed stock
option deductions exceed taxable income. Even so, firms that remain in the sample may still
have substantial stock option deductions, and these may affect the value of engaging in tax
avoidance. However, as reported in Table 4, Column 3, adding the value of stock option
exercises by the top 5 executives (scaled by the book value of assets) to the model as a proxy for
these deductions leads to results that are highly consistent with those reported in Table 2.

         The results discussed above primarily use contemporaneous variables. This reflects an
assumption that the market responds rapidly to changes in the level of tax avoidance activity.
This approach may, however, miss the effects of past tax avoidance activity. Thus, a
comprehensive lag specification is used to test the robustness of the results. This specification
includes the contemporaneous right-hand-side variables in Eq. (3), along with one-period lags of
these variables (apart from the volatility measure, which is not lagged because it is already
calculated over a 5-year period). The results are reported in Table 4, Column 4. The
contemporaneous interaction term remains positive and of borderline significance (even though
the lags reduce the sample size and increase the number of regressors). The lagged interaction

25
   Adding deferred tax expense to the definition of q (as in Kaplan and Zingales (1997)) so that:
                                             (#6)it + ((#24)it * (#25)it ) − (#60)it − (#74) it
                                       qit =
                                                                  (#6)it
also leads to results that are highly consistent with those in Table 2, with the tax avoidance interaction term being
positive and significant.
26
   For example, Graham and Tucker (2005) highlight the relationship between the use of tax shelters and capital
structure in their sample of firms involved in tax shelter litigation.


                                                          17
term is also positive, but insignificant. Moreover, the (unreported) pattern of results for the well-
governed and poorly-governed subsamples closely resembles that in Table 2. Thus, including the
lagged terms does not fundamentally affect the conclusions of the analysis.27

4.4.      Additional Controls

         The specifications used in obtaining the results in Table 2 (Eq’s (2) and (3)) use a number
of controls for factors that may affect firm value. However, it is still possible that the changes in
q are driven by omitted variables. For example, unobserved shocks to the investment
opportunities available to the firm may cause variations in q that are unrelated to tax avoidance
activity, as q is generally thought to be closely associated with firms’ investment decisions.
Capital expenditures (Compustat #30), scaled by the book value of assets, are used to control for
changes in firms’ investment levels.28 This variable has a positive association with q, but does
not affect the tax avoidance interaction term (which remains positive and significant), as shown
in Table 5, Column 1.29

         To control for the firm’s past performance, the lagged return on assets (Execucomp
variable ROA, which is defined as net income before extraordinary items and discontinued
operations, divided by total assets, and expressed as a percentage) is added to the model. ROAi,t-1
can control for either mean reversion (e.g. Fama and French, 2000) or persistence in earnings.
Adding this new control variable leads to consistent results, as shown in Table 5, Column 2.
Next, future revenue growth is used as a control for possible omitted variables that may affect
market value, such as expectations about the firm’s future sales. Future revenue growth is
calculated (using Compustat #12) by subtracting revenue in year t from revenue in year (t + 1),


27
   These issues could be addressed by isolating reports of tax shelter activity directly to remove any doubt about
whether the market was responding to tax shelters. For example, using an event study approach that examines
abnormal stock returns associated with the relatively small number of cases of tax shelter litigation would alleviate
some concerns related to whether the tax avoidance measure actually captures that phenomenon. Unfortunately, the
information revealed by the announcement of such cases would relate as much to issues of managerial competence
and negative publicity in addition to investors’ valuation of tax avoidance per se. The approach adopted here enables
a large sample analysis but comes at the cost of some imprecision on the measurement of tax avoidance.
28
   In addition, this variable can control for changes in current and expected depreciation allowances that may affect
measured book-tax differences.
29
   Changes in intangibles that affect q but are imperfectly measured in the book value of assets can be proxied for by
research and development expenditures (Compustat #46) and advertising expenditures (Compustat #45). However,
there are a large number of missing values for these variables (for example, there are only 973 observations for
advertising expenditures). Using zeroes for the missing values (following Brick, Palmon and Wald (2003)) leads to
results that are broadly consistent with those in Table 2, but it is difficult to reach definite conclusions because of the
missing data.


                                                            18
and scaling by revenue in year t. As reported in Table 5, Column 3, this leads to essentially
consistent results, with the interaction term being positive and borderline significant. Overall,
then, adding extra control variables to the model leads to results that are generally consistent
with those in Table 2.30

4.5.    Alternative Explanations

        While the analysis discussed above suggests that the basic results are robust to several
measurement issues, there are alternative explanations available for the link between the
valuation of tax avoidance and firm governance. Note, however, that the use of a panel of firms
with firm and year effects accounts for many obvious sources of heterogeneity that might
confound the analysis.31 Two alternative explanations seem particularly relevant. The first
emphasizes unobserved heterogeneity in tax avoidance strategies that is correlated with firm
governance. The second alternative explanation is that the tax avoidance measure might measure
something else that could be differentially valued based on firm governance.

        First, it is possible that the differences in valuation of tax avoidance between the well-
governed and poorly-governed subsamples relate to differences in the types of tax shelters used
by these firms. It is possible that the smaller effect for poorly-governed firms is due to these
firms investing in riskier shelters that are discounted at higher rates. While it is not possible to
eliminate this alternative explanation, it should be noted that the point estimate for the poorly-
governed firms is not positive, so this alternative explanation would require that poorly-governed
firms invest in shelters with negative expected returns. This seems unlikely, given the wide
availability of tax shelters with very high returns (e.g. Slemrod, 2004). While it is conceivable
that firm governance is correlated with a differential appetite for risky tax shelters, the relative
abundance of high return shelters and the absence of any positive effect for less well-governed
firms suggest that this cannot explain the results entirely.



30
   Morck and Yang (2001) show that inclusion in the S&P 500 has a positive effect on q. However, no firms in this
sample changed their inclusion status (determined using Execucomp variable SPCODE) over this period. There is
evidence of higher q for firms incorporated in Delaware, at least over some time periods (e.g. Subramanian, 2004).
However, very few firms change their state of incorporation. Firm age is sometimes used as an explanatory variable
(e.g. Gompers et al., 2003), but would of course be redundant here as both firm and year effects are used.
31
   For example, it is possible that a trend towards growing foreign income may have led to both the tax avoidance
measure (which relies on US tax expense only) and firm value increasing over time. However, as long as this
constitutes a general trend within the sample, it would be absorbed by the year effects.


                                                        19
           Second, if the proxies used for earnings management are incomplete, then the remaining
component of the book-tax gap may be mischaracterized as tax avoidance when it actually
represents earnings management. Accordingly, it is possible that the results are driven by
differential market reactions to earnings management by well-governed and poorly-governed
firms. One variant of this earnings management explanation would rationalize the results as
reflecting a situation where earnings manipulation is more harshly penalized for poorly-governed
firms. This view, however, would have to explain why well-governed firms feature a positive
valuation of earnings management. While there are theoretical models that suggest that earnings
management may be value-maximizing for shareholders,32 the more common view is that such
activities represent managers pursuing private benefits (Leuz, Nanda and Wysocki, 2003), for
instance raising their compensation by meeting bonus targets (Healy, 1985) or increasing the
firm’s stock price prior to exercising options. Again, this alternative explanation is impossible to
dismiss completely, but the results of the paper are difficult to reconcile with conventional
interpretations of earnings management and their consequences for shareholders.

           If earnings management is difficult to observe, the differential market reactions could be
attributed to investors placing more trust in the earnings of well-governed firms. For example,
when managers of well-governed firms use accruals to adjust realized cash flows upwards, this
may be viewed as an indication that they are smoothing future increases in revenues and,
accordingly, lead to a positive reaction. On the other hand, similar actions by the managers of
poorly-governed firms may be viewed with more skepticism and lead to a zero or negative
reaction. If this explanation were driving the results, controlling for variables such as future
revenue growth should reduce or eliminate the differential market response, by capturing
differences in the extent to which managed earnings are informative about future revenues. In
Section 4.4, a variable capturing future revenue growth was interpreted as a proxy for
unobserved expectations concerning the firm’s future performance, but it can also be interpreted
as a variable that captures the informativeness of a firm’s earnings statements. As shown in
Table 5, Column 3, the basic results are robust to including a control for future sales growth.
Thus, it does not appear that this alternative explanation can fully account for the empirical
results.


32
     See e.g. Goel and Thakor (2003) and Bolton, Scheinkman and Xiong (2003).


                                                        20
5.     Conclusion

       The simple presumption that corporate tax avoidance represents a transfer of value from
the state to shareholders does not appear to be validated in the data. In the full sample, tax
avoidance activity by firms does not lead to increases in firm value. There is a positive effect for
a subsample of firms that are identified as being well-governed, while there is no significant
effect for firms that are less well-governed. These findings appear to be robust to a wide variety
of checks for measurement issues and alternative explanations. The results are consistent with
the hypothesis that the valuation of tax avoidance is a function of firm governance and, more
broadly, with the point of view that tax avoidance and managerial efforts to divert value from
shareholders are intertwined. In doing so, this paper shows that incorporating agency issues into
the analysis of corporate tax avoidance, as advocated by Slemrod (2004), leads to theoretical and
empirical conclusions that are substantially different from those that would be predicted by a
model where managers are perfect agents.

       The findings also reinforce the quantitative importance of tax avoidance in the decision-
making process of managers that is suggested by anecdotal evidence and by the analysis of
Graham and Tucker (2005). In particular, they argue that, for firms in their sample, tax shelters
function as non-debt tax shields and they interact with capital structure decisions in significant
ways. This paper demonstrates that the market values those actions with skepticism given the
complexities they introduce and this skepticism is only offset in the presence of high-quality
governance.




                                                 21
References
Auerbach, A. J. (2002) “Taxation and Corporate Financial Policy” in A. J. Auerbach and M.
      Feldstein (eds.) Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3, North-Holland: Amsterdam,
      1251-1292.

Ayers, B. C., C. E. Lefanowicz and J. R. Robinson (2003) “Shareholder Taxes in Acquisition
       Premiums: The Effect of Capital Gains Taxation” Journal of Finance, 58, 2783-2801.

Bankman, J. (2004) “The Tax Shelter Problem” National Tax Journal, 57, 925-936.

Bolton, P., J. Scheinkman and W. Xiong (2003) “Executive Compensation and Short-Termist
       Behavior in Speculative Markets” NBER Working Paper #9722.

Brick, I. E., O. Palmon and J. K. Wald (2003) “CEO Compensation, Director Compensation, and
        Firm Performance: Evidence of Cronyism” Working paper.

Brown, J. R., N. Liang and S. Weisbenner (2004) “Executive Financial Incentives and Payout
      Policy: Firm Responses to the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut” NBER Working Paper #11002.

Chen, K. P. and C. Y. C. Chu (2005) “Internal Control vs. External Manipulation: A Model of
       Corporate Income Tax Evasion” Rand Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Chetty, R. and E. Saez (2004) “Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from the
       2003 Dividend Tax Cut” NBER Working Paper #10841.

Cloyd, B., L. F. Mills and C. D. Weaver (2003) “Firm Valuation Effects of the Expatriations of
       U.S. Corporations to Tax Haven Countries” The Journal of the American Taxation
       Association, 25, 87-109.

Crocker, K. J. and J. Slemrod (2005) “Corporate Tax Evasion with Agency Costs” Journal of
      Public Economics, forthcoming.

Dechow, P. S. Richardson and I. Tuna (2003) “Why Are Earnings Kinky? An Examination of
      the Earnings Management Explanation” Review of Accounting Studies, 8, 355-384.

Dechow, P., R. Sloan and A. Sweeney (1995) “Detecting Earnings Management” The
      Accounting Review, 70, 193-225.

Demsetz, H. and K. Lehn (1985) “The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes and
      Consequences” Journal of Political Economy, 93, 1155-1177.

Desai, M. A. (2003) “The Divergence between Book and Tax Income” in J. M. Poterba (ed.) Tax
       Policy and the Economy, Vol. 17, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, 169-206.

Desai, M. A. (2004) “The Degradation of Corporate Profits” Working paper.



                                              22
Desai, M. A. and D. Dharmapala (2005) “Corporate Tax Avoidance and High Powered
       Incentives” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Desai, M. A., A. Dyck, and L. Zingales (2004) “Theft and Taxation” NBER Working Paper
       #W10978.

Desai, M. A. and J. R. Hines Jr. (2002) “Expectations and Expatriations: Tracing the Causes and
       Consequences of Corporate Inversions” National Tax Journal, 55, 409-441.

D’Souza, J. and J. Jacob (2000) “Why Firms Issue Targeted Stock” Journal of Financial
      Economics, 56, 459-83.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1998) “Taxes, Financing Decisions and Firm Value” Journal of
      Finance, 53, 819-843.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2000) “Forecasting Profitability and Earnings” Journal of
      Business, 73, 161-175.

Gentry, W. M., D. Kemsley and C. J. Mayer (2003) “Dividend Taxes and Share Prices: Evidence
       from Real Estate Investment Trusts” Journal of Finance, 58, 261-282.

Goel, A. and A. Thakor (2003) “Why Do Firms Smooth Earnings?” Journal of Business, 76,
       151-192.

Gompers, P. A., J. Ishii and A. Metrick (2003) “Corporate Governance and Equity Prices”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 107-155.

Graham, J. R. (2003) “Taxes and Corporate Finance: A Review” Review of Financial Studies,
      16, 1074-1128.

Graham, J. R., M. H. Lang, and D. A. Shackelford (2004) “Employee Stock Options, Corporate
      Taxes, and Debt Policy” Journal of Finance, 59, 1585-1618.

Graham, J. R. and A. Tucker (2005) “Tax Shelters and Corporate Debt Policy” Working paper.

Hanlon, M. (2003) “What Can We Infer About a Firm’s Taxable Income from its Financial
      Statements?” National Tax Journal, 56, 831-863.

Hanlon, M. (2005) “The Persistence and Pricing of Earnings, Accruals, and Cash Flows when
      Firms Have Large Book-Tax Differences” The Accounting Review, forthcoming.

Healy, P. (1985) “The Effect of Bonus Schemes on Accounting Decisions” Journal of
       Accounting and Economics, 7, 85-107.

Hines, J. R., Jr. (2004) “On the Timeliness of Tax Reform” Journal of Public Economics, 88,
       1043-1059.



                                              23
Jones, J. (1991) “Earnings Management During Import Relief Investigations” Journal of
        Accounting Research, 29, 193-228.

Kaplan, S. N. and L. Zingales (1997) “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Useful
      Measures of Financing Constraints?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 169-216.

Leuz, C., D. Nanda and P. D. Wysocki (2003) “Earnings Management and Investor Protection:
       An International Comparison” Journal of Financial Economics, 69, 505-527.

Lev, B. and D. Nissim (2004) “Taxable Income, Future Earnings, and Equity Values” The
       Accounting Review, 79, 1039-1074.

Manzon, G. B., Jr. and G. A. Plesko (2002) “The Relation Between Financial and Tax Reporting
     Measures of Income” Tax Law Review, 55, 175-214.

Mehran, H. (1995) “Executive Compensation Structure, Ownership, and Firm Performance”
      Journal of Financial Economics, 38, 163-184.

Morck, R. (2004) “How to Eliminate Pyramidal Business Groups - The Double Taxation of
      Inter-Corporate Dividends and Other Incisive Uses of Tax Policy” NBER Working Paper
      #10944.

Morck, R., A. Shleifer and R. Vishny (1988) “Management Ownership and Corporate
      Performance: An Empirical Analysis” Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 293-315.

Morck, R. and F. Yang (2001) “The Mysterious Growing Value of S&P 500 Membership”
      NBER Working Paper #W8654.

Perez-Gonzales, F. (2003) “Large Shareholders and Dividends: Evidence From U.S. Tax
       Reforms” Working paper.

Phillips, J., M. Pincus and S. O. Rego (2003) “Earnings Management: New Evidence Based on
        Deferred Tax Expense” The Accounting Review, 78, 491-521.

Slemrod, J. (2004) “The Economics of Corporate Tax Selfishness” National Tax Journal, 57,
      877-899.

Slemrod, J. and S. Yitzhaki (2002) “Tax Avoidance, Evasion and Administration” in A. J.
      Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.) Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3, North-Holland:
      Amsterdam, 1423-1470.

Subramanian, G. (2004) “The Disappearing Delaware Effect” Journal of Law, Economics &
      Organization, 20, 32-59.




                                             24
U.S. Department of the Treasury (1999) “The Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters: Discussion,
       Analysis and Legislative Proposals” Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Press Office.

Weisbach, D. (2002) “Ten Truths about Tax Shelters” Tax Law Review, 55, 215-253.

White, H. (1980) “A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct
       Test for Heteroskedasticity” Econometrica, 48, 817-830.

Zingales, L. (1995) “Insider Ownership and the Decision To Go Public” Review of Economic
       Studies, 62, 425-448.




                                             25
                                                          Table 1
                                                  Summary Statistics

                                                                                       Standard             Number of
                                                                Mean                   Deviation           Observations
Tobin's q (excluding deferred tax expense)                        2.2588                    1.5768                  3,658
Tobin's q (including deferred tax expense)                        2.2204                    1.5738                  3,286
Book-tax gap (scaled)                                             0.0050                    0.0666                  3,658
Adjusted book-tax gap (scaled)                                   (0.0020)                   0.0629                  2,807
Total accruals (scaled)                                          (0.0380)                   0.1074                  3,658
Discretionary Accruals (scaled): Jones
Model                                                             0.0029                    0.0966                  3,653
Discretionary Accruals (scaled): Modified
Jones Model                                                       0.0029                    0.0975                  3,548
Discretionary Accruals (scaled): Forward-
Looking Jones Model                                               0.0043                    0.1055                  3,451
Ratio of Value of Stock Option Grants to                          0.3890                    0.2477                  3,658
Total Compensation for Top 5 Executives

Value of Stock Option Exercises by Top 5
Executives (scaled)                                               0.0035                    0.0133                  3,658
Sales ($ billion)                                                 4.4502                    9.6611                  3,658
Volatility (Black-Scholes measure)                                0.3581                    0.1509                  3,658
Deferred tax expense (scaled)                                     0.0291                    0.0356                  3,286
Return on assets (%)                                              6.6497                    6.8781                  3,658
Plant, Property and Equipment (scaled)                            0.5957                    0.3590                  1,023
Capital expenditures (scaled)                                     0.0701                    0.0530                  3,606
R & D expenditures (scaled)                                       0.0551                    0.0601                  2,584
Advertising expenditures (scaled)                                 0.0581                    0.0773                    973
Long-term debt (scaled)                                           0.1782                    0.1447                  3,650
Debt in current liabilities (scaled)                              0.0399                    0.0543                  3,658
Governance Index, 1998                                            9.3486                    2.7965                  3,658
Institutional Ownership (fraction)                                0.5904                    0.1691                  3,734
Note: These variables are defined as in the text. Tobin's q (without deferred taxes) is defined in Section 3, and Tobin's q
(with deferred taxes) is defined in Section 4. "Scaled" variables are deflated by the lagged or contemporaneous book
value of assets.
                                                                   Table 2

                                  Tax Avoidance, Firm Value and Governance Institutions

Dependent Variable:                                                                         Tobin's q

                                                          (1)                     (2)                      (3)                   (4)

                                                                                                      Well-Governed            Poorly-
                                                       All Firms               All Firms
                                                                                                          Firms             Governed Firms


Book-Tax Gap (Scaled)                                        0.4563                 -0.3830                  2.0916    *           -0.3830
                                                           (0.4923)               (0.4547)                 (1.1164)               (0.4523)
Book-Tax Gap Interacted with                                                         2.4746     **
Dummy for Better Governed Firms
                                                                                  (1.1883)
Total Accruals (Scaled)                                     0.6379      ***         0.6774                  0.5955     **          0.6774
                                                           (0.2273)               (0.4162)                 (0.2625)               (0.4140)
Ratio of Value of Stock Option                               0.2528     **           0.3742     ***          0.0143                 0.3742     ***
Grants to Total Compensation for Top
                                                           (0.1127)               (0.1258)                 (0.2352)               (0.1251)
5 Executives

Sales                                                       0.0288      **         0.0432       *            0.0180    *            0.0432     *
                                                           (0.0128)               (0.0236)                 (0.0106)               (0.0235)
Volatility                                               -1.476814 ***             -2.1009 ***              -0.8384                -2.1009 ***
                                                           (0.5546)               (0.6490)                 (0.5247)               (0.6455)


Year and Firm Effects?                                             Y                       Y                      Y                       Y
No. of Firms                                                      687                     687                    206                     481
No. of Obs.                                                     3,658                   3,658                    999                   2,659
R-Squared                                                    0.7278                  0.7343                  0.7754                 0.6818
Note: The dependent variable is Tobin's q , as defined in Section 3. The sample (over the period 1993-2001) is drawn from the merged
Compustat and Execucomp databases, and is restricted to those firms for which data on the Governance Index is available. It is also limited to
those firm-years with positive current Federal tax expense and positive (adusted) taxable income. All specifications include year effects, firm
fixed effects and the controls listed. The specification in column 2 also includes interaction terms (with the dummy for better governed firms)
for all the right-hand-side variables, except the firm fixed effects. The dummy for better governed firms is equal to one if the Governance Index
is lower than or equal to 7 and zero otherwise. In column 3, the sample is restricted to firms with a Governance Index with a value lower than
or equal to 7. In column 4, the sample is restricted to firms with a Governance Index with a value higher than 7. Robust standard errors that are
clustered at the firm level are presented in parentheses; *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                         Table 3
 Tax Avoidance, Firm Value and Governance Institutions: Alternative Measures of Earnings
                                    Management

Dependent Variable:                                                                 Tobin's q

                                                              (1)                     (2)                      (3)

                                                                                 Modified Jones          Forward-looking
                                                         Jones Model
                                                                                    Model                  Jones Model

Book-Tax Gap Interacted with Dummy                              2.4862      **          2.4659      **           2.4215      *
for Better Governed Firms
                                                              (1.1893)                (1.1975)                 (1.3203)
Accruals Measure (Scaled)                                      0.7453       *          0.7542       *           0.7126       *

                                                              (0.3912)                (0.3976)                 (0.4193)


Basic Controls, Year and Firm Effects?                                 Y                       Y                        Y
No. of Firms                                                          687                     674                      668
No. of Obs.                                                         3,653                   3,548                    3,451
R-Squared                                                       0.7343                  0.7363                   0.7414
Note: The dependent variable is Tobin's q , as defined in Section 3. The sample (over the period 1993-2001) is drawn from
the merged Compustat and Execucomp databases, and is restricted to those firms for which data on the Governance Index
is available. It is also limited to those firm-years with positive current Federal tax expense and positive (adusted) taxable
income. All specifications include year effects, firm fixed effects and the set of basic controls included in Table 2. The
specifications also include interaction terms (with the dummy for better governed firms) for all the right-hand-side
variables, except the firm fixed effects. The dummy for better governed firms is equal to one if the Governance Index is
lower than or equal to 7 and zero otherwise. Robust standard errors that are clustered at the firm level are presented in
parentheses; *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                                     Table 4

           Tax Avoidance, Firm Value and Governance Institutions: Tax Avoidance Robustness Checks


Dependent Variable:                                                                           Tobin's q

                                                             (1)                    (2)                     (3)                      (4)

                                                                                                                                All Firms: Lag
                                                         All Firms               All Firms               All Firms
                                                                                                                                Specification

Book-Tax Gap Interacted with Dummy                             2.5173      *           2.3709     **           2.3915     **           2.3803      *
for Better Governed Firms
                                                             (1.4001)                (1.1420)                (1.2206)                (1.3099)
Deferred Tax Expense (Scaled)                                 0.0980
                                                             (1.7432)
Value of Stock Option Exercises by                                                                           39.0326      ***
Top 5 Executives (Scaled)
                                                                                                              (10.42)


Lagged Book-Tax Gap Interacted with                                                                                                    3.1458
Dummy for Better Governed Firms                                                                                                      (2.1407)




Basic Controls, Year and Firm Effects?                                Y                      Y                       Y                        Y
Debt Controls?                                                        N                      Y                       N                        N
Lagged Basic Controls?                                                N                      N                       N                        Y
No. of Firms                                                         650                    685                     687                      649
No. of Obs.                                                        3,286                  3,650                   3,658                    3,414
R-Squared                                                      0.7632                  0.7455                  0.7600                  0.7310
Note: The dependent variable is Tobin's q, as defined in Section 3. The sample (over the period 1993-2001) is drawn from the merged
Compustat and Execucomp databases, and is restricted to those firms for which data on the Governance Index is available. It is also limited to
those firm-years with positive current Federal tax expense and positive (adusted) taxable income. All specifications include year effects, firm
fixed effects and the set of basic controls included in Table 2. The specifications also include interaction terms (with the dummy for better
governed firms) for all the right-hand-side variables, except the firm fixed effects. In addition, Column 4 includes lags of these basic controls
(except for the volatility measure). The debt controls are as described in the text. The dummy for better governed firms is equal to one if the
Governance Index is lower than or equal to 7 and zero otherwise. Robust standard errors that are clustered at the firm level are presented in
parentheses; *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                          Table 5

          Tax Avoidance, Firm Value and Governance Institutions: Additional Controls


Dependent Variable:                                                                 Tobin's q

                                                              (1)                     (2)                     (3)

                                                           All Firms               All Firms               All Firms


Book-Tax Gap Interacted with Dummy                               2.6152     **           2.2470    *             2.0618    *
for Better Governed Firms
                                                               (1.1956)                (1.2117)                (1.2229)
Capital Expenditures (Scaled)                                    2.2137     ***

                                                               (0.8397)
Lagged return on assets (%)                                                              0.0261    ***

                                                                                       (0.0070)


Future Sales Growth                                                                                              0.4110    **
                                                                                                               (0.1689)


Basic Controls, Year and Firm Effects?                                 Y                       Y                       Y
No. of Firms                                                          684                    687                     684
No. of Obs.                                                         3,606                   3657                    3576
R-Squared                                                        0.7383                  0.7392                  0.7477
Note: The dependent variable is Tobin's q, as defined in Section 3. The sample (over the period 1993-2001) is drawn from
the merged Compustat and Execucomp databases, and is restricted to those firms for which data on the Governance Index
is available. It is also limited to those firm-years with positive current Federal tax expense and positive (adusted) taxable
income. All specifications include year effects, firm fixed effects and the set of basic controls included in Table 2. The
specifications also include interaction terms (with the dummy for better governed firms) for all the right-hand-side
variables, except the firm fixed effects. The dummy for better governed firms is equal to one if the Governance Index is
lower than or equal to 7 and zero otherwise. Robust standard errors that are clustered at the firm level are presented in
parentheses; *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
