NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE THICK MARKET EFFECT ON LOCAL
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE FLUCTUATIONS
Li Gan
Qinghua Zhang
Working Paper 11248
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11248
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

We thank Vernon Henderson, John Driscoll, Bent Sorensen, Herakles Polemarchakis and Peter Hansen for
their help during the writing of an earlier version of this paper. We also thank Dean Corbae, Steve Bronars,
Guan Gong, Dan Hamermesh, Qi Li, Hugo Mialon, Gerald Oettinger, Derek Neal, Steve Trejo, Paul Wilson,
and especially four anonymous referees for their comments. We thank Jingyuan Yin for her research
assistance. All the remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Li Gan and Qinghau Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Thick Market Effect on Local Unemployment Rate Fluctuations
Li Gan and Qinghau Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 11248
March 2005
JEL No. J64, R23
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how the thick market effect influences local unemployment rate fluctuations. The
paper presents a model to demonstrate that the average matching quality improves as the number of
workers and firms increases. Unemployed workers accumulate in a city until the local labor market
reaches a critical minimum size, which leads to cyclical fluctuations in the local unemployment rates.
Since larger cities attain the critical market size more frequently, they have shorter unemployment
cycles, lower peak unemployment rates, and lower mean unemployment rates. Our empirical tests
are consisten with the predictions of the model. In particular, we find that an increase of two standard
deviations in city size shortens the unemployment cycles by about 0.72 months, lowers the peak
unemployment rates by 0.33 percentage points, and lowers the mean unemployment rates by 0.16
percentage points.
Li Gan
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
gan@eco.utexas.edu
Qinghua Zhang
Guanghua School of Management
Beijing University
Beijing, China
zhangq@gsm.pku.edu.cn

1

Introduction

Unemployment rates vary widely across cities in the United States. Among the 295 Primary
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (PMSAs), the average unemployment rate from 1981 to 1997
ranged from 2.4% in Columbia, Missouri (PMSA code 1740), to 19.6% in McAllen-EdinburgMission, Texas (PMSA code 4880). One main explanation to this phenomenon is the industry
composition eﬀect: since diﬀerent cities have diﬀerent industry compositions, nation-wide,
industry-speciﬁc shocks have diﬀerent composite eﬀects on unemployment rates in diﬀerent
cities.1
Although the industry composition eﬀect is intuitive, people still ﬁnd signiﬁcant geographic
diﬀerences in mean unemployment rates after controlling for the industry composition eﬀect.
Another hypothesis in the literature, risk diversiﬁcation hypothesis, is based on the observation that in the local labor market, prosperous industries absorb the unemployment of those
experiencing contractions. Therefore, a city with a more diversiﬁed industry structure has a
lower variance in labor demand. As a result, the frictional unemployment rate in this city is
also lower. For example, Mills and Hamilton (1984) argue that larger cities are usually more
industrially diverse and thus have lower unemployment rates. Neumann and Topel (1991)
provide a formal model on the eﬀect of risk diversiﬁcation.
A few empirical studies have conﬁrmed the risk diversiﬁcation hypothesis, e.g., Simon
(1988) and Neumann and Topel (1991). Simon’s study is based on U.S. data at the 2-digit
SIC level that covers 91 large PMSAs over the years 1977–1981. He deﬁnes the frictional
unemployment rate as a city’s aggregate unemployment rate net of the eﬀects of national
shocks and industry composition. He ﬁnds that the frictional unemployment rate declines as
local industrial diversity rises. Using U.S. data at the state level over the years 1950–1985,
Neumann and Topel show that after controlling for the eﬀect of industry composition, the
unemployment rate is signiﬁcantly and persistently lower in labor markets where the sectoral
demand risk is more diversiﬁed.
1

In this paper, the term “city” has the same meaning as the term “PMSA.”

2

However, little work in the literature studies variations in unemployment rate ﬂuctuations
across cities. Alperovich (1993)’s empirical work ﬁnds a signiﬁcant and negative correlation
between city size and the unemployment rate as well as the spell of individual unemployment in Israel. However, cyclical behaviors of the unemployment rate is not the focus of his
study. Moreover, there is no theoretical model in his paper. Our paper contributes by exploring just that. We present a model that provides predictions on variations in both the
frequency/duration and amplitude of unemployment cycles across cities, as well as an additional explanation to geographical diﬀerences in mean unemployment rates. We use data of 295
PMSAs in the U.S. over the years 1981- 1997 to test the predictions of the model empirically.
We ﬁnd that city size contributes signiﬁcantly to the spatial heterogeneity of unemployment
cycles.
Understanding variations in unemployment cycles has important policy implications, for the
duration of unemployment cycles is closely related to the mean of the individual unemployment
spell. It is also important to note the diﬀerence between national business cycles and local
unemployment cycles studied in this paper. National Business cycles are typically caused by
aggregate shocks to demand and/or productivities. However, local unemployment cycles in
this paper are driven by market friction and idiosyncratic shocks across workers and ﬁrms.
Therefore, our analysis on local unemployment rate ﬂuctuations is conducted after controlling
for the eﬀects of industry composition and aggregate business cycles.
The intuition behind our model is as follows. Both workers and ﬁrms are heterogeneous
in terms of their technological speciﬁcity. They are assumed to be located on a unit circle
that represents the technology space. The matching quality is better and the wage rate is
higher if the distance between a ﬁrm and a worker is shorter. A thicker market means that
there are more workers and more ﬁrms on this unit circle. When a market is suﬃciently thick,
workers’ expected return from job-searching is higher than the cost of the job search. Only
in this situation, active job search begins and matches occur; otherwise, unemployed workers
accumulate until the local labor market reaches a critical minimum size. Therefore, the local
labor market becomes active at a certain frequency, which leads to cyclical ﬂuctuations in

3

the unemployment rate. For example, job fairs in a city are usually held at intervals instead
of continuously. In a simple version of the model, a cycle of unemployment starts with full
employment. The pool of unemployed workers increase over time until it reaches a critical
size when matches occur and unemployed workers get jobs. If the unemployment increases
linearly, the length of the unemployment cycle is twice as long as the mean of individual
unemployment durations. Because a larger city typically generates more unemployed workers
during a given time period, it takes a shorter time for the city’s labor market to attain the
critical minimum size. Therefore, its labor market becomes active more frequently. Thus our
model predicts a speciﬁc type of agglomeration economies, that is, larger cities on average have
shorter unemployment cycles and lower unemployment rates.
That matching quality and wages depend on the distance between a ﬁrm and a worker
is illustrated in the matching model of Helsley and Strange (1990) who use a unit circle to
describe the technological space of ﬁrms and workers. Their model is used to study urban
agglomeration economies2 . There is other work in the literature that studies how urban agglomeration facilitates the matching process in local labor markets, such as Ciccone and Hall
(1996), Wheeler (2001)and Glaeser and Mare (2001). However, all the aforementioned work
does not study the relationship between urban agglomeration and local unemployment cycles.
Diamond (1982) presents a model of the thick market eﬀect that hinges on search cost instead of on matching quality. His idea is that the more activity there is on one side of the
market, the lower the contacting costs faced by those who are looking for trading partners
on the other side. Shimer (2001) applies Diamond’s trading externality and Mortensen and
Pissarides (1994)’s matching model to explain his ﬁnding that state unemployment rates are
negatively correlated with the share of youth in the working age population. He argues that if
there are more “mis-matched” and ready-to-move young workers in a state, then the number
of available workers is larger. A thicker labor market is more appealing for ﬁrms to create jobs.
As a result, the state’s unemployment rate is lower. However, his paper does not consider the
2

For a general discussion on urban agglomeration economies, see Henderson (1986, 1988) and Duranton and

Puga (2004). In addition, Wilson (1988) provides an empirical test for agglomeration economies.

4

eﬀect of matching quality as well as the eﬀect of the size of the economy on the unemployment
rate. Our paper explicitly models how matching quality and matching probability are aﬀected
by city size in a dynamic setting. It establishes a systematic relationship between city size and
local unemployment rate ﬂuctuations.
Empirically, this paper tests three predictions in our model, after controlling for the eﬀects
of risk diversiﬁcation and industry composition: (1) the length of an unemployment cycle is
shorter in a larger city; (2) the peak unemployment rate decreases as city size increases; and
(3) the average unemployment rate in a city is negatively correlated with city size.
One way to test the negative correlation between the length of the unemployment cycle and
city size is to conduct a spectral analysis. If we think of the time series as compounded cycles
with diﬀerent frequencies, the spectral density of a certain frequency measures how much the
cycle associated with this speciﬁc frequency contributes to ﬂuctuations in the time series. We
consider two types of frequencies: max-frequency and mean-frequency. Since a frequency is
the inverse of a cycle length, our model predicts that the two types of frequencies are positively
correlated with city size. Another way to investigate the relationship between the length of
the unemployment cycle and city size is to carry out a duration analysis. The duration of an
unemployment cycle is the time length of the unemployment cycle. We decompose an entire
unemployment cycle into two stages: the peak-to-trough stage (the expansion in the economy)
and the trough-to-peak stage (the contraction in the economy). Our model predicts that the
length of the trough-to-peak stage is negatively correlated with city size.
Testing a negative relationship between peak unemployment and city size is relatively
straightforward. After identifying peak points in unemployment cycles, we construct the average peak unemployment rate for each city and then ﬁnd its relationship with the log of average
city size.
To ﬁnd the relationship between the average unemployment rate and city size, we use
a linear regression model. The model includes the log of average city size as one of the
explanatory variables.
The empirical results in this paper are consistent with the three aforementioned predictions

5

of the model. In particular, we ﬁnd that an increase of two standard deviations in city size
shortens the unemployment cycle by about .72 months, lowers the peak unemployment rate
by .33 percentage points and lowers the average unemployment rate by about .16 percentage
points,
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2.1 presents the theoretical model
that provides the three hypotheses for the empirical tests that follow. Section 2.2 discusses
the data. Section 3 conducts a spectral analysis on the frequency of unemployment rate
ﬂuctuations. Section 4 carries out a duration analysis on the average length of unemployment
cycles. It also studies the peak unemployment rate. Section 5 investigates the inﬂuence of city
size on the mean unemployment rate. Section 6 summarizes the paper.

2

The Model and the Data

2.1

The Model

In this section, we present a simple model that illustrates the eﬀect of the thick market and
its associated agglomeration economy on local unemployment rate ﬂuctuations. Zhang (2002)
presents a dual version of the model with strategic behaviors that focuses on the local capital
market. Workers and ﬁrms are heterogeneous in terms of their technological speciﬁcity. We
assume idiosyncratic shocks to all the ﬁrms. This is reﬂected by the separation rate of a
worker-job pair during any time period, denoted as ν.
Let N be the number of workers in a city who are immobile across cities, and let this be
the measure of city size.3 Let the number of unemployed workers be U and let the number
of job openings be V . We use a unit circle to represent the technology space. We can think
of this unit circle as a clock. All the points on the circle are indexed from 0 to 1 clockwise.
The locations of zero and one on the unit circle are at the same point and correspond with
3

In reality, labor may be mobile. However, labor mobility is limited because of moving costs. The qualitative

results from our theoretical model will hold given a limited labor mobility. Our empirical regressions control for
the eﬀect of migration across cities.

6

twelve-o’clock on a clock. All the V jobs are evenly spaced around the unit circle. Let b denote
the location of the 1st job, b ∈ [0, 1). The j + 1 − th job is then located at point b + j/V .
However, if b + j/V > 1, the location of j + 1 − th job becomes b + j/V − 1. We assume b
to be a random variable uniformly distributed over the unit circle [0, 1). All the workers are
independently and uniformly distributed over the unit circle [0, 1).4 A worker knows his own
location.
The matching mechanism is as follows. One worker can be matched with at most one job.
One job can be matched with at most one worker. Job j + 1 located at point b + j/V can only
be matched with a worker who lies within the arc interval [b + j/V − 1/2V, b + j/V + 1/2V ).5
Suppose an unemployed worker is located at point a ∈ [0, 1). If he falls into the 1/2V -interval
of job j + 1, namely, if a ∈ [b + j/V − 1/2V, b + j/V + 1/2V ), then he is matched with job
j + 1. The matching quality between job j + 1 and the worker is dependent on the shorter
arc distance between them, denoted by da,j+1 . The better the matching quality, the higher
the productivity of the job-worker pair. Let y ≡ y(da,j+1 ) denote the value of the products
and y  (da,j+1 ) < 0. Following Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), we assume that the worker
gets paid from the job through bargaining and we assume a certain bargaining power θ > 0.
Thus, the worker’s payoﬀ from the job increases as their mutual distance decreases; that is,
w ≡ θy(da,j+1 ) and w (·) < 0. When there is more than one worker located in the interval
[b + j/V − 1/2V, b + j/V + 1/2V ), job j + 1 is then matched with the worker who is located
closest to the job.
Ex ante, an unemployed worker chooses whether to look for a job or not. If he does, he
incurs a positive search cost, denoted c; otherwise, his search cost is zero.6 His decision is based
4

Since the location of the ﬁrst job b is random, the assumption that jobs are even-spaced preserves the

uncertainty of match while simpliﬁes the analytics of the model.
5
Without this assumption, an assignment problem would arise when one worker is the favorite to two jobs.
Any allocation rule would involve complicated computations of the model that make it impossible to get analytical results. Zhang (2002) addresses the assignment problem without making this assumption. The allocation
rule there is the same as an eﬃcient multiple-object auction with a capacity constraint. Her simulation results
are similar to the analytical results of the simple model in this paper.
6
All unemployed workers are seeking employment by deﬁnition. However, search has diﬀerent intensities.

7

on the comparison between the expected payoﬀ from search and the search cost. Suppose he
is at point a. If the worker searches for a job in the job market, his payoﬀ will be:7
W (a) =



 w(da,j+1 ),



if matched with job j + 1;

(1)

0, if no match.

Ex ante, a worker does not know the exact location of each job. To him, b is a random
variable. Thus the ex ante expectation of a worker’s payoﬀ from searching is taken over
b ∈ [0, 1).
When the expected payoﬀ from job-search at least compensates the search cost, i.e.,
E[W (a)] ≥ c, an unemployed worker starts to actively search for jobs. Finding out the expected payoﬀ requires the matching probability of a worker. Suppose there are U unemployed
workers looking for jobs and there are V job openings. According to the matching mechanism
described earlier, the expected number of matches is:8




1
M (U, V ) = V 1 − 1 −
V

U 

.

The matching probability could be deﬁned in terms of the number of unemployed workers
(U ) or in terms of the number of job openings (V ). From now on, we assume U = V . This
assumption is consistent with Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) where jobs are both created and
destructed at roughly the same rate.
Our model is a simpliﬁcation of reality where the search intensity can be either 0 or 1. If the intensity is 0,
no search cost is incurred and seldom can a worker ﬁnd a job. If the intensity is 1, there is a search cost c.
The search cost may decrease as V or U increases, as in Diamond’s model. For simplicity, we assume c to be a
constant here. However, this assumption is not essential for the results of our model.
7
If the worker is not matched with a job this time period, he waits until next time. Waiting has a value.
Thus, the worker’s payoﬀ from a job should be net of this value. For simplicity, we assume that the value
of waiting is a constant and normalize it to be zero. We admit that the value of waiting should in fact be a
function of expected market size. In Zhang (2002), a fully dynamic model is developed and the value of waiting
is endogenously determined.
8
To understand the following equation better, let us think of V jobs as V empty boxes and U workers as
U balls. The balls fall into the boxes randomly. For each box, the probability of at least one ball falling
into it is 1 − (1 − 1/V )U . Because there are V boxes altogether, the expected number of ﬁlled boxes is thus
V × (1 − (1 − 1/V )U ).

8

When U = V , the matching probability of an individual worker, denoted by P , is given by:


1
P (U ) = 1 − 1 −
U

U

(2)

The matching probability in (2) has two properties. First, it decreases as U increases. This
is because when U increases, it is more likely that more than one worker has arrived at the
acceptable interval for the same job while the job only needs one worker.9 Second, P (U ) is
not dependent on the location of a since the model treats all workers symmetrically.
Now consider the expected payoﬀ of the worker at a, conditional on his being matched with
a job, say job j + 1 located at b + j/U .10 Because the bargaining power is θ, the conditional
expected payoﬀ of the worker is equal to θ/(1 − θ) times the conditional expected proﬁts of
the ﬁrm, denoted E(Π|match). The worker’s location a is the closest to the job among all
the workers and moreover, it is within the interval [b + j/U − 1/2U, b + j/U + 1/2U ). The
conditional expected payoﬀ of the worker is thus given by:
E(W |match) =
=

=

θ
E(Π|match)
1−θ
1
2U
θ
(1 − θ)y(da,j+1 )
1−θ 0
2U θ
1 − (1 − U1 )U

1
2U

0

1
2U

0

2U (1 − 2da,j+1 )U −1
2U (1 − 2da,j+1 )U −1 dda,j+1

y(da,j+1 )(1 − 2da,j+1 )U −1 dda,j+1 ,

dda,j+1 ,
(3)

where 0 ≤ da,j+1 = |a − b − j/U | ≤ 1/2U .11
Consider a production function y(da,j ) = ȳ exp(−αda,j ) where ȳ > 0 and α ≥ 10. In this
case, the expected payoﬀ of this worker is:
E(W ) = P (U )E(W |match)
9

In a recent paper, Gan and Li (2002) show that if rankings are allowed to order individuals and jobs, and

if unmatched workers are allowed to keep looking for jobs, the matching probability may be increasing with
market size.
10
Because ex ante all the jobs are symmetric, it does not matter which job is matched with the worker ex
post when calculating the expected payoﬀ.
11
Because da,j+1 is the shortest arc distance between job j + 1 and the U job seekers, using order statistic,
we can derive the pdf of da,j+1 , f (da,j+1 ) = 2U (1 − 2da,j+1 )U −1 .

9





1
1− 1−
U

=

= 2U θ ȳ

1
2U

0

U 

E(W |match)

exp(−αda,j+1 )(1 − 2da,j+1 )U −1 dda,j+1 ,

(4)

where PU is given by (2) and E(W |match) is given by (3). When U ≥ 3, it can be shown
numerically that E(W ) increases with U for any α ≥ 10. For example, given α = 100,
∂E(W )/∂U = .018θ ȳ, .006θ ȳ, .001θ ȳ when U = 3, 30, 100, respectively. This reﬂects the eﬀect
of a thick market on improving the average matching quality between jobs and workers. Since
E(W ) increases as U increases, when U is large enough, E(W ) will surpass the search cost c.
Let n̄ be the critical size of the market such that:
2n̄θ ȳ

1
2n̄

0

exp(−αda,j+1 )(1 − 2da,j+1 )n̄−1 dda,j+1 = c.

(5)

We consider the equilibrium where unemployed workers wait before searching for jobs until
the total number of unemployed workers U in the city accumulates to n̄, since over time more
and more matched job-worker pairs are separated by idiosyncratic shocks. The n̄ in (5) is the
critical size of the market. We claim that the existence of such a critical size of the market
leads to cyclical unemployment ﬂuctuations in a city. Before the number of unemployed workers
reaches n̄, unemployed workers do not search for jobs in the market. When the market size
reaches n̄, all the unemployed workers engage in job-searching and matches occur. Therefore,
this model predicts that either all or none will search. We call such an occasion as a clearance
of the market.
Formally, let us normalize the labor market’s clearance time at time t = 0. Then at the
beginning of time t = 1 the unemployment in the local market is U0 , determined by:


1
U0 = n̄ 1 −
n̄

n̄

.

(6)

Let Ut be the number of accumulated unemployed workers by time t. Let T be the number
of time intervals such that:
UT ≥ n̄ > UT −1 .

10

(7)

The inequalities in (7) state that T is the smallest number of time intervals such that the
accumulated number of unemployed workers in the local market will be larger or equal to the
minimum market size n̄. Assuming that the separation rate of a worker-job pair during any
time period is ν, we have:
Ut = Ut−1 + ν(N − Ut−1 ),

1 ≤ t ≤ T.

Solving the above diﬀerence equation, we get:
Ut = N (1 − (1 − ν)t ) + U0 (1 − ν)t ,

1 ≤ t ≤ T,

(8)

The unemployment rate at the end of time t, denoted as ut , is thus:
ut = Ut /N = 1 − (1 − ν)t +




= 1− 1−

U0 (1 − ν)t
,
N

1 ≤ t ≤ T,

U0
(1 − ν)t
N

(9)

Clearly, ut increases with t, implying that over time, as the pool of unemployed workers
increases, the unemployment rate goes up. The average unemployment rate over the time
interval [1, t] is:
ūt ≡

t
i=1 ui

t

,



= 1− 1−

1 ≤ t ≤ T,
U0
N



1−ν
ν

(10)
1 − (1 − ν)t
t



.

From (10), ∂ ūt /∂t > 0. since ut increases as t increases, its average over t, ūt , also increases
with t.
At time T , the number of accumulated unemployed workers just reaches the critical minimum size for the labor market to clear. According to (7) and (8),
U0 (1 − ν)T + N (1 − (1 − ν)T ) ≥ n̄ > U0 (1 − ν)T −1 + N (1 − (1 − ν)T −1 ).
Rearrange the above inequality as follows:
T ≥

ln ((N − n̄)/(N − U0 ))
> T − 1.
ln(1 − ν)
11

(11)

From (11), we can see that T decreases as N increases. Intuitively, it takes less time for
a larger city to accumulate enough unemployed workers in the local labor market, given ν.
Because T measures the length of time from the trough to the peak of an unemployment
cycle, our model predicts that the length of each unemployment cycle is therefore negatively
correlated with city size.
At time T , the unemployment rate is at its highest. From (9), the peak point unemployment
rate is given by:



uT = 1 − (1 − ν)T 1 −



U0
.
N

(12)

Equation (12) says that the peak unemployment rate uT increases as T increases. Combined
with Equation (9), this model predicts that the peak unemployment rate decreases as city size
increases.
According to (10), the average unemployment rate over the time interval [1, T ] is:


1−ν
ūT = 1 −
ν

1 − (1 − ν)T
T



1−



U0
.
N

(13)

According to Equation (13), the average unemployment rate over a cycle increases as T
increases. Because T decreases as city size increases, the average unemployment rate for the
cycle is lower for larger cities.
To better illustrate our model, we draw the unemployment ﬂuctuation rate in two hypothetical markets in Figure 1. We let the probability of separation be constant at ν = .01. The
critical size of the market n̄ = 5, 000. In the top graph in Figure 1, city size is 60,000. In
the bottom graph in Figure 1, city size is 30,000. From the two graphs, we see that it takes a
longer time for the smaller city to reach the critical size. The length of the cycle in the larger
city is 5.56 while the length of the cycle in the smaller city is 12. The average unemployment
rate in the larger city is about 6%, while the average unemployment rate in the smaller city is
about 12%. The peak unemployment rate in the larger city is 8.3%, while the smaller city’s
peak unemployment rate is 16.7%.
In summary, the model has three testable predictions: (1) the length of unemployment
cycles is shorter in a larger city; (2) larger cities have lower peak unemployment rates; and (3)
12

the average unemployment rate should be negatively correlated with city size;

2.2

The Data

The empirical analysis is conducted on a sample of 295 PMSAs in the U.S. over the years
1981–1997. During this period, the U.S. economy experienced both recession and expansion.
The data on monthly unemployment rates is collected from the Employment and Earnings
published by the Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Denote city c’s
unemployment rate at time t by unemprct . The employment data by PMSA is compiled from
County Business Patterns and by summing up the city’s employment over industries. Denote
a city c’s employment at time t by empct .
The industry employment information is obtained from the data that covers 543 industries
at the 3-digit SIC level. We use the yearly employment data in County Business Patterns to
calculate industry shares for each PMSA. We also use increments in the national employment
by industry to approximate the nationwide industry-speciﬁc shock. The data on national
employment by industry is obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Let sict denote the
employment share of industry i in city c at time t. Let it denote the nationwide employment
growth rate of industry i during time t. The industry composition eﬀect on city c at time t
will then be:
IN DCOMct =

543
sict
i

× it ,

where c = 1, 2, ..., 295,

(14)

i = 1, 2, ..., 543,
and, t = 1981 : 1, 1982 : 2, ..., 1997 : 12.
Note here sict ’s are the same for all the t’s in the same year, because for each city, its industry
shares do not change much over the course of a year.
A second variable is the risk diversiﬁcation eﬀect, denoted as RISKct . This variable measures uncertainty local labor demand that depends on the covariance of local labor demand
across industries. Following Neumann and Topel (1991), we compile a variable RISK:
RISKct = sct Ωsct,
13

(15)

where sct is the vector of industry employment shares of city c at time t and Ω is the covariance of nationwide industry-speciﬁc (detrended) shocks. The higher RISKct , the higher the
uncertainty in local labor demand. Because the market friction tends to be greater when the
uncertainty of the employment is higher, RISKct aﬀects the unemployment rate in a positive
way.
Unemployment beneﬁts, denoted by benefit, are another important factor aﬀecting unemployment rates. We use the ratio of average weekly beneﬁt to average weekly total wage to
represent unemployment beneﬁts. The state-by-state ratio is obtained from the U.S. Department of Labor (http://www.doleta.gov). If a PMSA is across more than one state, we assign
the mean ratio of these states to the PMSA.
Shimer (2001) suggests that the proportion of youth in a local market may aﬀect the
local unemployment rate. We use the ratio of population between age 15 and age 24 to the
population between age 15 and age 64 as a measure of the proportion of youth, denoted as
youth share. This state-by-state ratio is obtained from the U.S. census. If a PMSA is across
more than one state, we assign the mean ratio of these states to the PMSA.
Another factor that may aﬀect unemployment rates is the net migration.12 To control for
the eﬀect of net migration, we use the mean net migration rate over the sample period at the
PMSA level. Finally, it is possible that the area of the a city may aﬀect the unemployment
rate. We include the variable log(square miles) and its square in the regressions.
Table 1 is a summary of statistics of the variables involved in the analysis of this paper.
The sample period is January 1981 – December 1997. The unemployment rate, unempr, is
measured in percentage points. City size in Table 1 is measured by a city’s average labor force
over time. Since variable log(size) will be used, we list the summary statistics of the log of
city size.
Table 1 shows that both city size and unemployment rate vary signiﬁcantly. The average
labor force ranges from 247,289 in Enid, Oklahoma (PMSA code 2340), to 3,532,300 in Los
Angeles-Long Beach, California (PMSA code 4480). The average unemployment rate ranges
12

We thank two referees for pointing this out.

14

Table 1: Summary Statistics of PMSA Averages (1981–1997)

PMSA average
unempr
emp
size
log(size)
beneﬁt
youth share
net migration rate
log(miles2 )
INDCOM
RISK
INDCOM × RISK

mean

standard
deviation

minimum

maximum

original
data frequency

6.60
232,110
247,289
11.71
.362
.231
1.196
7.249
.00208
.00266
8.2894E-6

2.30
397,482
425,347
1.07
.047
.014
1.131
.861
.000506
.00134
6.938E-6

2.43
19,931
19,931
9.94
.264
.191
-.983
3.843
.207
.000979
1.575E-6

19.58
3,262,702
3,532,300
15.7
.470
.291
5.678
10.58
.393
.0130
.0000683

monthly
monthly
monthly
monthly
yearly
yearly
yearly
ﬁxed
monthly
yearly
monthly

from 2.4% in Columbia, Missouri (PMSA code 1740), to 19.6% in McAllen-Edinburg-Mission,
Texas (PMSA code 4880).
In Figure 2, we draw mean unemployment rates and log of city size. The straightline in
the ﬁgure is the ﬁtted line. The slope of the ﬁtted line is -.366 (.123). To ease the potential
concern about “outliers,” we delete cities that have unemployment rates larger than 15%. The
ﬁtted slope (not shown in the ﬁgure) is still signiﬁcantly negative at -.250 (.107). In Section
5, we investigate this relationship in more detail.

3

City Size and the Frequency of Unemployment Fluctuations
— a Spectral Analysis

Our focus in this section is on the relationship between the frequency of ﬂuctuations in a city’s
unemployment rate and its size. In particular, we are interested in testing the ﬁrst prediction

15

of our model in Section 2.1, namely, the length of the cycles T decreases as the city size N
increases.
We conducted a spectral analysis on three samples. The ﬁrst sample consists of 139 PMSAs
in the U.S. during 1981–1997. The unemployment rate data is monthly. For each PMSA, the
number of unemployment rate observations is at least 200, indicating at most 4 missing values
in the monthly unemployment rate. The second sample contains 168 PMSAs in the U.S.
during 1983–1997. For each PMSA, the number of unemployment rate observations is at least
176, again indicating at most 4 missing values. As for the third sample, the period covers
1986–1997; and there are 204 PMSAs. For each PMSA, the number of unemployment rate
observations is at least 140. Because we allow for at most 4 missing values for each PMSAs
in the monthly unemployment rate, as the sample period becomes longer, there are therefore
fewer qualiﬁed PMSAs remaining in the sample. We can see that any one of the three sample
periods experienced both recession and expansion in the U.S. economy. Each sample contains
PMSAs of all sizes. Since the spectral analysis on the three samples all show similar results,
for convenience, in this paper we only present regression results based on the ﬁrst sample; that
is, the one with the longest sample period (i.e., January 1981–December 1997). The sample
size is 139.
Our model studies unemployment rate ﬂuctuations that are driven by market friction and
idiosyncratic shocks across workers and ﬁrms, it does not consider business cycles caused by
aggregate shocks to demand and to productivities. Therefore, it is necessary to control for the
eﬀect of aggregate shocks to the local unemployment rates. Thus, before we investigate the
spectrum of local unemployment cycles, we ﬁrst detrend the unemployment rate time series.
Speciﬁcally, we run regressions of the unemployment rate unemprct on the stochastic trend
Xct = {IN DCOMct , RISKct , RISKct ×IN DCOMct } to control for the eﬀects of the industry
composition and the risk diversiﬁcation and their interaction13 ; and on the deterministic trend
Z(t) = {1, t, t2 , t3 } to control for the eﬀects of time trends. Here the regression is conducted
13

Because benefit and youth share are yearly variables and do not change much over time, we do not treat

them as stochastic trend variables.

16

city by city. Our objective is to conduct a spectral analysis in the frequency domain of the
residuals city by city.

3.1

The Band Spectrum Regression and Filtering

The regression to be carried out here is called a band spectrum regression. It is conducted in the
frequency domain. Since we want to examine the frequency of unemployment rate ﬂuctuations,
it is natural to use a regression in the frequency domain to control for the eﬀects of trend
variables. Moreover, it is plausible to consider that the relationship between the unemployment
rate and trend variables is frequency-dependent. For example, the high frequency irregular
ﬂuctuations in labor demand should have a diﬀerent eﬀect on a city’s unemployment rate from
that of business cycle ﬂuctuations. When the relationship is frequency-dependent, a detrending
regression in the time domain can generate biased estimates, see Corbae, Ouliaris and Phillips
(2002). On the contrary, the band spectrum regression best captures the essence that the
coeﬃcients of trend variables are frequency-dependent and it leads to consistent estimates.
The band spectrum regression method adopted here follows Corbae et al. (2002).
We divide the frequency domain into three bands. Band 1 consists of frequencies that
correspond to cycles with a length from 2 to 4 months. This is a high frequency band. Band 2
includes frequencies associated with cycles longer than 4 months but shorter than 18 months.
This is a medium frequency band. Since a typical waiting period in the job search process falls
within this band, studying this band may reveal important information on the average waiting
period in the job search process.14 Band 3 is a low frequency band, consisting of frequencies
corresponding to cycles longer than 18 months. This band includes the national business cycle
frequencies, since according to National Bureau of Economic Research deﬁnitions, a business
cycle in the U.S. at the national level has a length of between 18 and 96 months.
Let W denote a discrete Fourier transformation such that for any time series y of length T ,
14

The mean unemployment duration of individuals is 3.8 months during 1994–2000 (Abraham and Shimer,

2001). According to our discussion in Section 1, the length of an unemployment cycle is roughly twice as long
as the mean unemployment duration.

17

W is a T × T matrix and W y is the discrete Fourier transformation of y. The T fundamental
frequencies in W y are 0, 2π/T, 4π/T, ..., and 2π(T − 1)/T . Let Aj be a T × T diagonal matrix
with value 1 at the k-th row if 2π(k − 1)/T lies within Band j as previously deﬁned, and which
otherwise has a value of 0. In other words, by taking the product of Aj and W y, we can zero
out all the fundamental frequencies in W y that lie outside of Band j.
The regression model speciﬁes:
W unemprct = A1 W Z(t)α1c + A2 W Z(t)α2c + A3 W Z(t)α3c
A1 W Xct βc1 + A2 W Xct βc2 + A3 W Xct βc3 + W uct

(16)

where αic , βci , and i = 1, 2, 3 are parameters to be estimated and which vary by city. Note that
Equation (16) allows parameters to be diﬀerent in diﬀerent bands, capturing the possibility that
the relationship between unemployment rates and control variables is frequency-dependent.
After the regression, we take the residuals for each city c and conduct the inverse Fourier
transformation. The resulting time series is an estimate of the detrended unemployment rate,
denoted {uct }.
Before we conduct a spectral analysis, there is one more step to go: ﬁltering. We need to
smooth the irregular high frequency ﬂuctuations in uct in order to obtain more robust results.
That’s why we ﬁlter out the high frequencies in uct that lie within Band 1. Also, because our
primary interest is local unemployment cycles, we need to control for the eﬀect of the time
trend and the eﬀect of national business cycles that might still remain after the band spectrum
regression. Thus we ﬁlter out the low frequencies in uct that lie within Band 3. We then focus
on the frequencies within Band 2. As stated above, this band consists of frequencies associated
with cycles longer than 4 months but shorter than 18 months. Studying this band reveals
important information on the average waiting period in the job search process. It sheds light
on local unemployment cycles that are caused by friction in the local labor market. We use
Corbae and Ouliaris (2002)’s ﬁlter to remove any frequency in uct that lies within either Band
1 or Band 3. Corbae and Ouliaris’s ﬁlter works in the frequency domain and it is natural for
us to use this ﬁlter after the band spectrum regression15 . Moreover, Corbae and Ouliaris’s
15

We also tried the method of Baxter and King (1999). We used the extracted time series obtained through

18

ﬁlter has the following merits: 1) it generates a statistically consistent estimator of the ideal
band pass ﬁlter; 2) it controls for stochastic trends and deterministic trends easily; and 3) it
involves no set up of parameter values and no loss of observations at either end of the time
series.
After ﬁltering {uct }, we obtain a new time series for each city c, denoted u∗ct . Our spectral
analysis is conducted on the frequency domain of {u∗ct }.

3.2

Spectral Analysis

Our spectral analysis reveals how cycles with diﬀerent frequencies account for ﬂuctuations in
a city’s unemployment rate. A frequency of ω is associated with a cycle of length of 2π/ω.
Let sy (ω) be the power spectral density at ω of a time series y; and
energy contained in ﬂuctuations in y, denoted Gy . Thus,

ω+δ
ω−δ sy (f )df

π
0 sy (ω)dω

is the total

represents the portion

of the energy that is attributed to frequencies that lie within the δ-interval of frequency ω.
This reﬂects how much frequencies within that interval contribute to ﬂuctuations in y.
We estimate the power spectrum density for each city. For city c and a given δc , we ﬁnd
a frequency ω whose δc -interval contributes the most to the energy of {u∗ct }. This frequency
contributes more to ﬂuctuations in the city’s unemployment rate than any of the other frequencies.
Formally, we deﬁne city c’s max-frequency as:
ωcmax = arg

ω+δc

max

δc ≤ω≤π−δc ω−δc

θ(|ω − f |)su∗c (f )df,

where θ(·) is a weight function. We let:



 0,

θ(f ) =





if |f − w| > δc ;
.82|f −w|/δc

ω+δc
ω−δc

.82|f −w|/δc df

, if |f − ω| ≤ δc .

This weight function has the property that the closer the frequency f is to ω, the larger
the weight assigned to this frequency will be.
Baxter and King’s ﬁlter to run the same regression as in Section 4.3. The results (not shown here but available
upon request) are consistent with the ones reported in Table 3 of this paper.

19

Table 2: Summary Statistics of Frequency Variables
mean std dev minimum maximum
max-frequency
mean-frequency

.631
.793

.235
.0985

.368
.616

1.520
1.030

Selecting an appropriate δc depends on how smooth the power spectral density curve of
time series {u∗ct } is and what method is used to estimate the power spectral density.16 A
smaller δc implies less robustness but more accuracy in calculating the max-frequency. After
some experiments, we choose δc = .049, which is 3% of the length of the spectral domain [0, π]
we investigate. Another frequency we are interested in is given by:
ωcmean =
The variable

ωcmean

π
0

su∗c (f )
f df.
Gu∗c

is called the “mean-frequency” since it is a weighted average of frequen-

cies over the frequency domain where the weight of each frequency is its (normalized) power
spectral density. The higher the mean-frequency, the more contributions from high frequency
cycles to unemployment ﬂuctuations there are.
Table 2 is a summary of statistics of the frequency variables. The max-frequency and
mean-frequency are .631 and .793, corresponding to 10.0 months and 7.9 months, respectively.
In order to understand the spectral analysis conducted in this section, we present an example comparing the {unemprt }, {u∗t }, and the power spectrum of {u∗t } of two cities. The
ﬁrst city, Monroe, Louisiana (PMSA code 5200), is relatively small and has an average labor
force of 52,589. The other city is Los Angeles (PMSA code 4480), with an average labor force
of 3,532,300.
The example is illustrated in Figure 3. The ﬁrst row in Figure 3 depicts the unemployment
rate unemprct for Monroe and Los Angeles. The average unemployment rate in Monroe is
8.30%; while in Los Angeles, the average unemployment rate is 7.69%. This is consistent with
the our models’ ﬁrst prediction.
16

We use a MATLAB function “pmtm”. It is a function using the multi taper method (MTM) to estimate

the power spectral density.

20

The detrended and ﬁltered unemployment rates u∗ct are illustrated in the ﬁgures in the
second row. We will come back to these ﬁgures in Section 5. In the third row, we draw the
power spectrum of u∗ct for both cities. The max-frequency in Monroe is .44, corresponding to
a cycle of 2π/.44 = 14.3 months. For Los Angeles, its max-frequency occurs at 1.08, which
corresponds to a cycle of around 6 months.17 We may also turn to a more robust measurement,
the mean-frequency. Monroe has a lower mean-frequency (.6) than that of Los Angeles (.73),
which means that the larger city has shorter cycles than the smaller city on average, consistent
with the ﬁrst prediction of our model.

3.3

Results from Summary Regressions

We use simple regressions of the variables of max-frequency and mean-frequency on the log of
city size and Yct to summarize the relationships, where Yc is a vector of other variables that
may inﬂuence unemployment rates, discussed in Section 2.2. Speciﬁcally,
max − f requencyc = αf + Yc ζ f + η f log(sizec ) +
(or mean − f requencyc)

f,
c

(17)

where
Yc = {mean beneﬁtc , mean youth sharec , mean net migration ratec , log(miles2c )},
According to our model in Section 2.1, the sign of η f should be positive. The regression
results are shown in Table 3. As predicted by the model, both max-frequency and meanfrequency are signiﬁcant and positively correlated with city size. To assess the magnitude of
the eﬀect of city size, consider an increase of two standard deviations in the log of city size. The
max-frequency increases by .135. If the initial max-frequency is .631, which equals the mean of
max frequency across cities, the corresponding unemployment cycle will be shortened by 1.75
months. As to the mean-frequency, it increases by .066. If the initial mean frequency is .793,
17

The ﬁrst peak in Los Angeles’ power spectrum occurs at frequency .52, corresponding to a cycle of 12

months. This is the seasonal eﬀect. It is slightly dominated by the city’s max-frequency, because its spectral
density is smaller than that of the max-frequency.

21

Table 3: Frequency Regression Results
dependent variable
constant
log(size)
beneﬁt
youth share
net migration rate
log(miles2 )
[log(miles2 )]2
R2
No. of obs.

max-frequency

mean-frequency

.084
(.086)
.063
(.022)
-.600
(.423)
.590
(1.67)
-.0035
(.021)
.0044
(.188)
-.0031
(.013)

.605
(.358)
.031
(.0092)
.014
(.177)
-.639
(.699)
-.0015
(.0086)
.0031
(.078)
-.0011
(.0053)

.078
139

.099
139

Standard errors are in parentheses.

which equals the mean of mean-frequency across cities, the corresponding unemployment cycle
will be shortened by .61 months. To summarize, the results in this section support our model’s
the ﬁrst prediction: larger cities have shorter unemployment cycles. According to Table 3, the
average beneﬁt, the average youth share, and the average net migration rate are statistically
insigniﬁcant, which indicates that these three variables cannot explain cyclical ﬂuctuations of
unemployment rates.

22

4

The Duration Analysis

In this section we carry out a diﬀerent experiment: we investigate the duration of cyclical
ﬂuctuations in the unemployment rate city by city. Following Diebold and Rudebusch (1990),
“duration” here refers to the length of each cycle, while a “cycle” is the time length between
two consecutive turning points of an unemployment rate. We will deﬁne the turning points
later in this section.
A duration analysis diﬀers from the spectral analysis in two aspects. First, in a duration
analysis, identifying turning points of a cycle depends on the subjective rule we use. In a
spectral analysis, a cycle is deﬁned in the strict sense of periodicity. Thus, the results of a
spectral analysis do not depend on the rule used to identify the turning points of a cycle.
Second, the results from a spectral analysis are concerned with a whole cycle. Thus, it is
impossible to discern diﬀerent behaviors at diﬀerent stages of a cycle. In contrast, a duration
analysis reveals the relationship between city size and the length of both trough-to-peak cycles
and peak-to-trough cycles. Moreover, through identifying turning points, a duration analysis
sheds light on the amplitude of cyclical ﬂuctuations. Thus, it can provide an empirical test
on the second prediction of our model in Section 2.1; namely, larger cities have lower peak
unemployment rates.

4.1

Duration of Unemployment Cycles

We examine the duration of cyclical ﬂuctuations of {u∗ct }, for each city c, where {u∗ct } is the
detrended and ﬁltered unemployment rate deﬁned in the previous section. A cycle of {u∗ct }
is the time length between two consecutive turning points of {u∗ct }. The following are some
useful deﬁnitions.
• A trough point is the point where an upturn is about to start. Because we are considering
the unemployment rate, an upturn in {u∗ct } signals a downturn in the economy.
• A peak point is the point with the highest value of {u∗ct } between two consecutive trough
points.
23

• A trough-to-trough duration is the length between two consecutive trough points.
• A trough-to-peak duration is the length between a trough point and the ﬁrst peak point
right after it.
• A peak-to-trough duration is the length between a peak point and the ﬁrst trough point
right after it.
The key then is to ﬁgure out how to identify an upturn in {u∗ct }. The classic criterion
for identifying a downturn in a business cycle is the “two consecutive declines” rule associated with GDP. Here, we apply a similar criterion (with a slight modiﬁcation) to determine
unemployment cycles. Speciﬁcally, an upturn is signaled either by two consecutive periods
of growth in the unemployment rate or by three consecutive time periods where each has a
higher unemployment rate than the preceding; moreover, there should be at least two periods
of growth in the unemployment rate in these three time periods. The modiﬁcation made here
is to control for small noises in the time series.
According to the above criterion, time t is a trough point of {u∗ct } if and only if:

 

∗
∗
∗
∗

uct−2 > uct , uct−1 > uct and





u∗ct+1 > u∗ct and






∗
∗
 u
>u
or u∗
ct+2

4.2

ct+1



ct+2

(18)

> u∗ct , u∗ct+3 > u∗ct+2 .

City Size and Durations of Unemployment Cycles

We ﬁrst identify each city’s peak and trough points of unemployment cycles according to (18).
Next we calculate each city’s average trough-to-trough duration, trough-to-peak duration,
peak-to-trough duration and peak unemployment rate. Table 4 provides a summary of statistics
of these variables. The average length of cycles, measured by the average trough-to-trough
duration, is 7.0 months. Note, in Table 2, that the mean-frequency is .793, corresponding to a
cycle of 7.9 months. The diﬀerence between the two measures arises from the fact that cycles
are measured according to diﬀerent methods.
24

Table 4: Summary Statistics of Duration Variables
mean std dev min max
trough-to-trough
trough-to-peak
peak-to-trough
peak rate

7.01
3.4
3.6
.61

1.01
.43
.71
.375

5.27
2.56
2.57
.188

10.9
4.95
6.89
2.76

Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 5: Regression Results of Duration Analysis

constant
log(size)
beneﬁt
youth share
net migration rate
log(miles2 )
[log(miles2 )]2
R2
No. of obs.

trough-to-trough

trough-to-peak

peak-to-trough

peak rate

7.94
(3.61)
-.337
(.093)
-.310
(1.79)
-.619
(7.07)
.091
(.087)
.851
(.792)
-.054
(.053)

4.14
(1.54)
-.117
(.039)
-.681
(.760)
3.86
(3.01)
-.024
(.034)
-.024
(.337)
.0039
(.023)

3.81
(2.51)
-.220
(.064)
.360
(1.24)
-4.55
(4.91)
.123
(.060)
.876
(.550)
-.058
(.037)

4.47
(1.31)
-.154
(.034)
-.748
(.647)
-5.22
(2.56)
-.027
(.031)
-.181
(.287)
-.016
(.019)

.122
139

.103
139

.137
139

.161
139

Standard errors are in parentheses.

25

Table 5 lists results from some simple regressions that summarize the relationship between
the log of city size and unemployment cycles. In the ﬁrst column, the trough-to-trough duration, i.e., the length of an entire cycle, is signiﬁcantly and negatively correlated with city
size. In particular, an increase in two standard deviations of the log of city size will result
in a decrease in the duration of unemployment cycles by .72 months. If we decompose the
entire cycle into two parts, Table 5 shows that the trough-to-peak duration is signiﬁcantly and
negatively correlated with city size, while the peak-to-trough duration is also signiﬁcantly and
negatively correlated with city size.
The test results are consistent with the thick market model presented in Section 2. According to the ﬁrst prediction of our model, larger cities in general have shorter trough-to-peak
durations. Due to the thick market eﬀect, a city’s unemployed workers accumulate before the
local labor market reaches a large enough size to have workers actively search for jobs. Larger
cities typically need less time to reach that market size, which implies shorter trough-to-peak
durations.
It is worth pointing out that the average length of peak-to-trough is 3.4 months (Table 5).
Our model has not yet considered how the matching between ﬁrms and workers proceeds after
the minimum critical size n̄ is reached. It assumes that matching occurs instantly. However, it
may take time after ﬁrms and workers meet. Table 6 shows a signiﬁcant negative correlation
between the peak-to-trough duration and city size. The explanation to this fact is an interesting
topic for future research. It might be that urban agglomeration speeds up the matching process.
As to the relationship between city size and peak unemployment rates, it is clear from
the last column in Table 5 that the peak unemployment rate is signiﬁcantly and negatively
correlated with city size. This result supports the second prediction of the model in Section 2.
A lower peak unemployment rate in a larger city indicates a shallower recession in that city.
In particular, an increase in two standard deviations in the log of city size lowers the peak
unemployment rates by .33 percentage points.
Table 5 also shows that the average beneﬁt and the average youth share cannot explain
any duration variables. However, the youth share is marginally signiﬁcant in explaining the

26

peak unemployment rate.
The ﬁgures in the second row of Figure 3 illustrate how the durations and peak unemployment rates of unemployment cycles are diﬀerent for two diﬀerent cities. Monroe, Louisiana,
which is a small city, has a much larger average peak unemployment rate than that of Los Angeles. The average peak rate in Monroe is .801%, while the average peak rate in Los Angeles
is .451%. Moreover, the average length of cycles is also longer in Monroe (7.6 months) than
that of Los Angeles (6.8 months).

5

City Size and Mean Unemployment Rate

In this section, we examine the relationship between the average unemployment rate and city
size. The basic model we are interested in is as follows:
unemprct = αc + γt + Xct β + Yct ζ + η log(sizec ) +

ct ,

(19)

where the Xct and Yct are vectors of control variables. In particular, we consider:
Xct = {RISKct , IN DCOMct, RISKct × IN DCOMct }
Yct = {beneﬁtct , youth sharect , mean net migration ratec , log(miles2c )},
where the variable RISKct in Xct is constructed in (15), and the variable IN DCOMct in Xct is
constructed in (14). The expected sign for RISKct is positive and for IN DCOMct is negative.
The coeﬃcient for the interaction term is unclear. The vector Xct represents the two previous
hypotheses about diﬀerence in local unemployment rates: the industry composition and the
risk diversiﬁcation. The vector Yct includes other variables that may aﬀect local unemployment
rates, such that unemployment beneﬁt and youth share. Both variables are discussed in Section
2.2.
To investigate the relationship between the unemployment rate and city size, we include an
additional term log(sizec ) in the model. City size is deﬁned by the city’s average total labor
force in our sample period. The coeﬃcient on the log of average city size, η, is expected to be
negative: the larger the city size, the lower the unemployment rate.
27

Our model only studies unemployment rate ﬂuctuations that are driven by market friction
and idiosyncratic shocks across workers and ﬁrms, it does not consider business cycles caused
by aggregate shocks to demand and to productivities. Therefore, it is necessary to control for
the eﬀect of aggregate shocks to the local unemployment rates. In Equation (19), the term γt
is the ﬁxed time eﬀect. It is used to control for the eﬀect of the time trend.
Another term αc in (19) represents the unobserved city heterogeneity. Since the variable
log(sizec ) does not change over time, we cannot use a ﬁxed city eﬀect model. Instead, we let
αc be a random variable, such that E(αc |Xit , log(sizec )) = 0. This speciﬁcation represents a
random city eﬀect model. For the purpose of comparison, we also estimate models that do not
include the term log(sizec ).
We use the random eﬀect model rather than the ﬁxed eﬀect model for two reasons. First,
using time invariant city size is consistent with our theoretical model that only considers the
eﬀect of size variation across cities (not across time). Second, using the random eﬀect model
avoids a potential problem that the unemployment rate at time t at a city may aﬀect net
migration of the city at time t+1. Therefore, that eﬀect may lead to correlation between the
error term

ct

and the city size at time t+1. Since the correlation mainly occur in the time

domain, using the average city size minimizes (if not eliminates) that correlation. To further
control the eﬀect of migration or the growth of the city, we include the average net migration
rates in the regressions.18
The reduced-form speciﬁcation outlined in equations (19) is chosen for two reasons. First,
since the reduced-form speciﬁcation is consistent with previous study about local unemployment rates of Simon (1988) and Neumann and Topel (1991), we can compare our results to
their work. Second, the theoretical model in Section 2 only oﬀers predictions in signs on how a
local unemployment rate varies with the city size.19 It is, therefore, appropriate to work with
18

We also include the total population growth rates in the regressions. Results (not shown here) are virtually

the same.
19
For example, Equation (13) describes the the average unemployment rate ūT would decrease if the city size
N increases, i.e., ∂ ūT /∂N > 0. Other parameters in Equation (13), such as the unemployment in the local
market at beginning of time U0 , and the separation rate of a worker-job pair during a time period ν, are the

28

the reduced-form speciﬁcation.
Table 6 lists the regression results. Column (1) does not have city size while Column
(2) includes city size. In these speciﬁcations, the coeﬃcients for the variable IN DCOM are
signiﬁcantly negative, supporting the industry composition hypothesis. The coeﬃcients for the
variable RISK are positive but signiﬁcant. In addition, our estimates are consistent with the
results in Shimer (2001) who shows that a larger youth share leads to a lower unemployment
rate.20
More importantly, in the regression results reported in Column (2) the log of city size
has a signiﬁcantly negative eﬀect on a city’s unemployment rate: The coeﬃcient for log(size)
is -.0752 (.0129). The third prediction of our model is supported: larger cities have lower
unemployment rates.
To compare the magnitude of the eﬀects of all three hypotheses, we calculate changes
in the unemployment rate given an increase of two standard deviations for each of the ﬁve
variables IN DCOM , RISK, youth share, unemployment beneﬁts, and log(size). If we apply
the estimates from Column (2), the unemployment rate would decrease by .018 percentage
points if IN DCOM increases, increase by .006 percentage points if RISK increases, decrease
by .06 percentage points if youth share increases, increase by .096 percentage points, and
decrease by .16 percentage points if city size increases. The eﬀect of city size is thus much
more important than eﬀect of industry composition and risk diversiﬁcation. It is about 60%
larger than the eﬀect of unemployment beneﬁts, and more than twice as much as the eﬀect of
youth proportion.
same across cities with the diﬀerent sizes. The values of these variables do not aﬀect the negative relationships
between the city size N and the unemployment rate ūT .
20
Our results remain essentially the same when the birth rate is used as the instrumental variable for youth
share.

29

Table 6: Unemployment Rate Mean Regression Results
Variables
time ﬁxed eﬀect
city random eﬀect
constant
lagged unemployment rate
INDCOM
RISK
INDCOM × RISK
unemployment beneﬁt
youth share
mean net migration rate
log(miles2 )
[log(miles2 )]2

(1)
yes
yes
.485
(.520)
.874
(.0020)
-18.64
(1.033)
10.61
(5.69)
360.8
(163.8)
1.058
(.128)
-1.765
(.528)
-.0051
(.011)
-.141
(.140)
.0105
(.0095)

log(size)
R2
.915
No. of Obs.
50439
Standard errors are in parentheses.

30

(2)
yes
yes
1.423
(.539)
.873
(.0021)
-18.66
(1.033)
1.467
(5.88)
424.9
(163.4)
1.019
(.127)
-2.147
(.531)
.0080
(.011)
-.203
(.139)
.0179
(.0095)
-.0752
(.0129)
.916
50439

6

Conclusion

This paper explores the relationship between city size and pattern of unemployment rate
ﬂuctuations. We present a model of the local labor market in which when more workers are
looking for jobs and more job openings are available, the matching quality between jobs and
workers increases. A higher matching quality leads to a higher wage. Workers incur search
costs if they actively search for jobs. Unemployed workers accumulate in a local market until
the market reaches a critical size such that the expected payoﬀ is higher than the cost of
job-searching. Since a given shock produces more unemployed workers in larger cities during
a given time period, it takes a shorter time for larger cities to reach the critical size described
above. Consequently, the model predicts: (1) the length of unemployment cycles decreases as
city size increases; (2) the peak unemployment rate is negatively correlated with city size; and
(3) the average unemployment rate is lower in larger cities.
Our empirical analysis utilizes data that covers 295 PMSAs in the U.S. over the years
1981–1997. After controlling for the eﬀects of industry composition and risk diversiﬁcation,
we ﬁnd that larger cities have shorter unemployment cycles. Speciﬁcally, the unemployment
cycle will be shortened by roughly .72 months if city size increases by two standard deviations.
We also ﬁnd milder trough-to-peak unemployment cycles for larger cities. The peak unemployment rate will be lowered by .33 percentage points if city size increases by two standard
deviations. Finally, city size has a signiﬁcantly negative eﬀect on the mean unemployment
rate. In particular, the unemployment rate will be lowered by roughly .16 percentage points.
All these empirical results are consistent with our model’s predictions.

References
Abraham, K. G. and Shimer, R.: 2001, Changes in unemployment duration and labor force
attachment, NBER working paper, #8513.
Alperovich, G.: 1993, City size and the rate and duration of unemployment: evidence from
Israeli data, Journal of Urban Economics 34, 347–57.
Baxter, M. and King, R.: 1999, Measuring business cycles: approximate band-pass ﬁlters for
economic time series, Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 575–93.
31

Ciccone, A. and Hall, R.: 1996, Productivity and density of economic activity, American
Economic Review 86(1), 54–70.
Corbae, D. and Ouliaris, S.: 2002, Extracting cycles from nonstationary data, Working Paper,
Department of Economics, University of Texas at Austin.
Corbae, D., Ouliaris, S. and Phillips, P.: 2002, Band spectral regression with trending data,
Econometrica 70(3), 1067–1109.
Davis, S. and Haltiwanger, J.: 1992, Gross job creation, gross job destruction, and employment
reallocation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 819–63.
Diamond, P.: 1982, Aggregate demand management in search equilibrium, Journal of Political
Economy 90(5), 881–894.
Diebold, F. X. and Rudebusch, G. D.: 1990, A nonparametric investigation of duration dependence in the American business cycle, Journal of Political Economy 98(3), 596–616.
Duranton, G. and Puga, D.: 2004, Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies, in V.
Henderson and J. Thisse (eds.), Handbook of Regional and urban Economics 4.
Gan, L. and Li, Q.: 2002, Eﬃciency of thin vs. thick markets, Working Paper, Department of
Economics, University of Texas Austin.
Glaeser, E. and Mare, D.: 2001, Cities and skills, Journal of Labor Economics 19(2), 316–42.
Helsley, R. and Strange, W.: 1990, Matching and agglomeration economies in a system of
cities, Regional Science and Urban Economics 20, 189–212.
Henderson, V. J.: 1986, The eﬃciency of resource usage and city size, Journal of Urban
Economics 19, 47–70.
Henderson, V. J.: 1988, Urban Economics, New York: Oxford University Press.
Mills, E. J. and Hamilton, B. W.: 1984, Urban Economics, Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman and
Company.
Mortensen, D. and Pissarides, C.: 1994, Job creation and job destruction in the theory of
unemployment, Review of Economic Studies LXI, 397–415.
Neumann, G. and Topel, R.: 1991, Employment risk, diversiﬁcation, and unemployment,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(4), 1341–65.
Shimer, R.: 2001, The impact of young workers on the aggregate labor market, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116, 969–1007.
Simon, C.: 1988, Frictional unemployment and the role of industrial diversity, Quarterly Journal of Economics 103(4), 715–28.
32

Wheeler, C.: 2001, Search, sorting and urban agglomeration, Journal of Labor Economics
19(4), 879–99.
Wilson, P.: 1988, Wage variation resulting from staggered work hours, Journal of Urban
Economics 24, 9–26.
Zhang, Q.: 2002, A microfoundation of local business cycles, Working Paper, Department of
Economics, University of Texas at Austin.

33

Figure 1: Illustration of the Thick Market Eﬀect on Unemployment Fluctuations

N=60,000, nbar=5,000, ν=0.01
0.2

u

0.15

0.1

0.064
0.05

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

120

140

160

180

200

N=30,000, nbar=5,000, ν=0.01
0.2

0.15

u

0.122
0.1

0.05

0

0

20

40

60

80

100
t

34

Figure 2: Logarithm of City Size and
Mean Unemployment Rates
20

Unemployment Rates

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
9

10

11

12

13

log(city size)

35

14

15

16

Figure 3: Patterns of Unemployment Rates in Monroe, LA, and Los Angeles, CA

Monroe, LA
(average labor force: 57,349)

15

10

10

5

5

0
Jan. 1981

Dec. 1997

0
Jan. 1981

2

2

1

1

0

0

−1

−1

−2

−2

Jan. 1981

Dec. 1997

1.5

Dec. 1997

Jan. 1981

Dec. 1997

1.5
(0.44, 1.38)

power spectrum

unemployment rate

(detrended and filtered)

unemployment rate

15

Los Angeles
(average labor force: 3,532,300)

1

1
(1.08, 0.51)

0.5
0

0.5

0

1

2

0
0

3.14

36

1

2

3.14

