                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION FROM HYBRID CORN TO BETA BLOCKERS

                                            Jonathan Skinner
                                             Douglas Staiger

                                         Working Paper 11251
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11251


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




We are grateful to Martin N. Baily, Ernst Berndt, Bronwyn Hall, Christopher Jencks, seminar participants
at Duke, the University of Michigan, Princeton University, the European University Institute, and to
participants in the CRIW meeting on "Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services: Essays in Memory of Zvi
Griliches" in September 2003. Weiping Zhou and Daniel Gottlieb provided superb data analysis. This
research was funded by the National Institute on Aging PO1- AG19783. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jonathan Skinner and Douglas Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Technology Adoption From Hybrid Corn to Beta Blockers
Jonathan Skinner and Douglas Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 11251
March 2005
JEL No. O3, I1

                                            ABSTRACT

In his classic 1957 study of hybrid corn, Griliches emphasized the importance of economic
incentives and profitability in the adoption of new technology, and this focus has been continued in
the economics literature. But there is a distinct literature with roots in sociology emphasizing the
structure of organizations, informal networks, and ““change agents.”” We return to a forty-year-old
debate between Griliches and the sociologists by considering state-level factors associated with the
adoption of a variety of technological innovations: hybrid corn and tractors in the first half of the
20th century, computers in the 1990s, and the treatment of heart attacks during the last decade. First,
we find that some states consistently adopted new effective technology, whether hybrid corn,
tractors, or effective treatments for heart attacks such as Beta Blockers. Second, the adoption of these
new highly effective technologies was closely associated with social capital and state-level 1928 high
school graduation rates, but not per capita income, density, or (in the case of Beta Blockers)
expenditures on heart attack patients. Economic models are useful in identifying why some regions
are more likely to adopt early, but sociological barriers    perhaps related to a lack of social capital
or informational networks      can potentially explain why other regions lag far behind.

Jonathan Skinner
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
jon.skinner@dartmouth.edu

Douglas Staiger
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.staiger@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction

       The idea that differential adoption of new technology can explain productivity

differences across regions has gained acceptance in the economics literature. Most of the

variation in income per capita across countries appears to come from differences in total

factor productivity (TFP) rather than differences in inputs such as capital or labor

(Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare, 1997; Casselli and Coleman, 2000), and income

differences have been directly related to differences across countries in technology

adoption (Comin and Hobijn, 2004). Economic models such as that proposed by Parente

and Prescott (1994) imply that relatively small differences across countries in barriers to

technology adoption could explain much of the difference in income levels and growth

across countries. In medicine, the recent emphasis on accountability has documented a

similarly wide variation in medical practice with most observers agreeing that

improvements in compliance with well-established guidelines could lead to substantial

improvements in health outcomes of lagging regions (Berwick, 2003; Jencks, 2003;

Skinner, 2003).

       The real question is why some countries or regions are successful in adopting

efficient technological innovations, and why others lag behind? The classic research in

economics goes back to the study of state-level hybrid corn diffusion during the 1930s

and 1940s by Zvi Griliches (Griliches, 1957). For Griliches, the answer was clear: the

presence of differential economic incentives and the profitability of innovation
determined the wide variations in the pace of diffusion.1 However, this view of the

diffusion of technology was not shared universally. During the early 1960s, there was a

long and contentious debate between Griliches and sociologists in Rural Sociology on

what caused technology to diffuse. In this exchange, the sociologists, including Everett

Rogers, emphasized characteristics of individual decision makers, the structure of

networks, and interactions among decision makers in regulating the speed and extent of

diffusion.2 While Griliches ultimately acknowledged the potential importance of these

sociological factors (Griliches, 1962), the literature on diffusion in sociology and the

parallel literature in economics has shown little cross-fertilization, at least until quite

recently.3

         In this paper, we return to the debate between Griliches and the sociologists by

considering a number of technological innovations in addition to hybrid corn, with a

particular focus on the treatment of heart attacks (acute myocardial infarction or AMI) in

the 1990s. Between 1984 and 1998 mortality among the elderly in the year following a

heart attack fell from 41 percent to 32 percent, with most of the gain representing

progress in medical technology (Cutler, 2004; Cutler and McClellan, 2001). Despite these

gains, there remain large and persistent differences across regions in the survival rates of

observationally identical heart attack patients, differences that cannot be explained by

variations in expenditures or surgical rates of diffusion (Skinner and Staiger, 2005;

Skinner, Staiger, and Fisher, 2005). These patterns suggest that, like hybrid corn, the

1
  Hall (2004) provides an excellent synthesis of both the economic and sociological
literature on diffusion.
2
  Brandner and Straus (1959), Griliches (1960), Havens and Rogers, (1961), Griliches
(1962), Rogers and Havens (1962), and Babcock (1962).
3
    See for example Calvó-Armengol and Jackson (2004) and Conley and Udry (2004).


                                               2
diffusion of new innovations in the treatment of heart attacks has been uneven, with some

regions lagging behind others.

       In a previous study, we found that early adopter states of hybrid corn in the 1930s

and 1940s were also the early adopter states of    Blockers for the treatment of heart

attacks in 2000/01 (Skinner and Staiger, 2005).      Blockers are a highly effective and

inexpensive off-patent drug used among appropriate AMI patients to reduce demands on

a weakened heart. Clinical trials indicate the use of    Blockers reduce mortality by 25

percent or more (Gottlieb, McCarter, and Vogel, 1998; Yusuf, Wittes, and Friedman,

1998) and their beneficial effects have been well understood for several decades (Yusuf

et. al., 1985). In this paper, we expand our set of technological innovations to include not

just hybrid corn and   Blockers, but also tractors in the first half of the 20th century,

computers in the 1980s and early 1990s, and more general measures of technological

progress in health care: changes and levels in one-year mortality and one-year

expenditures for AMI patients during 1989-2001. Briefly, we find a strong state-level

association in the likelihood to innovate in all technologies, ranging from tractors to

Blockers.

       We next use a factor analysis approach to ask what characteristics of the state are

most strongly associated with technological innovation in general, and which are most

closely associated with higher costs for treating heart attacks? Conventional economic

explanatory variables include per capita income and population density to reflect

potential geographic spillovers. As well, we also include high school attainment in 1928

(Goldin and Katz, 1998) and a measure that reflects social networks or social capital

more generally (Putnam, 2001), a mechanism stressed in the early work on the diffusion




                                              3
of medical technology (Coleman, Katz, and Menzel, 1966). Nearly all of the variables

considered in the analysis line up along two latent factors. The first latent factor is highly

associated with education (correlation 0.95) and the Putnam social capital index

(correlation 0.97). This first factor is also closely associated with the adoption of hybrid

corn, tractors,   Blockers, and both the level and decline in AMI mortality, with

somewhat weaker correlation for computer ownership, but is not associated with

increased costs for the treatment of heart attacks. The second latent factor is strongly

associated with per capita income (correlation 0.84) and population density (correlation

0.89) in the state. While this second factor is largely unrelated to technological diffusion

or quality of health care, it is closely associated with higher health care costs (correlation

0.92).

         In sum, there appear to be common factors or barriers within regions governing

the adoption of cost-effective technology, whether corn, tractors, computers, or

Blockers, and these are associated with the presence of education (or more effective

social or informational networks) in the region. Yet the adoption of these effective

technologies was not associated with either per capita income, or money spent treating

heart attack patients. While Griliches (1957) developed powerful economic approaches

to predict early technology adoption, sociological or network models may hold greater

promise in explaining why some regions seem to lag so far behind.

2. Griliches Versus the Sociologists on Technological Diffusion

         Griliches (1957) hypothesized that farmers who stand to gain greater profits from

an increase in productivity (per acre) would be more likely to adopt the use of hybrid

corn, a type of corn that increased yield by about 20 percent. Noting that the dollar value




                                              4
of investing in hybrid corn was larger for agricultural land that was already more

productive prior to adoption, he estimated a strong and significant state-level (and crop

reporting area) association between adoption and the initial value of agricultural land (see

also Dixon, 1980 who found similar results). Griliches acknowledged the potential

importance of sociological factors in affecting diffusion, but dismissed them as relatively

unimportant:

       It is my belief that in the long run, and cross-sectionally, these
       [sociological] variables tend to cancel themselves out, leaving the
       economic variables as the major determinants of the pattern of
       technological change. This does not imply that the “sociological”
       variables are not important if one wants to know which individual will be
       the first or last to adopt a particular technique, only that these factors do
       not vary widely cross-sectionally [p. 522, footnote 45]

       Sociologists were not entirely pleased with this assessment of their work. They

attempted to challenge the Griliches results on statistical grounds by focusing on time-

series rather than cross-sectional analysis, but this approach was not entirely successful,

since by appropriate correction for inflation Griliches (1962) reversed their result to one

supporting his profitability hypothesis. More successful was their study showing that

hybrid sorghum tended to be adopted not so much where adoption was more profitable,

but by farmers who had previously adopted hybrid corn, and was thus supportive of the

idea of “congruence,” that innovation was easier when one has innovated in the past. The

sociologists focused more on the observation that diffusion took place too slowly to

conform to a purely economic model:

       The acceptance of improved farming practices is determined largely by
       economic considerations yet, if economic considerations were the only
       basis of acceptance, improved practices would be adopted as rapidly as
       their economic advantages were demonstrated. But, not only is there a
       considerable lapse of time between initial acquaintance and adoption of a
       practice, but those who would benefit most from improved practices are



                                             5
       frequently the last to adopt them. [Wilkening, 1953, quoted in Havens and
       Rogers, 1961, p. 410.]

       Ultimately, Griliches grudgingly acknowledged the importance of sociological

factors in diffusion, observing that “If one broadens my ‘profitablity’ approach to allow

for differences in the amount of information available to different individuals, differences

in risk preferences, and similar variables, one can bring it as close to the ‘sociological’

approach as one would want to.” [Griliches, 1962, p. 330] While Griliches may have

ultimately rejected the “either/or” approach of the earlier debate, others, such as Schultz

(1964, p.164, quoted in Dixon, 1980) viewed his work as demonstrating the primacy of

economic over sociological models in development economics.

       Economic models of diffusion since then have largely remained firmly within the

context of profitability and relative advantage as the most important factors determining

the adoption of new technologies, as in the two models developed in Jovanovic and

Nyarko (1995, 1996) where the relative advantage of the individual agent, for example

his past investments in specific technologies, determines whether a new technology is

adopted. The common feature in these models is the absence of individuals interacting

with others except indirectly through market forces. The literature in health economics

has generally been more sympathetic to the idea of network effect on physician practice

style (Fournier, Prasard, and Burke, 2002), but even these are often poised in the form of

individual Bayesian learning models with full (ex post) information.4

       Exceptions to this approach are Foster and Rosenzweig (1995), where farmers

learned about their own optimal agricultural inputs by observing what other farmers do



4
 See Phelps (2000) for a review of the older literature on diffusion in health care; more
recently see Coscelli and Shum (2004).

                                              6
(knowledge spillovers), and Berndt, Pindyck, and Azoulay (2003) which allowed for the

possibility of network effects in the prescription of anti-ulcer drugs. More recently,

Conley and Udry (2004) were able to measure the importance of social networks in

effecting these knowledge spillovers, finding that pineapple farmers emulated input

choices of the more successful farmers within their social network.

       The medical quality-improvement movement has largely ignored the economic

models of adoption and adopted the sociological framework to understand why highly

cost-effective treatments such as screening for breast cancer, annual flu shots, and the use

of   Blockers lag behind ideal levels (Berwick, 2003). In this literature, physicians are

categorized into groups such as early-adopters and laggards, and the focus is on

individual “change agents” who can shift treatment norms within hospitals (Berwick,

2003, see Rogers, 1995).

       Their emphasis on sociological factors is not entirely surprising. There are few if

any economic incentives to prescribe    Blockers or flu shots, nor are there obvious

penalties for neglecting to do so. Thus standard economic models relying solely on profit

maximization would have limited predictive power in explaining diffusion (Skinner and

Staiger, 2005). What makes the lag in     Blocker adoption puzzling is that the clinical

benefits have been understood for many years. In 1985, Yusuf et. al. concluded in their

abstract that: “Long term beta blockade for perhaps a year or so following discharge after

an MI is now of proven value, and for many such patients mortality reductions of about

25% can be achieved.” In 1996 the National Committee for Quality Assurance adopted

Blocker use as a marker of quality (Berndt, 2001), yet median state compliance with

appropriate   Blocker use in 2000/2001 was still just 69 percent (Jencks et al, 2003). For




                                             7
the same reason, it would be difficult to develop an economic model explaining why the

use of X-rays for fractures lagged for several decades in the first part of the 20th century

(Howell, 1995), or why more than a century passed between the discovery that lemons

and limes prevented scurvy to the date when the British Navy mandated their use in

sailors’ diets (Berwick, 2003).

       Education is an important variable considered by all empirical studies of

diffusion, but the interpretation of how education matters differs between the economists

and the sociologists. For much of the economic literature, education is a measure of

human capital, and so innovation may be more likely to take place depending on the

nature of the production function and the elasticity of substitution between skilled labor

and capital (e.g., Casselli and Coleman, 2004). The sociological literature, on the other

hand, places greater emphasis on education as affecting the ability of “change agents”

and early adopters to process and understand the value of the new technology, and to be

able to make the jump to a new paradigm (Rogers, 1995).

       While one might expect differences across farmers in their education levels to

affect innovation in hybrid corn, it is more difficult to understand how average education

levels of the general population would matter for the use of medical procedures, since

each physician has completed at least 20 years of formal education.5 Alternatively,

education might be associated with more rapid innovation if the demand for innovations

were higher among highly educated patients. Explaining the pattern of        Blocker use in

the 24 hours following hospital admission as variations in demand by patients would be



5
  Specialists have more formal education, but the correlation between cardiologists per
capita and Blocker use across regions is near zero (Skinner, 2003).



                                              8
difficult. The typical Medicare patient is unlikely to be aware of    Blockers at all, and

among ideal candidates, its use should have been near 100 percent in any case regardless

of demand. An alternative hypothesis is that better quality physicians are attracted to

regions with higher income and hence greater demand for quality, although we do not

find evidence for this in the empirical section below.

       The classic work in the diffusion of medical technology is Coleman, Katz, and

Menzel (1966), who document the diffusion of a new antibiotic, tetracycline, among

physicians in several North Central communities. While the diffusion was relatively

rapid, with nearly 90 percent of physicians using the drug within 17 months, there were

distinct differences in rates of adoption. Physicians with more interactions among other

physicians, such as affiliation with a hospital or group practice, were more likely to adopt

early. Importantly, physicians who reported high social participation in the medical

community adopted earlier. Among those with low social participation, even after 17

months the use of the more effective antibiotic lagged by roughly 15 percent (page 49).6

       This literature suggests an important interaction between regional levels of

education and the extent of social participation or networks (see Barr, 2000). The

pathway is more indirect, since education is highly predictive of social participation in

the community, participation in democratic activities, and other factors conducive to the




6
  More recent analysis of the original data suggest a more complex mechanism for
diffusion (Strang and Tuma, 1993), with one study finding “contagion” effects
disappearing after controlling for drug advertising in medical journals (Van den Bulte
and Lilien, 2001). However, since the marketing variable in this latter study is common
to all physicians in the sample (i.e., it is not adjusted for the number of journals to which
the physicians subscribe) it is not clear that marketing alone can explain differential
diffusion rates.


                                              9
interactions that can lead to more rapid diffusion among health care providers within a

community. 7

       In practice, we use indexes of social capital and education in the 1990s from

Braatz and Putnam (1996). While the idea of social capital has received increasing

attention in economics (e.g., Helliwell, 1996; Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2004)

economists have also been among the most critical; see Durlauf and Fafchamps (2004)

for a distinctly lukewarm review of this approach. Our use of social capital, however,

avoids their most serious objections, in that we need not identify causality, nor need we

do more than to establish that some “factor x” associated with high levels of social capital

(controlling for income) is also associated with technological innovation. As it turns out,

general education levels, and even high school graduation rates in 1928 (Goldin and

Katz, 1998) are highly predictive of these innovations, but reliance upon education alone

begs the question, as noted above, of why Blockers were more likely to diffuse in states

with higher graduation rates.

       We begin the empirical analysis by considering at the state level the association

among four technological innovations; hybrid corn, tractors, computers, and     Blockers.

Simple correlations between innovation in hybrid corn and tractors are consistent with

either economic or sociological models, since the farmers gaining most from hybrid corn

adoption would presumably enjoy similar gains from adopting tractors. A correlation

between hybrid corn and computers is less likely, although to be fair, farmers were early




7
  Coleman, Katz, and Menzel (1966, p. 43) also find differences in rates of adoption
depending on the location of the physician’s medical school, with those attending school
in the North Central states being more likely to adopt. See also Strang and Tuma (1993).

                                            10
adopters of computers to keep track of plot yields and animal medical records.8

Predicting a positive correlation between the adoption of    Blockers and the adoption of

these other technologies is not so obvious, since the educational attainment of physicians

does not differ much across states, nor is it easy to develop a rational economic model as

to why physicians wouldn’t adopt highly effective treatments that save lives but only cost

about 20 cents per dose.

       To develop a broader picture of technology gains in the treatment of heart attacks,

we also consider risk adjusted one-year mortality rates, and risk-adjusted Medicare

expenditures by state, whether in levels or in changes during the period of analysis 1989-

2000. Mortality rates reflect a more general measure of technological innovation that

goes beyond    blocker adoption. Since these rates are derived conditional on the index

AMI, and a variety of covariates are included to control for underlying health differences,

they are less likely to be confounded by the general health levels of the state.9 One-year

Medicare expenditures capture the total value of inputs to care, given that the Medicare

program effectively pays on the basis of inputs (i.e., procedures performed by the

physician or subsequent admissions to the hospital) rather than on quality of outcomes.




8
   We are grateful to Ernst Berndt for pointing this out. This pattern is consistent with the
international data (e.g., Comin and Hobijn, 2004), see also Skinner and Staiger (2005).
9
  In other words, Louisiana may have higher rates of heart disease than Vermont, but this
does not imply that adjusted mortality in Louisiana should be higher conditional on the
heart attack. For example, in the empirical section we find no association between
adjusted AMI mortality and per capita income.



                                             11
Variations in expenditures capture both differences in total inputs across states and over

time, as well as differences in reimbursement rates.10

       The obvious question is, why do some states lag behind in adoption of these

innovations? Broadly, there are two ways that we might answer this question. One

reason is the factors unique to medical care such as regulation, health insurance, or

malpractice laws. Alternatively, in some states there may be broad, general barriers to

technology adoption such as discount rates, risk aversion, lack of human capital and

information networks, or cultural norms (e.g., Strang and Soule, 1998). These types of

barriers would not be unique to medical care, and would imply that some states would be

late to adopt a wide variety of innovations.

3. The Factor Analysis Model

       We adopt a factor analysis approach to quantify the relative importance of state-

level factors that could plausibly be associated with technological diffusion. The factor

model assumes that all of the state-level variables are linear combinations of a few

unobserved factors (representing the state-level characteristics that are barriers to

adoption) plus an independent error (Harmon, 1967). Thus, the correlations that are

observed between our different measures of adoption are assumed to be generated by a

few common factors. Furthermore, we can estimate whether any observed state

characteristic is strongly correlated with the common factor – i.e., are there




10
  There are also marked differences in Medicare reimbursement rates across regions
because of cost-of-living variation, and more importantly government programs such as
graduate medical education and disproportionate share hospitals programs. Thus cross-
sectional comparisons in expenditures will reflect these permanent differences, while
changes in expenditures will reflect only secular changes in reimbursement rates.



                                               12
characteristics of states that are strongly associated with adoption and can account for the

common adoption patterns that we observe across technologies.

        More specifically, a factor model assumes that the data we observe for each state

(Y) depends on a small-dimensional set of latent factors (F):

                                       Yj = Fj    + µj

where Fj is a 1 x j vector of factors with dimension less than Y,    is a matrix of

coefficients (the factor loadings) giving the effect of the factors on the elements of Y, and

µ j is a vector of independent residuals with Var( ) = Ψ a diagonal matrix. Without loss

of generality we normalize the factors to be independent with Var(F) = I, and normalize

the observed data so that each variable has var(Y) = 1. Thus, the factor loadings ( ) can

be interpreted as the increase in Y (in SD units) associated with a one standard deviation

increase in each factor. Moreover, with this normalization the factor loadings are equal

to the correlation between Y and each factor, so that a factor loading near 1 suggests a

strong association between Y and a given factor.

                                             Y) = Var(Y) = Λ’Λ+Ψ. Thus, the parameters of
        The factor structure implies that E(Y'

the factor model (Λ,Ψ) can be estimated by fitting the parameters of the factor model to the

observed covariance matrix. There are a variety of methods for doing this. We assume

normality and estimate the parameters by maximum likelihood (other methods yield similar

results).

        The main advantage of the factor model is that it summarizes the observed

correlation in the adoption measures with only a few factors, and thereby focuses

attention on a few simple dimensions on which adoption varies. Moreover, if the

unobserved factors are strongly correlated with other state characteristics such as



                                             13
education, income or social capital, then the factors can be given a natural interpretation.

There are also a number of important limitations of the factor model. First, the estimated

factor loadings are only unique up to an ortho-normal rotation. We report estimates from

the varimax rotation, which is commonly used in factor analysis because it maximizes the

amount that each outcome is associated with a unique factor, thus helping with

interpretation of the factors. A second limitation of the factor model is that the

appropriate number of factors is not obvious. We choose the number of factors

empirically, based on significance of additional factors and the robustness of results.

4. Data

       Here we describe each of the state-level variables used in the empirical analysis.

Measures of Non-Medical Technology Adoption

       We use two state-level measures of technology adoption in agriculture. For

hybrid corn adoption, Griliches estimated logistic models for each state of the form

ln(Pt/(K-Pt)) = a + bt, where Pt represented the fraction of land planted in hybrid seed in

year t, K the maximum fraction of land to be planted in hybrid seed, b the parameter that

captures the speed of adoption, and a the intercept. The parameters K, a, and b were

estimated by least squares for each state using annual data on the use of hybrid corn for

years ranging from 5% to 95% adoption (more precisely, K was first chosen by a crude

visual method, and then the parameters a and b were estimated by OLS). We use the

time (measured relative to 1940) at which the state attained a 10 percent level of hybrid

corn; this was given by (-2.2-a)/b, and was reported in Table 1 of Griliches (1957) for the

31 states on which he had data.




                                             14
       We used an identical methodology to obtain an estimate of the year in which each

state attained at least 10 percent levels of use for tractors. Data on the proportion of

farms in each state using tractors in the years 1920, 1925, 1930, 1940, 1945, 1949, 1954

and 1959 were taken from Olmstead and Rhode’s (2000) analysis of the diffusion of

tractors.11 We assumed that tractors would eventually be adopted by all farms (K = 1),

and estimated the parameters a and b by OLS for each state.12

       Finally, using data from the 1993 Current Population Survey, we estimated the

proportion of the population of each state that had a computer in their home. Unlike our

industry-specific measures of adoption in medical care and agriculture, computer

ownership captured the adoption of a new consumer good in the general population.

Medicare claims data on treatment of heart attacks

       Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI) makes a good case study to use in studying

health care productivity. Nearly every AMI patient is admitted to a hospital, and

ambulance drivers are generally instructed to drive to the nearest hospital, so the match

between hospital and AMI patient is rarely driven by consumer demand. The outcome,

survival, is accurately measured, as are measures of inputs and covariates, whether

reflecting regional measures in the use of pharmaceutical treatments, or demographic and

health information (including the type of heart attack).13


 The data on tractor use was originally derived from U.S Bureau of the Census (1962, p.
11

214). We thank Paul Rhode for providing these data.
12
  Dixon (1980) re-estimated the original Griliches (1957) diffusion parameters to
account for what ultimately turned out to be a 100 percent adoption level in each state for
hybrid corn, but found results consistent with the original analysis.
13
   Skinner, Staiger, and Fisher (2005) consider in more detail the role of surgical
innovations in both improvements in outcomes and increasing costs.



                                             15
       Data on the mortality and cost of treating heart attacks (acute myocardial

infarctions, or AMIs) are constructed from the Medicare Claims data from 1989-2000,

these data are described in greater detail in Skinner and Staiger (2005). They include 20

percent of Medicare admissions for 1989 to 1991, and 100 percent from 1992 to 2000.

We use every fee-for-service heart attack admission to create a longitudinal cohort of 2.5

million fee-for-service enrollees age 65 or over coded with acute myocardial infarction.14

We created risk-adjusted one-year and inflation-adjusted increases in Medicare

expenditures that control for a variety of demographic factors and comorbidities.15 Thus

differences across states and over time in demographic composition, severity of AMI, and

health status are accounted for in both mortality and expenditure measures.

       We assigned patients to states based on their residence (rather than where they

were treated), and use linked death certificate data to see whether patients survived a one-

year window. Payments by Medicare for the initial and all subsequent inpatient (Part A)

expenditures were used to construct measures of 1-year hospital costs for each patient.

To construct overall measures of risk-adjusted mortality and costs, we averaged the

measures for each state across the years 1989-2000. To construct measures of the change

in risk-adjusted mortality and costs, we used the change from 1989-1991 to 1999-2000.

14
   Luft (2003) found modest differences in underlying measurable health status between
fee-for-service and the HMO population. However, the survival characteristics of AMI
patients in HMOs, conditional on the observed comorbidities in his (and our) data, were
similar to those in the fee-for-service programs.
15
   These include demographic cells by sex, 5-year age groups, and race (black or
nonblack), and categorical variables for the type of heart attack (anterior, inferior,
subendocardial, other), the presence of vascular disease, pulmonary disorders, dementia,
diabetes, liver dysfunction, renal failure, cancer (non metastatic) and cancer (metastatic).
In this data set, we exclude patients reporting previous heart attacks, but to avoid
potential secular biases, we did not exclude people appearing twice in the data set.
.


                                             16
Overall in our data, 35 percent of Medicare heart attack victims died within one year of

their heart attack, and the average cost of treatment was just under $13,000 in 2000

dollars.

Other data on the quality of medical care

           We obtained from Jencks et. al. (2003) additional measures of the quality of

medical care in 2000/2001 for each state. These measures were derived by the Center for

Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) from large state-wide random samples of

medical records. Jencks et. al. reported information for twenty-two quality indicators for

each state, ranging from the fraction of the eligible population who receive mammograms

or flu immunizations, to the proportion of stroke patients who were prescribed a

recommended medication at discharge. Thus, these measures were intended to capture

the extent to which each state had adopted current medical guidelines across a range of

conditions. We use the overall ranking (based on the average ranking across the 22

indicators, with 1 being the best) as a general indicator of how close a state is to the

frontier in terms of its adoption of medical guidelines. As a specific measure of

innovation in the treatment of heart attacks, we also used the percent of heart attack

patients who receive beta-blockers within 24 hours of admission; as noted above, median

state-level compliance was just 69 percent.

State-level factors that may influence the rate of adoption

           In addition to state-level measures of the rate of adoption of various innovations,

we considered four variables that may capture differences across states that influence the

rate of adoption. Since income could affect the demand for innovative products, we

include per capita income based on the 2000 Census.         Many theories would suggest that




                                                17
density of the market could influence the rate of innovation, because higher density

would be associated with greater potential gains from an innovation. Therefore, we use

each state’s population density in 2000 (also from the Bureau of the Census).

       The third factor, education, was measured using two different approaches. The

first is whether a state invested early in high school education. As documented in Goldin

and Katz (1998), the “high school movement” occurred much earlier in certain regions of

the country, and this early development has had lasting effects on each region. As an

indicator of which states were early adopters of high school education, we used the

number of public and private high school graduates in each state as a percent of the

number of 17 year olds in 1928.16 The second education measure relies on an index

developed by Braatz and Putnam (1996). The index is the average of (1) test scores from

the National Assessment of Educational Progress, (2) the average SAT score in the state

adjusted for participation, and (3) a measure of the high school dropout rate.

       Finally, sociological explanations of technology adoption suggest that measures

of social capital, which capture the strength of relationships between individuals in the

state, should be important factors. We used a social capital index also developed by

Braatz and Putnam (1996), which is the average z-score of (1) non-profit organizations

per capita in 1989, (2) newspaper circulation per capita in 1991, (3) voter turnout in the

presidential elections of 1988 and 1992, (4) the number of association memberships per

capita from the General Social Survey for the years 1974-1994, and (5) the social trust

measure from the General Social Survey for 1972-1996.

5. Empirical Results

16
  See Goldin (1994) for details on the construction of the 1928 high school graduation
rate. We thank Claudia Goldin and Larry Katz for providing these data.

                                             18
       Summary statistics on the state-level variables are shown in Table 1. Data are not

available for all states in all years owing primarily to lack of data on agricultural

innovations in urban states. (Alaska and Hawaii are obviously missing for the historical

data.) There is a substantial degree of variation in all variables.

A. Is early adoption related across innovations?

       We begin by comparing the year in which each state adopted hybrid corn and two

other measures of technology adoption in the state: the year tractors achieved 10%

(Figure 1), and the rate of computer ownership in 1993 (Figure 2). There is a close

association across all three variables with regard to innovation (the graph comparing

computers and tractors, not reported here, is similar). The correlation between tractors

and hybrid corn is not entirely surprising, but it is perhaps more surprising that the pattern

is so similar in Figures 1 and 2. One might normally expect a much closer association of

hybrid corn adoption with tractor adoption than with computer ownership, particularly

under the assumption that profitability of farm land (rather than general characteristics of

the state) is a key determinant of agricultural adoption. Iowa might be expected to have

led in the adoption of hybrid corn and tractors, but it also led in computer ownership.17

       In Figure 3, we show the relationship by state in the proportion of ideal patients

receiving β blockers during 2001 (Jencks et al, 2003) along with the year in which each

state attained at least 10 percent levels of use for hybrid corn varieties, based on the

logistics curves estimated in Griliches (1957). Despite more than one-half century that

separates these adoption measures, and the very sharp differences in the nature of the

outputs (and the markets for these outputs), states that took longer to adopt hybrid corn

17
   As noted above, this could also be explained in part by early adoption of computers by
farmers in keeping track of livestock.

                                              19
also had much lower use of β blockers in 2000/2001 (correlation=-0.57). In other words,

there appears to be some common state-level factor that lead to slow adoption of any

innovation, whether in the last century or in this century.

B. Evidence on the variation in mortality and cost of care for AMI patients

       Cutler and McClellan (2001), Cutler et al. (1998) and Skinner, Fisher and Staiger

(2005) have documented recent trends in mortality and the cost of care for AMI patients.

The trends between 1984 and 2000 can be roughly characterized as two distinct periods:

From 1984 to 1997 there was a steady decline in one-year mortality rates following the

heart attack, accompanied by a steady rise in costs. Since 1997, however, costs have

continued to climb while mortality has remained unchanged or even risen slightly. In a

previous paper (Skinner, Staiger, and Fisher, 2005), we have demonstrated a lack of

association between the cost of care and patient mortality; this is shown in Figure 4.

States such as California and New York spent 40-60% more per patient than states such

as Indiana and Oregon, yet their patient outcomes were no better (in fact a bit worse).

The time-series evidence in that previous study showed a similar relationship; no

association between the growth in expenditures and the decline in mortality.

       This lack of an association between resources being devoted to patients and

patient outcomes suggests that the variation in mortality is the result of productivity

differences across regions, i.e. the diffusion of new innovations in the treatment of heart

attacks has been uneven, with certain states lagging behind. Figure 5 provides some

direct evidence suggesting that the high-mortality states have lagged behind in adopting

effective treatments for heart attacks. Here we plot the risk-adjusted mortality rate in

each state (averaged over the entire 1989-2000 period) against the percentage of heart




                                             20
attack patients receiving β blockers within 24 hours of their heart attack. There is a strong

negative relationship (correlation – 0.58) between mortality and a state’s use of β

blockers. A simple regression of the risk-adjusted mortality rate on the use of β blockers

suggests that a 10 percentage point increase in β blocker use is associated with a 1.2

percentage point decline in mortality. An effect of this magnitude is somewhat larger

than what would be expected on the basis of clinical trials, given that not every heart

attack patient is appropriate for the use of   Blockers. There were many other

innovations in the treatment of heart attacks; states more likely to use β blockers were

also more likely to adopt other beneficial innovations in patient treatment.18

C. State level factors related to adoption of innovations

       In this section we investigate whether any particular characteristic of a state can

explain the strong correlations we observe in the adoption of innovations over time and

across technologies. Estimates from the factor model are reported in Table 2. We used

the factor model to explain fourteen state-level variables: four measures of AMI mortality

and cost; five other measures of whether the state had adopted various innovations; and

five state characteristics that might influence the adoption of innovations. The first two

columns report the loading for the first two factors – i.e. the correlation between each

variable and the first two latent factors. The third column reports an R2 value,

representing how much of the variation in each variable can be explained by these two

factors. With the exception of changes in cost (and to a lesser extent changes in

mortality), these two factors are able to explain the majority of the variation across states.


18
   This paper does not consider the diffusion of surgical procedures such as angioplasty
and cardiac bypass surgery. See Cutler and Huckman (2003) and Skinner and Staiger
(2005) for further discussion of surgical diffusion.

                                               21
We limited the model to two factors because the third factor added little to the

explanatory power for any of the variables.19

       These estimates imply that the variation across states in AMI mortality and cost

can be adequately explained by two quite distinct factors. The first factor is strongly

related to mortality, with a correlation of -0.82. This same factor was also strongly

associated with all five measures of innovation: the correlation is about 0.7 with all

positive indicators of adoption (rates of beta blocker use in 2000 and computer ownership

in 1993); and a correlation of between -0.7 and -0.9 with all negative indicators of

adoption (quality of care ranking in 2000, and year achieved 10% in hybrid corn and

tractors). Moreover, this first factor is correlated 0.97 with the Putnam social capital

index, correlated 0.95 with the Putnam education index, and correlated 0.80 with the high

school graduation rate from 1928. Thus, the first factor suggests that high levels of social

and human capital in a state are generating early adoption across a wide range of

innovations.

       The second factor, in contrast, is only weakly correlated with the measures of

innovation. Instead, this factor is closely related to the cost of AMI care, to per capita

income in 2000, and to the population density in 2000. Thus, the variation across states

in the cost of care appears to be associated with very different characteristics of the state.




19
  With three factors included, the first factor accounted for 64% of the explained
variance, the second factor accounted for 28%, and the third factor accounted for only
8%. The third factor primarily loaded on to the Jencks overall quality rank and blocker
use (but not the AMI measures), explaining a bit more of the variation (and correlation)
in these two measures but adding little else to the model. Since blocker use was a
component of the Jencks ranking, this third factor may have captured a mechanical
correlation between these two measures.

                                              22
        Overall, this factor model suggests that the differences across states in AMI

mortality and in the adoption of a range of innovations can be explained by a single factor

that is closely related to the human and social capital of the state that facilitates the

adoption of innovations. This can be seen most clearly in the simple two-way graphs that

show the association between the social capital index and the adoption of hybrid corn

(Figure 6) and the adoption of    Blockers (Figure 7). Similar patterns are apparent when

educational attainment is substituted for social capital.

        More strikingly, Figure 8 plots Putnam’s social capital index against the level of

risk-adjusted AMI mortality. Again, this is not a measure of overall health in the

population (as in Putnam’s (2001) own analysis of social capital and mortality rates), but

instead the survival rate conditional on an index event and controlling for a wide variety

of comorbidities, and the result holds even when controlling for differences across states

in income levels (e.g.., Table 2). By contrast, there is little association between the level

of per capita income and mortality rates (Figure 9). Indeed, there appear to be two

groups of states, one with a positive association (on the Southwest-Northeast quadrant),

from Utah to New Jersey and the other with a negative association (on the Northwest-

Southeast quadrant) from Mississippi to Connecticut.

        As noted in Table 2, there is also a strong association between overall

technological improvements in AMI mortality and social capital. Figure 10 shows this

significant negative association between the change in AMI mortality and social capital,

while Figure 11 displays the lack of association between the change in AMI mortality and

the level of income in 2000. Once again, state-level income is shown to have little

association with technological improvement in health care.




                                               23
6. Conclusion

       We have revisited the 1960s debate between Zvi Griliches and the sociologists by

comparing the adoption of several important innovations during the 20th century, ranging

from advances at mid-century in hybrid corn and tractors, to medical innovations in the

treatment of heart attacks at the end of the century. We found first a very strong state-

level correlation with regard to the adoption of new and effective technology, and this

correlation held across a variety of industries and time periods. These results are

suggestive of state-level factors associated with barriers to adoption. One might further

expect a priori that these barriers could be related to information or network flows, given

that farmers, physicians, and individual computer users conduct their business in often

small and isolated groups, and therefore are most vulnerable to potential information

asymmetries.

       Second, we found that measures of social capital or education appear to explain a

large fraction of these state-level variations in the diffusion of innovation. We cannot

and need not make any claims about causality. However, it is not unreasonable to

conjecture that there are systematic differences across states with regard to the frequency

and likelihood of informational exchanges through networks or other social activities and

that these are systematically related to both average educational attainment and other

measures of social capital.

       Finally, we view the debate between Griliches and the sociologists as being a

particularly useful guide to better understanding what causes technological diffusion.

Often differences between the economic and sociological view were simply a matter of

labeling and semantics; what was congruent behavior for the sociologists (i.e., that




                                            24
farmers who innovate in one technology are more likely to innovate in another) could

potentially be relabeled Bayesian learning-by-doing by the economists, as in Griliches

(1962). But there remain more fundamental disagreements uncovered in this debate.

For economists, people who innovate first do so because of relative advantage, better

access to credit, greater profitability, and so forth. Most economic models assume

innovation doesn’t occur because it is more profitable to wait, whether because of

second-mover advantage, risk aversion, credit constraints, uncertainty, or other factors.

       By contrast, sociologists are more interested in why innovation can be so slow

even when it seems highly appropriate to do so, going so far as to label the non-

innovators “laggards,” a value-laden term economists typically avoid.20 Both groups

agree that economic incentives are very important in affecting the likelihood of adoption,

but the disagreements arise over the behavior of people who are slow to innovate; are

they slow because they lack (or have rejected) the appropriate decision tools, or because

they do so optimally?21

       Despite these caveats, it is important to note the potential importance of economic

incentives to get around the problem of slow diffusion. While the evidence is mixed on

the importance of marketing or drug detailers (Coleman, Katz, and Menzel, 1966; Van

den Bulte and Lilien, 2001), the fact remains that the drug had largely diffused within 18



20
  Economists may be quick to label behavior “inefficient” but this is typically because of
faulty incentives and not a lack of self-interest. The growing literature on behavioral
economics, particularly in health care (e.g., Frank, 2004) holds promise in bridging this
gap between economists and sociologists.
21
  In developing countries, it can sometimes be the case that native people who are
“laggards” in the adoption of modern agricultural methods do so for very good reasons
that may not be apparent to the western agricultural advisors (Rogers, 1995).



                                            25
months. Using more recent data on anti-ulcer drugs, Berndt et. al. (1997) documented

that detailers both shifted market share and expanded its overall use. Economic factors

such as expected profitability are clearly a necessary condition for the adoption of new

technologies; the insight of the sociologists is that they are not always sufficient

conditions.




                                             26
References


Babcock, Jarvis M., 1962. “Adoption of Hybrid Corn: A Comment.” Rural Sociology 27:
332-338.

Berndt, Ernst R., 2001. ”The U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry: Why Major Growth in
Times of Cost Containment?” Health Affairs 20 (March/April): 100-114.

Berndt, Ernst R., Linda Bui, David Reiley, and Glen Urban, 1997. “The Roles of
Marketing, Product Quality and Price Competition in the Growth and Composition of the
US Anti-Ulcer Drug Industry.” In The Economics of New Goods edited by Timothy
Bresnahan and Robert Gordon. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Berndt, Ernst R., Robert S. Pindyck, and Pierre Azoulay, 2003. “Network Effects and
Diffusion in Pharmaceutical Markets: Antiulcer Drugs.” Journal of Industrial Economics
51 (June): 243-270.

Barr, Abigail, 2000. “Social Capital and Technical Information Flows in the Ghanaian
Manufacturing Sector.” Oxford Economic Papers 52: 539-559.

Berwick, Donald M. 2003, “Disseminating Innovations in Health Care,” JAMA 289
(April 16): 1969-1975.

Braatz, Jay and Robert Putnam, 1996. “Families, Communities, and Education in
America: Exploring the Evidence.” Harvard University Working Paper.

Brandner, L., and M.A. Strauss, 1959. “Congruence Versus Profitabilty in the Diffusion
of Hybrid Sorghum.” Rural Sociology 24: 381-383.

Calvó-Armengol, Antoni, and Mathew O. Jackson, 2004. “The Effects of Social
Networks on Employment and Inequality.” American Economic Review 94 (June): 426-
454.

Caselli, Francesco, and Wilbur John Coleman II, 2004. “The World Technology
Frontier,” mimeo, Harvard University (April).

Coleman, James S., Elihu Katz, and Herbert Menzel, 1966. Medical Innovation: A
Diffusion Study. New York: Bobbs-Merrill Company.

Comin, D. and B. Hobijn, 2004. “Cross Country Technology Adoption: Making the
Theories Face the Facts.” Journal of Monetary Economics 51: 39-83.




                                          27
Conley, Timothy G. and Christopher R. Udry, 2004. “Learning About a New
Technology: Pineapple in Ghana.” mimeo, Yale University (December 23).

Coscelli, Andrea, and Matthew Shum, 2004. “An Empirical Model of Learning and
Patient Spillovers in New Drug Entry,” Journal of Econometrics 122: 213-246.

Cutler, David M., and Robert S. Huckman, 2003. “Technological Development and
Medical Productivity: Diffusion of Angioplasty in New York State” Journal of Health
Economics 22 (March): 187-217.

Cutler, David M., and Mark McClellan, 2001. “Is Technological Change in Medicine
Worth It?” Health Affairs 20.

Cutler, David M., 2004. Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health
Care System. New York: Oxford University Press.

Dixon, Robert, 1980. “Hybrid Corn Revisited,” Econometrica 48 (November): 1451-
1461.

Durlauf, Steven N., and Marcel Fafchamps, 2004. “Social Capital.” NBER Working
Paper No. 10485 (May).

Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig, 1995. "Learning by Doing and Learning
From Others: Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture," Journal of Political
Economy 103 (December): 1176-1209.

Frank, Richard G., 2004. “Behavioral Economics and Health Economics.” NBER
Working Paper No. 10881 (November).

Fournier, Gary M., Kislaya Prasad, and Mary A. Burke, 2002. “Physician Social
Networks and Treatment Variations in Coronary Inpatient Care,” mimeo, Florida State
University (May).

Goldin, Claudia, 1994. “Appendix to: `How America Graduated From High School, 1910
to 1960’, Construction of State-Level Secondary School Data,” NBER working paper
H057 (June).

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, 1998. “Human Capital and Social Capital: The
Rise of Secondary Schooling in America, 1910 to 1940.” NBER working paper 6439
(March).

Gottlieb S, McCarter R & Vogel R, 1998. “Effect of Beta-Blockade on Mortality among
high-risk and low-risk patients after myocaridal infarction.” New England Journal of
Medicine 339 (August 20): 489-497.




                                          28
Griliches, Zvi, 1957. “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological
Change.” Econometrica 25 (October): 501-522.

Griliches, Zvi, 1960. “Congruence versus Profitability: A False Dichotomy.” Rural
Sociology 25: 354-56.

Griliches, Zvi, 1962. “Profitability Versus Interaction: Another False Dichotomy.” Rural
Sociology 27: 325-330.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2004. "The Role of Social Capital in
Financial Development." American Economic Review 94 (June): 526-556.

Hall, Bronwyn, 2004. “Innovation and Diffusion.” In Handbook on Innovation, edited by
Jan Fagerberg, David C. Mowery, and Richard R. Nelson. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Harmon, H. H., 1967. Modern factor analysis. (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Helliwell, John, 1996. “Economic Growth and Social Capital in Asia.” in The Asia
Pacific Region in the Global Economy: A Canadian Perspective, Harris, Richard G., ed.,
Calgary: University of Calgary Press (1996): pp. 21-42.

Havens, A. Eugene, and Everett Rogers, 1961. “Adoption of Hybrid Corn: Profitability
and the Interaction Effect.” Rural Sociology 26: 409-414.

Howell, Joel D., 1995. Technology in the Hospital: Transforming Patient Care in the
Early Twentieth Century. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Jencks, Stephen F., Edwin D. Huff, and Timothy Cuerdon, 2003. “Change in the Quality
of Care Delivered to Medicare Beneficiaries, 1998-99 to 2000-2001.” JAMA 289
(January 15): 305-312.

Jovanovic, Boyan, and Yaw Nyarko, 1995. “A Bayesian Learning Model Fitted to a
Variety of Empirical Learning Curves.” Brookings Papers: Microeconomics.

Jovanovic, Boyan, and Yaw Nyarko, 1996. “Learning by Doing and the Choice of
Technology.” Econometrica 64 (November): 1299-1310.

Klenow, Peter, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, 1997. “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg (eds.) NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1997. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Luft, Harold S., 2003. “Variations in Patterns of Care and Outcomes After Acute
Myocardial Infarction for Medicare Beneficiaries in Fee-For-Service and HMO Settings.”
Health Services Research 38 (August): 1065-1079.



                                           29
Olmstead, Alan L. and Paul W. Rhode, 2000. “The Diffusion of the Tractor in American
Agriculture: 1910-60.” NBER working paper No. 7947 (October).

Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott, 1994. “Barriers to Technology Adoption and
Development” The Journal of Political Economy 102 (April):298-321.

Putnam, Robert D, 2001. Bowling Alone. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Rogers, Everett M., 1995. Diffusion of Innovations. (4th Edition.) New York: The Free
Press.

Rogers, Everett M., and A. Eugene Havens, 1962. “Rejoinder to Griliches’ ‘Another
False Dichotomy’.” Rural Sociology 27: 330-332.

Phelps, Charles E., 2000. “Information Diffusion and Best Practice Adoption.” Handbook
of Health Economics (Volume 1). Edited by A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse. Elsevier
Science: 223-264.

Schultz, T.W., 1964. Transforming Traditional Agriculture. New Haven: Yale University
Press.

Skinner, Jonathan, 2003. “Geography and the Use of Effective Care in the United States,”
mimeo, Dartmouth College (August). Available on web: www.dartmouth.edu/~jskinner.

Skinner, Jonathan, and Douglas Staiger, 2005. “The Diffusion of Health Care
Technology.” mimeo, Dartmouth College.

Skinner, Jonathan, Douglas Staiger, and Elliott Fisher, 2004. “Is Medical Technology
Always Worth It? The Case of Acute Myocardial Infarction.” Mimeo, Dartmouth
Medical School.

Strang, David, and Sarah A. Soule, 1998. “Diffusion in Organizations and Social
Movements: From Hybrid Corn to Poison Pills.” Annual Review of Sociology 24:265-
290.

Strang, David, and Nancy Brandon Tuma, 1993. “Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity in
Diffusion.” The American Journal of Sociology 99 (November): 614-639.

US Bureau of the Census, 1962. Census of Agriculture 1959. General Report, Vo. II,
Statistics by Subject. Washington DC, Government Printing Office.

Yusuf, S., R. Peto, J. Lewis, R. Collins, P. Sleight, 1985. "Beta Blockage During and
After Myocardial Infarction: An Overview of the Randomized Trials." Progress in
Cardiovascular Disease 27 (March/April): 335-71.




                                           30
Van den Bulte, Christophe, and Gary Lilien, 2001. “Medical Innovations Revisited:
Social Contagion versus Marketing Effort” American Journal of Sociology 106(5): 1409-
1435.

Yusuf, S. Wittes, J, Friedman, L., 1998. “Overview of results of randomized clinical rials
in heart disease I. Treatments following myocardial infarction” JAMA 260:2088-93.




                                            31
                   Table 1: Summary Statistics of State Data

Variable                                 #obs   Mean     Std. Dev    Min     Max

1. AMI mortality and cost
  AMI adjusted 1-year mortality          50     -0.009    0.021     -0.055   0.023
  AMI adjusted 1-year ln(cost)           50      9.37      0.19      9.09     9.78
    mortality, 89-91 to 99-00            50     -0.034    0.020     -0.102   0.031
    ln(cost), 89-91 to 99-00             50      0.63     0.16       0.42    1.22
2. Measures of innovation
  % AMI getting beta blocker w/in 24hr   50      69.7     7.7        50       86
  Jencks quality of care ranking, 2000   50      25.8     14.9        1       51
  Year hybrid corn achieved 10%          31     1940.6     3.5      1936     1948
  Year tractors achieved 10%             48     1930.6     8.7      1916     1947
  % with computers at home, 1993         50      0.28     0.07      0.14     0.44
3. Factors that influence adoption
  Putnam social capital index            48      0.01     0.79      -1.37     2.11
  ln(Per Capita Income, 2000)            50     10.24     0.15       9.95    10.63
  Putnam education index                 48     0.04      0.83      -1.74    1.89
  High School graduation rate, 1928      48     0.30      0.12      0.12     0.55
  ln(population density in 2000)         50     4.40      1.42      0.10     7.03




                                         32
                             Table 2: Factor Model Estimates


                                          Factor Loadings          R-squared
Variable                                 Factor 1 Factor 2       (1-uniqueness)

1. AMI mortality and cost:
 AMI adjusted 1-year mortality            -0.82       0.20            0.71
 AMI adjusted 1-year ln(cost)              0.00       0.92            0.85
   mortality, 89-91 to 99-00              -0.52       0.40            0.43
   ln(cost), 89-91 to 99-00               -0.33      -0.15            0.13
2. Measures of innovation
 % AMI getting beta blocker w/in 24hr      0.70       0.20            0.53
 Jencks quality of care ranking, 2000     -0.77       0.03            0.59
 Year hybrid corn achieved 10%            -0.71      -0.27            0.58
 Year tractors achieved 10%               -0.92      -0.16            0.88
 % with computers at home, 1993            0.68       0.45            0.67
3. Factors that influence adoption
 Putnam social capital index               0.97      -0.14            0.96
 ln(Per Capita Income, 2000)               0.42       0.84            0.88
 Putnam education index                    0.95       0.05            0.91
 High School graduation rate, 1928         0.80      -0.15            0.66
 ln(population density in 2000)           -0.35       0.89            0.92

Notes: Estimates based on 31 states used in Grilliches (1957).
       Factor model estimated by maximum likelihood, with varimax rotation




                                             33
Figure 1: Year Hybrid Corn Use Attained 10% and Year Tractor Use
Attained 10%: By State
              1950




                                                                                           MS
                                                                                                 SC   AL
                                                               WV
                                                                      AR        TN         LA
                                                                KY                                    GA
                          1940




                                                                                            NC
  year tractors achieved 10%




                                                                      VA
                                                                                 FL

                                                                                      TX
                                                MO
              1930




                                                                DE                    OK
                                                          MD
                                                        PA
                                                       MI
                                               OH
                                                IN        NY
                                               WI      NJ
                                                  MN
 1920




                                                           NE
                                        ILIA
                                                                 KS
                                                          ND
                                                           SD
              1910




                                 1935                     1940                     1945                    1950
                                                          year hybrid corn achieved 10%




                                                                           34
Figure 2: Year Hybrid Corn Use Attained 10% and % of Population
Living in Homes with Personal Computer in 1993: By State

                                                               MD

                                                                          VA
                                              IA
                                  .3




                                                                   KS
                                                               ND DE
  % in homes with computers, 1993




                                                   MO
                                              IL          NJ

                                                   WI
                                                   OH     MI NE                          TX
                                                                                                         GA
                                                          PA
                     .25




                                                     MN     NY                      FL
                                                    IN
                                                                SD
                                                                                         OK

                                                                                                    SC
                                                                         AR
         .2




                                                                 WV
                                                                                               NC
                                                                                   TN
                                                                                              LA

                                                                    KY

                                                                                                         AL
                 .15




                                                                                              MS

                                       1935                    1940                     1945                  1950
                                                               year hybrid corn achieved 10%




                                                                              35
Figure 3: Year Hybrid Corn Use Attained 10% and Use of Beta
Blockers Within 24 Hours of Acute Myocardial Infarction in 2000/2001:
By State


                                                               NY
                80




                                                     MN
                                           IA

                                                               ND
  AMI % betablocker in 24hr, 2000




                                                WI             NE
                                                OH
                                                               MD
                       70




                                                          MI    SD                                   SC
                                                 IN                  DE                         NC
                                                          PA          KS
                                           IL   MO                         VA
                                                                    WV
                                                                     KY               FL TX    LA
                                                                                     TN
                                                          NJ
       60




                                                                                               MS
                                                                                                          AL
                                                                                                          GA
                                                                                          OK
                50




                                                                           AR

                                    1935                       1940                     1945                   1950
                                                               year hybrid corn achieved 10%



Source: Skinner and Staiger (2004) using data from Griliches (1957) and Jencks et. al.
(2003).




                                                                                36
Figure 4: Average Risk-Adjusted 1-Year AMI Mortality and Average
Risk-Adjusted 1-Year AMI Expenditures (1989-2000), by State


                                       MS                                TX
                                          OK
                .02


                                       AR                             LA
                                                                        WV                                      NJ
                                                                 KY
                                                                    TN
                                                                   AL
                                                                  SC
                                                                        GA       OH                        CA
                                                                      MO NC                    MI
   AMI adjusted 1-year mortality




                                                            IN                          DE
                                                                                          IL                     NY
                           0




                                                                               FLNV      PA                MD
                                            OR
                                                                 KS           AZ
                                                                      VA

                                                                                         RI               MA
                                                                            WA
              -.02




                                        IA                             WI                                  CT
                                          ID           NE              MN
                                                                      ME           NH
                                               NM           CO

                                                 ND
  -.04




                                                                              WY


                                                                                   VT
                                               MT           UT
                                       SD
                -.06




                                   9             9.2                9.4                             9.6         9.8
                                                        AMI adjusted 1-year ln(cost)




                                                                              37
Figure 5: Use of Beta Blockers Within 24 Hours of Acute Myocardial
Infarction in 2000/2001 and Average Risk-Adjusted 1-Year AMI
Mortality (1989-2000): By State

                                               MS            TX
                                         OK
                .02



                                    AR                       LA
                                                   NJ        WV
                                                             KY
                                                     HI TN
                                          AL                             SC OH
                                          GA                   CA
                                                                 MO NCDEMI
   AMI adjusted 1-year mortality




                                                                      IN
                                                                 IL                          NY
                           0




                                              NV             FL     PA     MD
                                                                                        OR
                                                             AZ     KS
                                                                 VA

                                                                                             RI MA
                                                                         WA
              -.02




                                                                                 WI    IA
                                                                                       CT
                                                               ID                NE         MN
                                                                                                 ME   NH
                                                             NM                   CO

                                                                                  ND   AK
  -.04




                                                                         WY


                                                                                                 VT
                                                                       MT         UT
                                                                       SD
                -.06




                                   50         60                70                 80                      90
                                                   AMI % betablocker in 24hr, 2000




                                                                    38
Figure 6: Putnam’s Social Capital Index and Year Hybrid Corn
Achieved 10% by State

                 1950


                                         AL GA
    year hybrid corn achieved 10%




                                          SC
                         1945




                                          NC
                                          LA
                                    MS

                                                 TX            OK
                                               TN FL

                                          AR                     VA
        1940




                                                         DE                   KS
                                              KY
                                                   WV                                   SDNE
                                                        MD           NY                            ND
                                                         NJ         PAMI


                                                                    IN
                                                                 MO OH                  MN
                                                                              WI
                                                                    IL             IA
                 1935




                                         -1                     0                   1          2
                                                              Soc Cap Index, Putnam




                                                                         39
 Figure 7: Putnam’s Social Capital Index and Use of Beta Blockers
Within 24 Hours of Acute Myocardial Infarction in 2000/2001 by State
                 90




                                                                         NH
   AMI % betablocker in 24hr, 2000




                                                                                    MAME           VT
                                                                    NY        RI
                              80




                                                                                             MN
                                                                                   OR
                                                                                    CT IA

                                                                     UT                CO                    ND
                                                                               WI             NE
                                                                      OH
                                                       MD                     WA            WY
                70




                                           SC                        MI                      SD     MT
                                           NC           DE            IN
                                                                  PA          KS
                                                                VA
                                                                 MO
                                                                  IL
                                                          CA                   ID
                                           LAKY TX
                                                 NM
                                                 WV
                                                  FL     AZ
                                              TN
                                                        NJ
     60




                                     MS
                                            NV
                                          AL GA
                                                               OK
                 50




                                           AR

                                          -1                   0                   1                     2
                                                             Soc Cap Index, Putnam




                                                                     40
          Figure 8: Putnam’s Social Capital Index and
Average Risk-Adjusted 1-Year AMI Mortality (1989-2000) by State




                                  MS             TX             OK
              .02




                                        AR
                                        LA
                                                 WV   NJ
                                          KY
                                       ALSC TN
                                                                      OH
                                        NCGA            CA
                                                                  MO MI
  AMI adjusted 1-year mortality




                                                      DE               IN
                                                                   ILNY
                          0




                                            NV    FL MD            PA
                                                                                  OR
                                                          AZ                 KS
                                                                  VA

                                                                             RI MA
                                                                             WA
             -.02




                                                                              WI CT IA
                                                                              ID             MN
                                                                                              NE
                                                                        NH        ME
                                                 NM               DC                   CO

                                                                                                              ND
 -.04




                                                                                            WY


                                                                                                   VT
                                                                       UT                            MT

                                                                                            SD
              -.06




                                       -1                        0                   1                    2
                                                               Soc Cap Index, Putnam




                                                                       41
                                      Figure 9: Income per Capita in 2000 and
                                 Average 1-Year AMI Mortality (1989-2000) by State

                                    MS                                TX
                                                 OK
             .02
                                         AR LA
                                         WV                                                                       NJ
                                                 KY
                                                            TN        HI
                                               ALSC
                                                                     OH
                                                                     GA                       CA
                                                                 NCMO          MI
 AMI adjusted 1-year mortality




                                                                 IN                      DE
                                                                                              IL             NY
                         0




                                                                        FL      NV
                                                                                PA                      MD
                                                                      OR
                                                       AZ            KS
                                                                                         VA

                                                                               RI                                 MA
                                                                                          WA
            -.02




                                                                IA        WI                                                   CT
                                                 ID                   NE                      MN
                                                           ME                                      NH
                                         NM                                                        CO                     DC

                                                      ND                            AK
-.04




                                                                      WY


                                                                     VT
                                              MT
                                               UT
                                                           SD
             -.06




                           20000                 25000            30000            35000                               40000
                                                      per capita income (nominal), 2000




                                                                               42
                                         Figure 10: Putnam’s Social Capital Index and
                                     Decline in 1-Year AMI Mortality (1989-2000) by State

               0


                                                                    MO
                                                                               WA
                                                     FL
Change in AMI mortality, 1989-2000




                                                                  OK
                                                          MD
                            -.02




                                             NV            NJ
                                           AL TN                     PA
                                            SC             DE                  RI
                                                                       NY       ID
                                            ARGA NM          CA         MI
                                                                          NH   KS
                                                  WV                VA OH         OR
                                      MS                             IL IN             CO
                                            LA
                                            NC   TX                                 MAME WY
                                                            AZ
              -.04




                                                                    DC
                                                                                    CT
                                                                         UT                                  ND
                                                KY
                                                                               WI        IA SD
  -.06




                                                                                                  VTMT


                                                                                             NE
                                                                                            MN
               -.08




                                           -1                      0                   1                 2
                                                                 Soc Cap Index, Putnam




                                                                         43
                                            Figure 11: Income per Capita in 2000 and
                                     The Decline in 1-Year AMI Mortality (1989-2000) by State
               0


                                                                         MO
                                                                                            WA
                                                                              FL
Change in AMI mortality, 1989-2000




                                                      OK
                                                                                                          MD
                            -.02




                                                                                      NV                            NJ
                                                  AL              TN                 PA
                                                    SC                             RI      DE
                                                   ID                                                          NY
                                            AR                                     MI           CA
                                           NM                          KSGA                          NH
                                                                        OR                 VA
                                        MS WV                            OH
                                                                                                IL CO
                                                                     IN WY
                                                 LA
                                                              ME     NC TX                                          MA
                                                             AZ
              -.04




                                                                                                                                 CT
                                                  UT        ND
                                                       KY
                                                                 SD IA        WI
  -.06




                                                 MT                      VT


                                                                         NE
                                                                                                MN
               -.08




                               20000                  25000            30000            35000                            40000
                                                           per capita income (nominal), 2000




                                                                                      44
