                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WINNERS AND LOSERS FROM ENACTING THE
                           FINANCIAL MODERNIZATION STATUE

                                           Kenneth A. Carow
                                            Edward J. Kane
                                          Rajesh P. Narayanan

                                         Working Paper 11256
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11256


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




The authors are grateful to Philip Strahan and James Thomson for valuable comments on an earlier draft. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Kenneth A. Carow, Edward J. Kane, and Rajesh P. Narayanan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Has Financial Modernization Affected Corporate Customers?
Kenneth A. Carow, Edward J. Kane, and Rajesh P. Narayanan
NBER Working Paper No. 11256
March 2005, Revised July 2006
JEL No. G21, G24, G28, L51

                                           ABSTRACT

Previous studies of the announcement effects of relaxing administrative and legislative restraints
show that signal events leading up to the enactment of the Financial Services Modernization Act
(FSMA) increased the prices of several classes of financial-institution stocks. An unsettled question
is whether the gains observed for these stocks arise mainly from projected increases in efficiency or
from reductions in customer or competitor bargaining power. This paper documents that the value
increase came at the expense of customers and competitors. The stock prices of credit-constrained
customers declined during FSMA event windows and experienced significant increases in beta in
the wake of its enactment. These findings reinforce evidence in the literature on bank mergers that
large-bank consolidation is adversely affecting access to credit for capital-constrained firms.



Kenneth A. Carow
Indiana University
kcarow@iupui.edu

Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02458
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

Rajesh P. Narayanan
Ohio University
narayana@ohio.edu
                                                                        Draft of October 5, 2005


          WINNERS AND LOSERS FROM ENACTING THE FINANCIAL
                      MODERNIZATION STATUTE

Previous studies of the announcement effects of relaxing administrative and legislative restraints
show that signal events leading up to the enactment of the Financial Services Modernization Act
(FSMA) increased the prices of several classes of financial-institution stocks. An unsettled
question is whether the gains observed for these stocks arise from projected increases in
efficiency or from reductions in customer or competitor bargaining power. This paper documents
that the value increase came at the expense of customers and competitors. The stock prices of
credit-constrained customers declined during FSMA event windows and experienced significant
increases in beta in the wake of its enactment. These findings reinforce evidence in the literature
on bank mergers that large-bank consolidation is adversely affecting access to credit for capital-
constrained firms.


1. Introduction

    The Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999 (FSMA) authorized the reciprocal
entry of U.S. banks, securities firms, and insurance companies into one another’s
signature product lines. FSMA repealed Glass-Steagall and Bank Holding Company Act
restrictions on financial firms’ ability to engage in one another’s traditional activities, and
also repealed limitations on bank insurance activities imposed by the National Banking
Acts of 1864 and 1916.1
      At the signing of the bill, Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers predicted that the
bill would benefit “American consumers, business and the national economy.” However,
given how long the previous regime survived, it is hard to believe that FSMA was truly a
win-win proposition for all sectors of the economy. Regulatory adjustments usually
generate a distribution of sectoral wins and losses and economic theory suggests that
competitors and credit-constrained customers might suffer losses.
    Analytically, sectoral wins would register as increased stock values and/or lower risk
exposures for constituent firms. Event returns generated by regulatory and legislative
steps leading up to the enactment of FSMA indicate that the market anticipated that
deregulation would benefit the financial sector.2 This paper investigates whether
financial organizations might have benefited more than—or even at the expense of—at


1
  Also known as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), FSMA let stand restrictions set by the Bank
Holding Company Act of 1956 (BHCA) on nonfinancial firm entry into banking and on bank expansion
into “nonbanking” activities via subsidiary corporations.
2
  Previous event-study findings are summarized in section 4.2



                                                                                                   1
                                                                    Draft of October 5, 2005


least some customer and competitor sectors. It also asks whether financial-sector benefits
from relaxing product-market constraints come merely from projected improvements in
efficiency or also from increased bargaining power in dealing with customers and
regulators.
   Operational and informational scale and scope economies from combining banking,
insurance and securities activities within a single organization could simultaneously
increase financial-sector profits and lower explicit customer funding costs. Moreover,
diversification into new product lines could improve implicit costs by increasing the
safety and durability of individual banking organizations and better protect the
investments that particular borrowers have made in bank relationships.
   On the other hand, product-line extension is apt to increase the size of many banks
and to strengthen their competitive position vis-à-vis public credit markets and differently
chartered competitors. Increased bank control over firms’ access to public and private
securities markets could limit access to alternative funding sources for relationship
customers, raise their funding costs, and curtail their investment spending. Conglomerate
institutions might be tempted to downplay relationship lending and to pass fewer
informational quasi-rents through to repeat customers. With fewer competitors vying for
a customer’s business, resources devoted to analyzing customer-supplied information
might fall and relationship customers might confront disadvantageous limit prices or
pressure to liquidate collateral. Finally, increases in banking-institution size and
complexity could even undermine authorities’ ability to prevent securities or insurance
risks from spilling onto the federal safety net, harming customers in their capacity as
taxpayers.
   We conduct statistical tests that show net benefits from FSMA differed for different
categories of financial institutions and customers. Some of the gains conveyed to the
most favorably situated institutions (insurance companies and commercial banks) came
as a transfer from stockholders in customer firms and competing institutions. Within our
sample of customer firms, salient events in FSMA’s legislative progress produced a
2.53% cumulative decline in market capitalization. Although very large customers may
be said to have gained, credit-constrained customers—defined as younger, smaller firms
with single banking relationships, no outstanding public debt and demonstrable financing



                                                                                          2
                                                                              Draft of October 5, 2005


needs—experienced losses. This sector’s mean abnormal return cumulates to -5.22%
over FSMA progress events. The corresponding mean loss for credit-unconstrained
customers is only 1.68%. Moreover, for credit-constrained customers, the post-FSMA
systematic-risk coefficient (“beta”) rises by 0.20, while beta declines by 0.30 for the rest
of the sample. Cross-sectional regressions explaining individual-firm cumulative
abnormal returns confirm that small and credit-constrained customers suffered significant
harm.
    To translate sample results into estimates of aggregate gains and losses for financial
and nonfinancial firms, we make a heroic assumption. This assumption is that median
gain and loss rates experienced by sample firms would be representative of the medians
for corresponding size classes used by the Census Bureau to report the size distribution of
receipts at public and private firms. On this assumption, calculations reproduced as an
Appendix show that nonfinancial firms lost nine times as much from FSMA ($467
billion) as financial firms gained ($52 billion). Even if other estimation strategies could
reduce this ratio substantially, the size of the implied deadweight loss indicates that
proponents greatly overstated the efficiency benefits of FSMA.
    Our findings reinforce anecdotal concerns expressed in the business press3 and
econometric evidence in the bank merger literature that ongoing consolidation in the
banking industry is adversely affecting the ability of small firms to finance their growth
opportunities.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the potential impact
of financial modernization on customer welfare and derives testable hypotheses. The
paper’s statistical methods are described in section 3. Section 4 presents and interprets
our findings. The final section summarizes our empirical results and relates them to other
event studies of financial deregulation and banking consolidation.


3
  A sampling of complaints expressed in response to the Fleet-BankBoston merger is assembled in
Frieswick (2004): “the merged bank doesn’t give you the total borrowing capacity that you used to have.”
(Steven Wasserman, CFO of Symantec Corporation); “Banking is about relationships…If there’s a
reduction in quality of service and our relationship team gets cut that could be a deal breaker.” (Regina
Sommer, CFO of Netegrity); “fewer available bank officers is less daunting to FleetBoston corporate
customers that have diversified their bank relationships to prevent just such overdependence.” (Lee Kidder,
director of wholesale-banking research at TowerGroup, and former head of commercial-loan operations at
BankBoston). Kidder also warns that future megabanks may have the bargaining power to increase fees
and rates, change credit terms and corporate lending relationships, or choose not to renew a line of credit.


                                                                                                           3
                                                                              Draft of October 5, 2005



2. Financial modernization and customer welfare
    Modern banking theory assigns banks a special role in information production and
monitoring. The many points of contact a bank has with its repeat customers generate
private information and mutual trust. Diamond’s delegated-monitoring hypothesis
envisions that banks either win access to inside information from repeat customers or
uncover such information in the course of supporting and observing these customers’
loan and deposit business (Diamond, 1984).
    Privileged information allows a bank to assess and to price the risk of lending to a
relationship customer more accurately than the bank’s competitors can price risk. For
this reason, close ties with banks are valuable to healthy firms.4 In principle, abilities or
capacities that create extra-normal rents are intangible assets. Their value can be
expressed as a mutual claim to the capitalized flow (R) of reduced opportunity costs. The
outcome of a bilateral bargaining process (BP) allocates R partly to the relationship
customer (RC) and partly to the bank (RB) (Kane and Malkiel, 1965)5:
                          R(BP) = RC(BP) + RB(BP).                                                       (1)
    Changes in a customer’s RC can come either from changes in R or from changes in
the balance of bargaining power. Product-line extension can benefit customers by
displacing high-cost specialized firms (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1998 ) and by widening
and lengthening the contact a bank has with its relationship customers. Cross-selling
opportunities can uncover new information, improve monitoring capabilities, and
decrease agency costs, while expanding opportunities to use privileged information might
unlock scale and scope economies in various service capacities. Prior to FSMA, banks
were allowed to establish separately incorporated security affiliates on a case-by-case
basis (Section 20 banks and affiliates). Suggesting the possibility of scope economies,
Gande, Puri, and Saunders (1999) and Roten and Mullineaux (2002) find that debt

4
 Numerous studies confirm that banking relationships are valuable to firms. James and Smith (2000)
survey studies that proxy the value of banking relationships by borrower stock-price response to
originations or renewals of credit facilities. Petersen and Rajan (1994) and Berger and Udell (1995) are
excellent examples of studies of how enhanced credit availability and lower funding costs correlate with
close lending ties to banks.
5
 Because R requires the cooperation of both parties in that they want to avoid outcomes that would
eliminate the counterparty’s incentive to renew the relationship, equilibrium RC and RB should each be
strictly positive.


                                                                                                           4
                                                                  Draft of October 5, 2005


underwritten by bank affiliates carried lower underwriting fees than comparable issues
underwritten by investment banks.
   On the other hand, product-line expansion also increases asset size. Well-known
“size effects” in lending predict that the formation of larger, more complex banking
institutions might adversely affect small customers. Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan and
Stein (2005) show that small banks are more likely than large banks to extend loans to
borrowers that lack formal records. They also find that small-bank lending travels over
shorter distances, capturing localized knowledge of borrower condition. Evidence
reviewed by Berger, Demsetz and Strahan (1999) shows that a threshold asset size exists
at which banks begin to channel an increasing proportion of their lending to large firms.
Stein (2002) and Berger and Udell (2002) attribute this phenomenon to bureaucratic
blockages in the movement of customer information across components of large and
complex banks. These blockages result in the use of different technologies for lending to
large and small firms. Both papers portray large banking organizations as favoring
transaction-based loans to large firms over relationship loans to smaller ones. Stein
(2002) emphasizes that line managers’ incentives to research a given customer decline
with increases in bank size and complexity because soft information becomes harder to
communicate across the bank. Berger and Udell (2002) argue that monitoring difficulties
at large institutions tempt relationship managers to overinvest in generating new loans
and to hide evidence of deterioration in existing loans.

   Studies of merger events seldom find potential benefits for bank customers. Scale
economies in lending appear to exist only at very small banks. Moreover, only when
markets are competitive are merger benefits shifted to small customers. In the United
States, Strahan and Weston (1998) and Berger, Saunders, Scalise and Udell (1998) find
small-business lending increases in mergers involving small banks, but decreases when
large banks combine. Ely and Robinson (2004) show that large banks with security
affiliates show significantly smaller proportions of small-business loans than similar
banks that have no security affiliate. Carow, Kane and Narayanan (2004) find that the
megamergers in the U.S. lower the stock prices of small, credit-constrained customers.
Studies of bank mergers in Norway and Italy uncover similar effects. Karceski, Ongena
and Smith (2005) find that bank merger announcements reduce the equity value of small


                                                                                            5
                                                                    Draft of October 5, 2005


publicly traded Norwegian firms that are customers of the bank being absorbed, with the
extent of the decline increasing with the size of the target. In Italian bank mergers,
Sapienza (2002) finds contract interest rates on bank loans decline when banks with small
market shares combine, but increase in more-substantive mergers.
   Apart from size-related lending patterns, small customers could be harmed by
shrinkage in the number of outlets competing for their funding business. Diamond
(1993) argues that firms that have few funding outlets face a threat of inefficient
liquidation. The danger is that, when a firm runs short of tangible capital, its creditors
may ignore intangible going-concern values in deciding between rolling over short-term
loans and liquidating its collateral. Houston and James (1996), Detragiache, Garella and
Guiso (2000) and Degryse and Ongena (2004) establish that firms which already have
public debt outstanding or have multiple banking relationships are less susceptible to
hold-up pressure. However, benefits from access to public debt may be swamped if, as
Drucker and Puri (2005) suggest, banks can link the availability of loans to customers’
use of its investment-banking services. Kanatas and Qi (2003) show that bank
information monopolies increase the cost to a relationship customer of using an unrelated
investment bank for public capital. By increasing bargaining power, reduced competitive
pressure could enable a bank to reduce RC: the value of informational quasi-rents the
market shifts forward to relationship customers. Customers could lose bargaining power
in two ways. First, a customer that seeks funds from the capital market faces a cost from
not using its relationship bank as its investment banker in the form of a “lemon’s
discount.” This discount reflects the market’s fear that the relationship bank might have
found the customer uncreditworthy. Second, a bank’s information advantage in
predicting the timing of customer funding activity may generate limit-pricing
opportunities. Empirical studies confirm the importance of these effects. Yasuda (2005)
and Ljungqvist, Marston and Wilhelm (2005) find that lending banks disproportionately
capture the underwriting business of relationship customers. Consistent with these
studies, we find that, ceteris paribus, having public debt outstanding reduced abnormal
returns from FSMA progress events.
   Political clout tends to increase whenever a bank attains or solidifies its megabank
status. On the one hand, increased clout reduces the chance of failure. Many studies



                                                                                             6
                                                                      Draft of October 5, 2005


confirm the value of bank durability to customers. Looking at the 1984 collapse and
subsequent rescue of Continental Illinois Bank, Slovin, Sushka and Polonchek (1993)
show that customers’ wealth rises and falls with fluctuations in their lending institution’s
financial health. Kang and Stulz (2000), Bae, Kang and Lim (2002), and Ongena, Smith
and Michalsen (2003) show that adverse shocks to national banking systems reduced
borrower stock prices in Japan, Korea and Norway, respectively. On the other hand, by
reducing the effectiveness of regulatory discipline, increased bank clout can hurt
customers. Kane (2000) argues that in bank megamergers some of the stock price
increases experienced by targets and acquirers come from becoming increasingly “Too
Big to Discipline Adequately.” This contention is reinforced by Penas and Unal’s finding
(2004) that the yields on the outstanding bonds of acquiring and target megabanks both
decline.
        The net effect of FSMA on any individual customer depends on whether the
passthrough of regulatory subsidies and scope economies generated by growth in bank
size and product lines outweighs losses from reductions in the customer’s bargaining
power. It is reasonable to hypothesize that, except for very large customers, FSMA
might have strengthened the relative bargaining power of banks. Credit-constrained
firms—defined as younger, smaller corporations with a single banking relationship, no
outstanding public debt and demonstrable financing needs—seem especially vulnerable
to changes in the balance of bargaining power. As a bank increases in size and scope, it
might prefer to charge higher rates to such customers or to finance fewer of their growth
opportunities. In this case, as the FSMA advanced through the enactment process,
concern about the ability of credit-constrained firms to finance positive present-value
projects would reduce their stock prices and fears of adverse movements in their cost of
capital and ability to control essential collateral might raise their beta.


3. Methods
        Event-study methods are an established way to measure the welfare effects of




                                                                                            7
                                                                             Draft of October 5, 2005


legislation. 6 Schwert (1981) roots the method's evidential value in the strong likelihood
that markets are at least weak-form efficient. If stock prices incorporate relevant
information as it becomes publicly available, observed changes in stock prices estimate
changes in wealth and risk exposures occasioned by particular events.
    Wealth effects from "legislative progress" are identified with statistically significant
deflections from a benchmark trajectory for expected returns on portfolios of stocks in
selected sectors and subsectors. Inferences about risk focus on changes in portfolio betas
between pre-enactment and post-enactment periods.
    A legislative-progress event study begins by designating salient dates at which
information might have been transmitted to the market. Next, stakeholder groups
("sectors") must be identified, and portfolios representative of these groups constructed.
Finally, a model of pre-event “expected” returns on these portfolios must be developed to
benchmark “normal” returns for each portfolio on the event days. How this paper
proceeds through these steps is described in the next three subsections.


3.1 Legislative progress events
    Prior to the FSMA, banks devised clever ways to cross industry borders and
regulators subsequently redrew the borders to legitimize most incursions. Because
circumventive entry incurs continuing avoidance costs, even banking organizations that
had successfully smuggled themselves across the borders could benefit from legitimizing
or widening loopholes.
    Over time, financial institutions’ demand for new powers grew and regulatory
agencies became increasingly willing to use their rule-making powers to relax statutory
burdens. For example, in the mid-1980s, the Federal Reserve Board authorized bank
holding companies (BHCs) to establish “Section 20” subsidiaries that could underwrite
previously “bank ineligible” securities activities merely by staying within evolving
percentage-of-revenue and interaffiliate limits. On the insurance front, several state
regulators (e.g., in South Dakota in 1983 and Delaware in 1990) permitted state-chartered
banks (including institutions owned by out-of-state holding companies) to sell insurance

6
  Binder (1997) surveys the use of event-study methods to assess welfare effects from changes in regulatory
regimes.



                                                                                                         8
                                                                           Draft of October 5, 2005


products nationwide. FSMA firmed up and equalized financial institutions’ rights to
exercise banking, securities, and insurance powers within a single organization.
    Event-window movements in stock prices are particularly informative when events
surprise market participants. The prior interplay of arbitrage-like circumvention and
regulatory or statutory realignment of charter powers lessened the competitive impact of
FSMA and the value of the information that legislative-progress events could convey.
    Prior to 1999, 12 Congresses repelled 12 attempts to pass similar legislation. On May
6, 1999, financial-modernization legislation advanced beyond the committee level for the
first time, winning approval in the Senate. Our event timeline starts at this date and
progresses to enactment six months later. On July 1, the House of Representatives
approved its own version of the bill. A joint congressional committee formed to
reconcile the two versions announced significant progress on October 13, although issues
of regulatory jurisdiction remained unsettled. On October 15, the Federal Reserve and
the Treasury announced that they had settled their jurisdictional issues. A final obstacle
was White House insistence that the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) not be
undermined. A compromise between the White House and the House and Senate
conferees surfaced on October 22 and a final conference report was issued on November
2. Both chambers passed the bill on November 4 and President Clinton signed the
Financial Services Modernization Act into law on November 12. Table 1 lists and dates
these legislative-progress events.7


3.2 The Sampling Frame
    Our study samples two broad stakeholder groups: financial firms and their corporate
customers. The Center for Research in Security Prices database (CRSP) contains 682
financial-services firms. We partition these firms into seven subsectors: 268 U.S. banks
(3-digit SIC code 602 but excluding the 4-digit SIC code 6029 and section 20 banks), 25
Section 20 banks, 194 thrifts (3-digit SIC 603), 33 finance companies (3-digit SIC 61), 45
investment banks (3-digit SIC 62), 95 insurance companies, and 22 insurance agencies
(3-digit SIC 641).

7
 Information-generating event dates were identified using the Wall Street Journal Index, New York Times
Index, Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report, and prior studies of FSMA.


                                                                                                      9
                                                                             Draft of October 5, 2005


      Our sample of current and prospective customers is drawn from the universe of
nonfinancial corporations. To be included in our study, a firm had to meet four data-
availability criteria:
          1.       be traded on either the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ,
          2.       have daily returns available on CRSP during 1999,
          3.       be traded on at least 70% of the possible trading days, and
          4.       have balance-sheet and income-statement data on Compustat.

Applying the first three data requirements to the CRSP dataset produced 6803 firms. The
Compustat data requirement reduced the number of firms to 3820. Separating out firms
whose SIC code (= 6) classifies them as financial companies, and eliminating outliers
(firms whose event-day return exceeds 15% in absolute value) narrowed the sample to
3008 customers.
      To represent the competitiveness of each customer’s funding environment we
construct the following measures for each customer:8
      EFN: External Financing Needs, defined as planned investment minus internally
      generated funding.
      PUB_DEBT: an indicator variable that takes on the value one if the firm has public
      bonds outstanding; and is zero otherwise.
      AGE: Log of number of years that the firm’s stock has been trading publicly.
      SIZE: Log of asset size (in $million).
      MUL_REL: an indicator variable that equals one for customers that have multiple
      banking relationships; and is zero otherwise.
      SECTION20: an indicator variable that equals one for customers of a bank with a
      section 20 underwriting affiliate; and is zero otherwise.
      Rajan and Zingales (1998) and Cetorelli and Gambera (2001) demonstrate that the
growth of firms in need of external finance depends on the developmental state and
industrial structure of the financial environment in which firms seeks capital. Strahan
and Weston (1998), Berger et al (1998), Karceski, Ongena, and Smith (2004) and
Sapienza (2002) find that firm size is among the best proxies for customer bargaining
power. Kanatas and Qi (2003) identify age as a factor. Houston and James (1996) and

8
    The Appendix describes in a reproducible way how these variables are constructed.



                                                                                                  10
                                                                                 Draft of October 5, 2005


Detragiache, Garella, and Guison (2000) show that multiple relationships and the
presence of public debt mitigate adverse selection and hold-up costs. Consistent with
these studies, we define a customer as potentially “credit-constrained” (denoted by a
CREDIT_CONSTRAINED indicator) when it lies in the less-favorable tail of the
distribution of each of these five variables. CREDIT_CONSTRAINED equals one when:
         EFN > 0,
         PUB_DEBT = 0,
         AGE = 10 years or less,
         SIZE < log of $500 Million,
         MUL_REL = 0; and is 0 otherwise.
This definition yields 722 credit constrained-customers and 2286 credit-unconstrained
peers.


3.3. Model
    To estimate event returns, we employ the multivariate regression model (MVRM).
The MVRM model employs Zellner's (1962) seemingly unrelated regression framework.
It specifies a simultaneous system of market models (one for each sectoral portfolio),
explicitly conditioned on the occurrence (nonoccurrence) of the event. This model
corrects for heteroskedasticity and for contemporaneous dependence of individual-
equation errors. This allows us to test differences in sectoral responses to an event as
well as to overcome problems associated with event-day clustering.9


    The MVRM takes the form:

                                                       n
                             r jt = α j + β j rmt +   ∑γ
                                                      k =1
                                                             jk   D k + ε jt .

                                                                                                 (2)
Parameters and variables are defined as follows:
r jt = the return for portfolio j, on day t;


9
 For a more detailed explanation of the MVRM and of its advantages in testing the impact of regulatory
events, see Binder (1985a and 1985b).



                                                                                                         11
                                                                   Draft of October 5, 2005


α j = the value of the intercept for portfolio j;

β j = the systematic risk of portfolio j;

rmt = the market return on day t;

γ jk = the event-induced shift in the intercept (i.e., the abnormal return) generated by
event k;
Dk = a dummy variable that takes on the value of 1 during the two-day event window for
     event k, but is zero otherwise;
ε jt = the error term for portfolio j on day t.


   The return on each portfolio j is constructed by weighting the returns of constituent
firms equally. The equally weighted CRSP market index serves as the market proxy.
Returns are observed during a 10 ½-month period running from January 1, 1999 to
November 15, 1999. This “event period” encompasses eight specific progress events.
   Event dummies ( Dk , k=1, …,8) deviate from zero on the kth event date and on the
day following the event. A two-day event window is selected to account for the diffusion
of information following the event date. The coefficient of each Dk ( γ jk ) expresses the

abnormal return on portfolio j generated by event k. Net sectoral benefits derived from
the Act are measured by the cumulative abnormal return (CAR) which sums the γ j

responses over all eight events.
    For the legislative-progress period as a whole, we first test whether CARs differ
among the sectoral portfolios. Rejecting the null hypothesis would confirm that financial
modernization impacted individual-sector portfolios differently. We also test the
significance of the sum of CARs across the sectoral portfolios. Our inability to reject the
null hypothesis would indicate that, contrary to the Treasury Secretary’s claim, sectoral
gains and losses generated by the event might be redistributive in nature, neither creating
nor destroying wealth in the aggregate.
   Changes in a customer’s shadow price for external funding might also increase the
riskiness of its future earnings. To test this hypothesis, we investigate whether FSMA




                                                                                            12
                                                                                 Draft of October 5, 2005


also affected customer betas. This requires that we expand the model to include period-
specific slope and intercept dummies. The expanded model takes the form:
                               n
     r jt = α j + β j rmt +   ∑γ
                              k =1
                                     jk   D k + α 'j D EVENT + β 'j rmt D EVENT + α ′j′D POST + β ′j′rmt D POST + ε jt .

                                                                                                     (3)
In (3),
DEVENT = a dummy variable assigned the value of 1 in the event period—from January 1,
1999 to November 15, 1999; and is zero otherwise.
DPOST = a binary variable that takes the value of 1 in the post-event period—from
November 16, 1999 to May 15, 2000; and is zero otherwise.
Model (3) is estimated over the period July 1, 1998 to May 15, 2000.10 The specification
expresses systematic risk in the event period as the sum of β j + β 'j , in the post-event

period as β j + β ′j′ , and the variable BETACHANGEj as β ′j′ .


3.4 Cross-sectional tests
      Whether due to projected changes in relationship value (R) or in bargaining power
(BP), cumulated abnormal returns (CAR) express the net impact of FSMA on customer-
relationship value (RC). To investigate whether this net effect is significant, we undertake
a second round of testing. This round treats individual-customer CARi and
BETACHANGEi as joint proxies for relationship value (Ri) and bargaining power (BPi).
Individual-firm CARi and BETACHANGEi are generated in the MVRM regressions as
parameter estimates for sectoral portfolios.
Second-round regressions seek to approximate the following latent model:
                       CARi (or BETACHANGEi) = ai + bi Ri + ci BPi + ui.                             (4)


In estimating (4), the joint influence of Ri and BPi is proxied by variables that represent
the intensity of the competitive and informational environment in which the customer

10
  Introducing 6-month intervals on both sides of January 1, 1999 – November 15, 1999 lets us estimate
shifts in beta and allows us to make inferences about the influence of legislative-progress events on stock-
price volatility.




                                                                                                           13
                                                                    Draft of October 5, 2005


must negotiate loan financing. Parameter estimates presented in our tables are for
equation (5):


CARi (or BETACHANGEi) = ai + b1SECTION20i + b2EFNi + b3SIZEi + b4PUB_DEBTi
                                  + b5MUL_RELi + b6AGEi +
                                  b7CREDIT_CONSTRAINEDi + ui.                      (5)


4. Results
4.1 Sectoral tests
        We begin by estimating the MVRM model parsimoniously for two consolidated
sectors: financial firms and corporate customers. Table 2 presents the results. Panel A
shows that the average financial institution gained 1.20% in market value over the
legislative progress period, but this value does not differ significantly from zero. Still,
because 57.48% of the firms in the financial-sector portfolio experience positive
abnormal returns, we can reject (at the 1% level) the null hypothesis that abnormal
returns are evenly divided between positive and negative values. Explaining some of the
benefits experienced by financial institutions, the average customer lost 2.53% of its
market capitalization. Only 43.35% of the customer sample shows a positive CAR. A
sign rank test confirms that this percentage differs significantly from 50%. To assess the
economic significance of these findings, we multiply each firm’s market capitalization at
the start of the legislative period by its CAR and aggregate across the sector. Over the
eight progress events, the financial sector registers a $74 billion or 3.62% gain on its May
5, 1999’s market capitalization of $2.04 trillion. These returns show that large financial
firms gained more at the passage of FSMA than their smaller counterparts. The
corresponding numbers for the customer sector are a $407.2 billion decline and a -4.16%
loss on an initial capitalization of $9.76 trillion.

    Panel B shows that both sectors experience significant declines in systematic risk.
For the financial-sector portfolio, beta declines from 0.90 to 0.37 in the post-event period.
This decline is significant at the 1% level. Only 11.29% of the financial firms show an
increase in beta. This firmly rejects the hypothesis that, within the financial sector, beta




                                                                                              14
                                                                                Draft of October 5, 2005


changes are evenly divided.11 The customer portfolio shows a smaller decline in beta,
from 1.10 to 0.91. However, even this smaller decline is significant at 1% because only
30.49% of the firms experience an upward revision.
     Results in panel C confirm that event returns experienced by financial institutions
differ significantly from customer returns. Both the F-test and the Wilcoxon rank sum
test reject the null hypothesis that event returns are the same for both sectors. While
efficiency gains may exist, an F-test fails to reject the hypothesis that event returns
across these consolidated sectors sum to zero. This indicates that at least some of the
institutions’ gains are redistributive. In the aggregate, financial institutions fared better
than their customers.


4.2 Intrasectoral tests
     To investigate wealth effects within each of the consolidated sectors, we estimate
MVRM models for nine subsector portfolios: seven financial-industry subsectors and two
customer subsectors. The financial subsectors are: finance companies, insurance
agencies, thrifts, insurance companies, investment banks, all commercial banks, and
commercial banks with section 20 security-underwriting affiliates. The customer
subsectors distinguish credit-constrained and credit-unconstrained firms.
     Table 3 disaggregates the financial sector. Insurance companies, investment banks,
and commercial banks (the highlighted area of the table) gain value, while insurance
agencies, finance companies and thrifts lose value. Similar results are documented by
Akhigbe and Whyte (2001), Carow and Heron (2002), Hendershott, Lee, and Tompkins
(2002), and Yu (2002). The easiest way to explain this intrasectoral wealth redistribution
is to attribute it to expanded opportunities for industry consolidation opened up by
FSMA. Investors apparently expected large multiproduct financial institutions to
improve their competitive position relative to more-specialized industry participants.
     Table 4 disaggregates the customer subsector. Both subsectors lose market
capitalization, but credit-constrained customers suffer more severely (-5.22%) than
unconstrained firms (-1.68%). Moreover credit-constrained customers experience an
11
  Using a similar estimation period, the reduction in systematic risk for each of the financials sectors is
also documented in Akhigbe and Whyte (2004).




                                                                                                              15
                                                                   Draft of October 5, 2005


increase in beta from 1.32 in the pre-event period to 1.52 in the post-event period, while
the unconstrained firms experience a decline in beta from 1.03 to 0.73 over the same time
period. Parametric and nonparametric tests confirm that the wealth loss for credit-
constrained customers is significantly greater than for unconstrained customers.
   Tables 3 and 4 suggest that, although some of the benefits achieved by commercial
banks, securities firms and insurance companies trace to opportunities to outcompete
other financial sectors, additional gains came at customer expense and especially from
small, credit-constrained firms.


4.3 Cross-sectional results
   Table 5 treats CAR and beta change as endogenous variables for individual firms. In
the CAR regression (I), SIZE and the negative effect of CREDIT_CONSTRAINED
prove significant at the 1% level. Other things equal, average stock-price revisions are
less negative for larger firms and more negative for credit-constrained ones. This is
predicted by the hypothesis that a customer’s bargaining power increases with its size and
decreases with funding constraints. However, the negative sign found for PUB_DEBT
supports the hypothesis that some of the continuing investment-banking business of
relationship customers is apt to be disadvantageously forced into the bank.
   In the BETACHANGE regression (II), many more variables prove significant. Size
and credit-constrained variables remain significant, but (as hypothesized) their signs
reverse. The EFN coefficient is positive and significant. In combination with the
positive sign accorded PUB_DEBT, this further supports the hypothesis that funding
costs and effective access deteriorate. As in the CAR equation, increases in size can
overcome adverse effects. Given the correlation known to exist between the sizes of
banks and their customers, the negative and significant coefficient for the SECTION20
dummy (-0.17) reinforces the effects of size in reducing risk at the relatively large firms
that are customers of the generally large Section 20 banks. The significantly positive
coefficient for AGE (0.04) shows that, at the margin, increases in firm age can only
slightly improve a customer’s bargaining power.
   Tables 4 and 5 demonstrate that the stock prices of credit-constrained customers
declined during FSMA event windows and that credit-constrained customers experienced



                                                                                           16
                                                                            Draft of October 5, 2005


significant increases in systematic risk in the wake of its enactment. These findings
reinforce evidence in the literature on bank mergers that large-bank consolidation is
unfavorably affecting the price and/or availability of credit for capital-constrained firms.


4.4 Robustness Experiments
     Tables 6, 7, and 8 explore the sensitivity of our results to variation in sampling
technique, variable definitions, and model specification. The qualitative implications of
the results shown in Table 5 remain unchanged.
     Sampling Current Customers Only. Tables 2, 4, and 5 analyze a sample drawn from
the universe of current and prospective customers. The first columns of Tables 6 and 7
report results from sampling from the universe of current customers only.
     The first column of Table 6 shows that, although slightly stronger in magnitude, the
values of significant effects on customer CARs are much the same in the restricted
sample. However, the first column of Table 7 shows that the usefulness of the beta-
change regression virtually disintegrates. Only SIZE remains strongly significant and,
like R2 and the other previously significant variables, its value is greatly reduced. Taken
together, these experiments indicate that established bank customers are expected to be
financed more reliably and slightly more cheaply than potential customers.
     Using Loan Pricing Corporation’s (LPC) Dealscan database, we identify firms that
have an active loan facility with a sample bank that is designated to be either a sole
lender or a lead lender in a syndicate during the period January 1, 1999 to November 15,
1999. 12 As described by Angzabo, Mei and Saunders (1998), an originating institution is
a lead lender in a syndicate if it retains primary administrative, monitoring and contract-
enforcement responsibilities along with (typically) the largest stake in the loan. Other
institutions in the syndicate are either managers or participants. Managers usually
perform minor administrative duties and hold much smaller stakes in the loan than lead
lenders. Participants function only as signatories to the loan agreement and entities that
fund a piece of the loan. According to Yasuda (2005) “lending relationships” are highly

12
  The Loan Pricing Corporation’s (LPC) Dealscan database provides details of loans over $100,000
compiled from 13Ds, 14Ds, 13Es, 10Ks, 10Qs, 8Ks, and S-series (registration) statements that publicly
held companies and privately held companies with public debt outstanding file with the Securities
Exchange Commission.



                                                                                                        17
                                                                            Draft of October 5, 2005


correlated with the hierarchy of shareholdings in the syndicate: lead lenders are typically
relationship banks; participants are merely invited to help fund the loan by the lead
lenders; and managers stand somewhere in between.
     Identifying lead lenders by titles such as arranger, co-arranger, administrative agent,
agent or co-agent, and imposing the data requirements specified earlier, yields a sample
of 1218 nonfinancial customers. This subsample of relationship customers omits weaker
and developing relationships. While imposing these restrictions has the obvious
advantage of identifying established relationship customers, it has the disadvantage of
increasing the proportion of large firms (already an issue in sampling from the Dealscan
universe) and reducing the number of credit-constrained customers.13 Although results
from either sample remain qualitatively similar, the restricted sampling strategy reduces
the power of tests of the hypothesis that small, credit-constrained firms suffer
disproportionately from the enactment of FSMA.
     Alternative Specifications. Industry type might affect both the character of a firm’s
credit needs and the availability of assets that can serve as collateral. Although R2
improves, we find no qualitative differences from our benchmark results when we control
in Tables 6 or 7 for industry type with either one or two-digit SIC indicators. The last
column of each table introduces four other control variables: Tobin’s Q, the debt-to-asset
ratio, and indicators for dividends and for research & development expense. Although
each of these further controls is significant in one equation or the other, the signs of all
coefficients that proved significant in Table 5 remain the same. In only one case (namely,
for PUB_DEBT in the CAR equation) does any coefficient become insignificant.
Finally, although not reported here, the pattern of significant results proves much the
same when we use value-weighted market returns instead of equally-weighted market
returns to calibrate abnormal returns and betas.
     Redefining Credit Constraint. Credit-constrained customers are firms that lack
internal resources for financing planned investment expenditures and promise as well to
have difficulty meeting their need for external funding. Our indicator for credit


13
   The number of credit-constrained customers in the restricted sample of 1218 “LPC” customers is 168 (or
13.8%). This compares to 722 (or 24.0%) credit-constrained customers in the primary sample of 3008
firms.



                                                                                                      18
                                                                     Draft of October 5, 2005


constraint combines the impact of facing a funding gap with four measures of the
potential narrowness of the firm’s funding environment.
   The literature offers two alternative strategies for classifying firms as financially
constrained. The first strategy is to look for a single characteristic that might signal
financing constraint. Particular characteristics that others have used to classify a firm as
financially constrained include: small size [Gertler and Gilchrist (1993)]; the absence of a
bond rating [Kashyap, Lamont and Stein (1994)]; and dividend distributions [Fazzari,
Hubbard and Petersen (1998)].
   The second approach combines several firm characteristics into an endogenous
classification model: for example, conditioning the retention ratio on Tobin’s Q as in
Korajczyk and Levy (2003) or constructing indices as in Kaplan and Zingales (1997) and
Whited and Wu (2005). Size and the presence of public debt (and hence a bond rating)
already appear in our regressions.
   Korajczyk and Levy’s (2003) classification scheme embodies the idea that since
dividends and security repurchases compete for funds with investments, firms with
attractive investment opportunities and high agency costs for external finance may be
expected to retain net income for investment purposes. Conditioning on Tobin’s Q helps
to ensure that resource-constrained firms have meaningful investment opportunities and
are not financially distressed. Applied to our sample, Korajczyk and Levy’s measure of
financial constraint classifies 901 firms as financially constrained. Table 8 shows that
these firms experience larger negative abnormal returns and larger positive beta changes
than firms classified as unconstrained. Introducing the KL measure along with CREDIT-
CONSTRAINED into the abnormal-return and beta-change regressions increases our
model’s explanatory power, but does not render CREDIT-CONSTRAINED insignificant.
   Whited and Wu (2005) use GMM to estimate an intertemporal model of investment
and financial frictions that correlates better with CREDIT-CONSTRAINED than with the
other two indices. Whited and Wu interpret their index as a shadow price for external
finance to which every firm must adjust in equilibrium. They show that their index meets
the test of being a priced factor in a Fama-French model. When we restrict our sample to
the 2210 firms that report the data needed to construct Whited and Wu’s measure or the
2199 firms that report data needed to construct Kaplan and Zingales’ measure, credit-



                                                                                           19
                                                                    Draft of October 5, 2005


constrained firms continue to show significantly lower FSMA event returns and
significantly higher post-FSMA systematic risk.
5. Summary and implications
       Previous investigations of event returns associated with the FSMA and piecemeal
loophole expansions show stock-price benefits for banks, investment banks, and
insurance companies. Such gains are strongly predicted by partial-equilibrium analysis.
The intensity of prior lobbying activity shows that at least some of the abandoned
constraints on product offerings had inefficiently limited institutions’ ability to use their
private information, contracting skills, and scope economies. Removing these binding
constraints should permit affected institutions to exploit private information on clients to
design, market, and price their product lines more effectively than before. In general
equilibrium, however, the benefits that favored financial institutions win from exercising
their new freedoms must be weighed against losses that might develop elsewhere in the
economy.
       Given how stubbornly Congress resisted previous efforts to repeal product-line
restrictions, it is clear that important sectors had an economic stake in their continuance.
Economic theory indicates that expanding the scope of institutional charters might
expand opportunities for very large banks to extract rents both from informational
advantages and from size-related safety-net subsidies. Our findings strongly reject the
hypothesis that abnormal returns generated by FSMA events were entirely or even mainly
due to gains in efficiency. Our data show that favored sectors’ gains from FSMA not only
came from decreases in the aggregate value of the stock of vulnerable customers, but also
that losses at nonfinancial firms far outstripped financial firms’ gains.
       That small, credit-constrained firms suffer negative event returns reinforces
popular fears that the worldwide consolidation of the financial industry adversely affects
capital-constrained firms. Happily, a notable surge in the flow of banking charters
awarded in the U.S. supports the hypothesis that, over time, new entrants are seizing the
opportunity to service such firms. Many of these new banking enterprises reclaim
intangible relationship capital by employing bank executives whose jobs had evaporated
in a prior consolidation.




                                                                                            20
                                                                  Draft of October 5, 2005


                                     REFERENCES
Akhigbe, Aigbe and Ann Marie Whyte, 2001, The market’s assessment of the Financial
      Services Modernization Act of 1999, Financial Review 36, 119 -138.

Akhigbe, Aigbe and Ann Marie Whyte, 2004, The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999:
      Risk implications for the financial services industry, The Journal of Financial
      Research 27, 435-446.

Angzabo, Lazarus A., Jianping Mei and Anthony Saunders, 1998, Credit spreads in the
      market for highly leveraged transaction loans, Journal of Banking and Finance
      22, 1249-1282.

Bae, Kee-Hong, Jun-Koo Kang and Chan-Woo Lim, 2002, The value of durable bank
       relationships: evidence from Korean banking shocks, Journal of Financial
       Economics 64, 181-214.

Berger, Allen N., Rebecca Demsetz and Philip Strahan, 1999, The consolidation of the
       financial services industry: causes, consequences, and implications for the future,
       Journal of Banking and Finance 23, 135-194.

Berger, Allen N., Anthony Saunders, Joseph M. Scalise, and Gregory F. Udell, 1998, The
       effects of bank mergers and acquisitions on small business lending, Journal of
       Financial Economics 50, 187-229.

Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell, 1995, Relationship lending and lines of credit in
       small firm finance, Journal of Business 68, 351-81.

Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udel, 2002, Small business credit availability and
       relationship lending: The importance of bank organizational structure, Economic
       Journal 112, 32-53.

Berger, Allen N., Raghuram G. Rajan, Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen, and
       Jeremy C. Stein, 2004, Does function follow organizational form? Evidence from
       the lending practices of large and small banks, Journal of Financial Economics
       76, 237-69.

Binder, J. J., 1997. The event study methodology since 1969, University of Illinois-
       Chicago, working paper.

Binder, J. J., 1985a. On the use of the multivariate regression model in events studies,
       Journal of Accounting Research 23, 370-383.

Binder, J. J., 1985b. Measuring the effects of regulation with stock price data, Rand
       Journal of Economics 16, 167-183.




                                                                                           21
                                                                Draft of October 5, 2005


Carow, Kenneth A., and Randall Heron, 2002, Capital market reactions to the passage of
      the Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999, Quarterly Review of
      Economics and Finance 42, 465-485.

Carow, Kenneth A., Edward J. Kane, and Rajesh P. Narayanan, 2004, How have
      borrowers fared in banking mega-mergers?, Journal of Money, Credit, and
      Banking (forthcoming).

Cetorelli, Nicola, and Michele Gambera, 2001, Banking market structure, financial
       dependence and growth: International evidence from industry data, Journal of
       Finance 56, 617-648.

Czyrnik, Kathy, and Linda Schmid Klein, 2004, Who benefits from deregulating the
       separation of banking activities? Differential effects on commercial bank,
       investment bank, and thrift stock returns, The Financial Review 39, 317-341.

Detragiache, Enrica., Paolo Garella, and Luigi Guiso, 2000, Multiple versus single
       banking relationships: Theory and evidence, Journal of Finance 55, 1133-1161.

Degryse, Hans, and Steven Ongena, 2005, Distance, lending relationships and
      competition, Journal of Finance 60, 231-266.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1984, Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, Review
      of Economic Studies 51, 393-414.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1993, Seniority and maturity of debt contracts, Journal of
      Financial Economics 33, 341-368.

Drucker, Steven and Manju Puri, 2005, On the benefits of concurrent lending and
      underwriting, Journal of Finance, 60 (December), forthcoming.

Ely, David P. and Kenneth J. Robinson, 2004, The impact of banks’ expanded securities
       powers on small business lending, Review of Financial Economics 13, 79-102.

Fazzari, S.M., R. Glenn Hubbard and B. C. Petersen, 1988, Financial constraints and
       corporate investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 141–195.

Frieswick, Kris, 2004, The two faces of bank mergers, CFO Magazine, March 1.

Gande, Amar, Manju Puri, and Anthony Saunders, 1999, Bank entry, competition, and
       the market for corporate securities underwriting, Journal of Financial Economics
       54, 165-185.

Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist, 1993, The role of credit market imperfections in the
        monetary transmission mechanism: arguments and evidence, Scandinavian
        Journal of Economics 95, 43–63.



                                                                                      22
                                                                   Draft of October 5, 2005



Hendershott, Robert J., Darrell E. Lee and James G. Tompkins, 2002, Winners and losers
      as financial service providers converge: Evidence from the Financial
      Modernization Act of 1999, Financial Review 37, 53-72.

Houston, Joel and Christopher James, 1996, Bank information monopolies and the mix of
      private and public debt claims, Journal of Finance 51, 1863-1889.

James, Chris, and David Smith, 2000, Are banks still special? New evidence on their
       role in the capital-raising process, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 13(1),
       52-63.

Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan, 1998, Entry restrictions, industry evolution, and
       dynamic efficiency, Journal of Law and Economics, 41(1), 239-74.

Kanatas, George and Jianping Qi, 2003, Integration of lending and underwriting:
      Implications of scope economies, The Journal of Finance 58, 1167-1191.

Kane, Edward J., 2000, Incentives for banking megamergers: What motives might
       regulators infer from event-study evidence? Journal of Money credit and Banking
       32, 671-701

Kane, Edward J. and Burton G. Malkiel, 1965, Bank portfolio allocation, deposit
       variability, and the availability doctrine, Quarterly Journal of Economics 79, 113-
       134.

Kang, Jun-Koo, and Rene M. Stulz, 2000, Do banking shocks affect borrowing firm
       performance? An analysis of the Japanese experience, Journal of Business 73, 1-
       23.
Kaplan, Steve N. and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide
      useful measures of financing constraints? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112,
      169–216.

Karceski, Jason, Steven Ongena, and David C. Smith, 2005, The impact of bank
      consolidation on commercial borrower welfare, Journal of Finance, 60, 2043-
      2082.

Kashyap, Anil K., Owen A. Lamont, and Jeremy Stein, 1994, Credit conditions and the
      cyclical behavior of inventories, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 565–592.

Korajczyk, Robert and Amnon Levy, 2003, Capital structure choice: macroeconomic
       conditions and financial constraints, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 75-109.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, Felicia Marston and William J. Wilhelm, 2005, Competing for
      securities underwriting mandates: Banking relationships and analyst
      recommendations, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.


                                                                                            23
                                                                 Draft of October 5, 2005



Ongena, Steven, David C. Smith, and Dag Michalsen, 2003, Firms and their distressed
      banks: Lessons from the Norwegian banking crisis, Journal of Financial
      Economics 67, 81-112.

Penas Maria F., and Haluk Unal, 2004, Gains in bank mergers: Evidence from the bond
      markets, Journal of Financial Economics, 74, 149-179.

Petersen, Mitchell, and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1994, The benefits of lending relationships:
       evidence from small business data, Journal of Finance 49, 3-37.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth,
       American Economic Review 88, 559-586.

Sapienza, Paola, 2002,The effects of banking mergers on loan contracts, Journal of
       Finance 57, 329-67.

Schwert, G. W., 1981, Using financial data to measure effects of regulation, Journal of
      Law and Economics 25, 121-158.

Slovin, Myron B., Marie E. Sushka, and John A. Polonchek, 1993, The value of bank
        durability: Borrowers as bank stakeholders, Journal of Finance 48, 247-266.

Stein, Jeremy. C., 2002, Information production and capital allocation: Decentralized
        versus hierarchical firms, Journal of Finance 57, 1891-1921.

Strahan, Philip E., and James P. Weston, 1998, Small business lending and the changing
       structure of the banking industry, Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 821-845.

Whited, Toni M. and Guojun Wu, 2005, Financial constraints risk, Review of Financial
      Studies, forthcoming.

Yasuda, Ayako, 2005, Do bank relationships affect the firm’s underwriter choice in the
      corporate bond underwriting market? Journal of Finance, 60, 1259-1292.

Yu, Lei, 2002, On the wealth and risk effects of the Glass-Steagall overhaul: evidence
       from the stock Market, New York University, Working paper.

Zellner, A., 1962, An efficient method of estimating seemingly unrelated regressions and
       test for aggregation bias, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 348-
       368.




                                                                                          24
                                                                       Draft of October 5, 2005



Table 1: Legislative Progress Events


         Event Date                                            Event




May 6, 1999                Senate approves Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999 (S.900) 55-44.
                           President Clinton threatens a veto over provisions concerning the Community
                           Reinvestment Act.

July 1, 1999               House of Representatives approves H.R.10 by margin of 343-86.


October 13, 1999           Significant progress in reconciling the House and Senate bills is announced.

October 15, 1999           Federal Reserve and Treasury Department announce agreement on
                           responsibility for regulating Financial Holding Companies and bank
                           subsidiaries.

October 22, 1999           Early-morning negotiations eliminate the threat of a presidential veto. White
                           House and Conference Committee agree on compromise provisions.


November 2, 1999           Conference report is signed by majority of conferees, clearing the way for
                           floor votes in the House and Senate.


November 4, 1999           Financial Services Modernization Act passes the Senate 90-8 and the House
                           362-57.


November 12, 1999          President Clinton signs the Financial Services Modernization Act.




                                                                                                  25
                                                                               Draft of October 5, 2005



Table 2: Intersectoral tests

Abnormal returns and changes in beta are computed using a multivariate regression model. To compute
abnormal returns, a benchmark model is estimated using returns from January 1, 1999 to November 15,
1999. A benchmark for Beta changes is estimated by adding an additional 6 months of returns on either
side of the abnormal return estimation period, i.e. from July 1, 1998 to May 15, 2000.

                                                                  Financial            Customers




         Number of Companies                                        682                   3008

         Panel A: Abnormal Returns

         Cumulative abnormal return (CAR)                          1.20%                  -2.53%
         t-statistic for H0 : CAR = 0                               0.66                 -3.30***

         Percent positive CARs                                     57.48                   43.35
         z-statistic for H0 : % positive CAR = 50%                3.91***                -7.29***


         Panel B: Systematic Risk (beta)

         Pre-beta (7/1/98 – 12/31/98)                                0.90                  1.10
         Post-beta (11/16/99 – 5/15/00)                              0.37                  0.92
         t-statistic for H0 : beta change (pre to post) = 0       -12.09***              -9.63***

         Percent positive beta changes                             11.29%               30.49%
         z-statistic for H0 : % positive beta changes = 50%       -20.22***            -21.41***


         Panel C: Cross-sectoral hypotheses tests

         p-value of F-test for H0 : CAR for financial portfolio               0.0248
         = CAR for customer portfolio

          p-value of Wilcoxon rank sum test for H0 : CAR for                  < 0.0001
         financial portfolio = CAR for customer portfolio

         p-value of F-test for H0 : CAR for financial portfolio               0.5550
         + CAR for customer portfolio = 0




*** Significant at the 1% level




                                                                                                        26
                                                                          Draft of October 5, 2005



Table 3: Intrasectoral Differences within the Financial Sector
Abnormal returns are computed using a multivariate regression model and data from January 1, 1999 to November 15, 1999.




                                                                                                  Financial Sector

                                                    Finance         Insurance        Insurance         Investment         Commercial   Section20        Thrifts
                                                   Companies         Agencies        Companies            Banks             Banks        banks


Number of firms                                        33               22               95                45                268          25             194



Cumulative Abnormal Return (CAR)                     -5.15%           -0.80%           5.33%             3.40%              1.22%       2.23%           -0.18%
t-statistic for H0 : CAR = 0                          -1.22            -0.22           1.99*              0.80               0.63        0.33            -0.11

Percent positive CARs                                33.33             31.82           76.8%              62.22             60.08       68.00           48.97
z-statistic for H0 : % positive CAR = 50%            -1.91*           -1.71*          5.23***              1.64            3.30***      1.80*           -0.29



*** Significant at the 1% level
* Significant at the 10% level




                                                                                                                                                   27
                                                                            Draft of October 5, 2005


Table 4: Differences within the Customer Sector
Abnormal returns and changes in beta are computed using a multivariate regression model. To compute
abnormal returns, the model is estimated using returns from January 1, 1999 to November 15, 1999. Beta
changes are benchmarked by adding an additional 6 months of returns on either side of the abnormal-return
estimation period, i.e. from July 1, 1998 to May 15, 2000.

                                                                 Customer Sector

                                                            Credit          Credit-
                                                          constrained    unconstrained


                Number of firms                              722              2286


                Panel A : Abnormal Returns
                Cumulative Abnormal Return (CAR)            -5.22%           -1.68%
                t-statistic for H0 : CAR = 0               -3.55***           -1.49

                Percent positive CARs                        38.92            44.75
                z-statistic for H0 : % positive CAR =      -5.95***         -5.02***
                     50%

                Panel B: Systematic Risk
                Pre-beta (7/1/98 – 12/31/98)                 1.32             1.03
                Post-beta (11/16/99 – 5/15/00)               1.52             0.73
                t-statistic for beta change from pre to    5.59***         -10.86***
                post

                Percent positive beta changes               49.17            24.58
                z-statistic for H0 : % positive beta        -0.45          -24.30***
                changes = 50%

                Panel C: Cross –sectoral hypotheses
                tests
                p-value for F test and Wilcoxon rank           0.1111, < 0. 0001
                sum test for H0: CAR for constrained
                customers = CAR for unconstrained
                customers

                p-value for F-test and Wilcoxon rank           < 0.0001, < 0.0001
                sum test for H0: beta changes for
                constrained customers = beta changes
                for unconstrained customers

*** Significant at the 1% level




                                                                                                      28
                                                                            Draft of October 5, 2005


Table 5: Cross-sectional analysis of customers
Abnormal returns and changes in beta are estimated using a multivariate regression model. To compute
abnormal returns, the model is estimated using returns from January 1, 1999 to November 15, 1999. Beta
changes are benchmarked by adding an additional 6 months of returns on either side of the abnormal return
estimation period, i.e. from July 1, 1998 to May 15, 2000. Variable definitions are provided in the
Appendix. t-values corrected using White’s procedure appear in parentheses below coefficient estimates.


                                                    CAR          BETACHANGE
                                                          I           II

                      Intercept                     -0.0521            0.3006
                                                    (-5.26)***        (4.81)***

                      SECTION20                     -0.0011           -0.1729
                                                    (-0.20)           (-5.33)***

                      EFN                           -0.0003            0.0164
                                                    (-0.51)           (3.94)***

                      SIZE                          0.0062            -0.1066
                                                    (3.65)***        (-10.16)***

                      PUB_DEBT                      -0.0113           0.0693
                                                    (-1.97)**         (2.14)**

                      MUL_REL                       -0.0034            0.0393
                                                    (-0.54)            (1.10)

                      AGE                           0.0012            0.0355
                                                    (0.56)           (2.89)***

                      CREDIT_CONSTRAINED            -0.0216            0.1407
                                                    (-4.02)***        (3.13)***

                      Number of Observations        3008               3008
                      R-squared                     0.0197            0.1313
                      Adjusted R-squared            0.0174            0.1292
                      P-value on F-stat             <.0001            <.0001


*** Significant at the 1% level
** Significant at the 5% level
* Significant at the 10% level




                                                                                                      29
                                                                           Draft of October 5, 2005


Table 6
Robustness tests of the cross-sectional model of cumulative abnormal returns
This table summarizes robustness tests of the model of cumulative abnormal returns. The endogenous variable
is the cumulative abnormal return over the eight events listed in Table 1. Each column provides incremental
evidence about robustness. Model 1 restricts the sample to firms where LPC data are available. We interpret
this as “sampling current customers only.” Model 2 respecifies the CAR model to include a series of indicator
variables identifying the one-digit SIC code of the company. Industry effects as well as intercepts are not
shown in the table. Model 3 respecifies the indicator variables to identify the two-digit SIC code of the
company. Again, industry effects and intercepts are not shown in the table. Model 4 includes additional
Compustat variables as control variables. TOBINQ equals the market value of assets divided by book value of
assets (data6-data60+data24*data25)/data6. DEBT_ASSET equals the total debt divided by assets (data9 /
data6). R&D is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has research and development expenditures (data46
> 0; 0 otherwise). DIVIDEND is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm paid dividends on their common
stock (data26 > 0; 0 otherwise). TOBINQ and DEBT_ASSET are winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles.
                                    Model 1             Model 2               Model 3            Model 4
                                                                                                Additional
                                                      Full-Sample          Full-Sample            Control
                                 LPC Sample           1-digit SIC           2-digit SIC          Variables
Intercept                          -0.0633                                                      -0.0411
                                (-3.66)***                                                     (-3.75)***
SIZE                                0.0068              0.0056                0.0052             0.0049
                                  (2.40)**           (3.22)***             (3.00)***           (2.71)***
SECTION20                           0.0129              0.0005               -0.0002            -0.0016
                                    (1.29)              (0.10)               (-0.03)            (-0.28)
PUB_DEBT                           -0.0209             -0.0096               -0.0070            -0.0094
                                 (-2.46)**             (-1.53)               (-1.11)            (-1.45)
MUL_REL                            -0.0005             -0.0033               -0.0034            -0.0014
                                   (-0.07)             (-0.49)               (-0.50)            (-0.21)
EFN                                 0.0002             -0.0003               -0.0004            -0.0001
                                    (0.15)             (-0.63)               (-0.73)            (-0.11)
AGE                                -0.0005              0.0015                0.0007            -0.0014
                                   (-0.15)              (0.70)                (0.31)            (-0.60)
CREDIT_CONSTRAINED                 -0.0258             -0.0211               -0.0223            -0.0204
                                 (-2.40)**           (-3.31)***           (-3.49)***           (-3.15)***
TOBINSQ                                                                                         -0.0027
                                                                                               (-2.00)**
DEBT_ASSET                                                                                      -0.0119
                                                                                                (-0.91)
R&D                                                                                              0.0070
                                                                                                 (1.60)
DIVIDEND                                                                                         0.0155
                                                                                               (2.86)***
Number of Observations                1218                3008                 3008                2920
R-squared                           0.0179              0.0297                0.0526             0.0239
Adjusted R-squared                  0.0122              0.0248                0.0376             0.0202
P-value on F-stat                   <.0026              <.0001                <.0001             <.0001
*** Significant at the 1% level ** Significant at the 5% level




                                                                                                     30
                                                                             Draft of October 5, 2005


Table 7
Robustness tests of the cross-sectional model of changes in beta
This table summarizes robustness tests related to the model explaining changes in beta. Beta changes are
benchmarked by comparing the beta estimated for 6 months of returns prior to the legislative period to the beta
estimated for the 6 months following the legislative period. Each column provides evidence about robustness.
Model 1 restricts the sample to firms for which LPC data are available. We interpret this as “sampling current
customers only.” Model 2 respecifies the CAR model to include a series of indicator variables identifying the
one-digit SIC code of the company. Model 3 respecifies the indicator variables to identify the two-digit SIC
code of the company. Industry effects and intercepts are not shown in the table for models 2 and 3. Model 4
includes additional Compustat variables as control variables. TOBINQ equals the market value of assets
divided by book value of assets (data6-data60+data24*data25)/data6. DEBT_ASSET equals the total debt
divided by assets (data9 / data6). R&D is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has research and
development expenditures (data46 > 0; 0 otherwise). DIVIDEND is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm
paid dividends on their common stock (data26 > 0; 0 otherwise). TOBINQ and DEBT_ASSET are winsorized
at the 5th and 95th percentiles.
                                    Model 1            Model 2              Model 3             Model 4
                                                                                               Additional
                                                     Full-Sample         Full-Sample             Control
                                  LPC Sample          1-digit SIC         2-digit SIC           Variables
Intercept                          0.0764                                                       0.1169
                                   (0.79)                                                      (1.77)*
SIZE                               -0.0702            -0.1012             -0.0953              -0.0907
                                 (-4.43)***         (-9.55)***          (-9.08)***           (-8.30)***
SECTION20                          -0.1078            -0.1648             -0.1514              -0.1081
                                  (-1.94)*          (-4.82)***          (-4.50)***           (-3.14)***
PUB_DEBT                           0.0173              0.0508              0.0688               0.0665
                                   (0.37)              (1.32)             (1.82)*              (1.71)*
MUL_REL                            -0.0160             0.0367              0.0197               0.0303
                                   (-0.40)             (0.89)              (0.49)               (0.73)
EFN                                -0.0049             0.0183              0.0143               0.0161
                                   (-0.82)          (5.46)***            (4.32)***            (4.67)***
AGE                                0.0316              0.0340              0.0313               0.0328
                                   (1.83)*          (2.61)***            (2.40)**              (2.37)**
CREDIT_CONSTRAINED                 0.0569              0.1239              0.1280               0.1307
                                   (0.95)           (3.17)***            (3.33)***            (3.37)***
TOBINSQ                                                                                         0.0072
                                                                                                (0.90)
DEBT_ASSET                                                                                     -0.1771
                                                                                              (-2.25)**
R&D                                                                                             0.2868
                                                                                             (10.87)***
DIVIDEND                                                                                       -0.0530
                                                                                               (-1.63)
Number of Observations               1218                3008                3008                 2920
R-squared                          0.0458              0.1578              0.2082               0.1781
Adjusted R-squared                 0.0403              0.1536              0.1956               0.1750
P-value on F-stat                  <.0001              <.0001              <.0001               <.0001
*** Significant at the 1% level ** Significant at the 5% level ** Significant at the 10% level




                                                                                                        31
                                                                                Draft of October 5, 2005


Table 8
Correlations Between Alternative Measures of Financial Constraint
Given that all three alternative measures of financial constraint are composites of the control variables used
in our cross-sectional regression models, the original control variables are collinear with each of the
alternative measures. For this reason, we do not report cross-sectional regressions using the alternative
measures. The upper portion of the correlation table describes the bivariate correlation that exists between
the four measures of financial constraints. The lower portion of the table reports the correlations that the
different measures have with abnormal returns and changes in beta. We note that, unlike the other indices,
Whited and Wu’s (2005) index of financial constraint is an inverse measure. Hence, all indices show that
financially constrained firms have lower abnormal returns and larger increases in systematic risk. Whited
and Wu’s (2005) measure represents financial constraint as [-.062*(debt to assets) + .010*(indicator for
positive dividends) + .067*(1 plus the growth in the firm’s sales) + .060*(log of assets) - .043*(1 plus the
growth in industry sales) + .053*(cash flow to assets)]. Kaplan and Zingales (1997) measure financial
constraint as [-1.001909*(cash flow to assets) + 3.139193*(debt to assets) - 39.36780*(dividends to assets)
- 1.314759*(liquid cash to assets) + .2826389*(Tobin’s Q)]. Korajczyk and Levy (KL) (2003, p.82) define
a firm as financially constrained if: “(1)the firm does not have a net repurchase of debt or equity and does
not pay dividends within the event window, and (2) its Tobin’s Q, (defined as the sum of the market value
of equity and the book value of debt, divided by the book value of assets), at the end of the event
quarter…[is] greater than one.” As an indicator variable, the KL index correlates more closely with our
indicator that the other indices.

Correlation Matrix (p-values are reported below coefficient estimates)

                             Sample            Credit       Whited    Kaplan &     Korajczyk
                             Size         Constrained       & Wu       Zingales      & Levy

        Alternative measures of financial constraint

        Credit               3008              1.0000      -0.2338       0.1025       0.2723
        Constrained                                         <.0001       <.0001       <.0001

        Whited &             2210             -0.2338       1.0000       0.0778       -0.3188
        Wu                                     <.0001                    <.0003        <.0001

        Kaplan &             2199              0.1025       0.0778       1.0000       0.3626
        Zingales                               <.0001       <.0003                    <.0001

        Korajczyk &          2236              0.4774      -0.1916       0.2685       1.0000
        Levy                                   <.0001       <.0001       <.0001

        Correlations with abnormal returns and changes in beta

        CAR                       3008        -0.1197       0.0578      -0.0462       -0.1029
                                               <.0001       0.0065       0.0302        0.0001

        BETA_CHANGE               3008         0.2305      -0.1898      -0.0876       0.1249
                                               <.0001       <.0001       0.0001       0.0001




                                                                                                           32
                                                                     Draft of October 5, 2005



Appendix: Variable Definitions


Variable Name                                                   Description


CAR                        The Cumulative Abnormal return over each of the eight events listed in Table 1.
                           Each event window combines the day of the event with the day following the
                           announcement. Values winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles are used in cross-
                           sectional tests.

BETACHANGE                 Calculated change in beta between the six-month period preceding the January 1,
                           1999 (7/1/98 to 12/31/98) and the six-month period following the passage of
                           FSMA (11/15/99 to 5/15/00). Values winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles are
                           used in cross-sectional tests.


EFN                        The average value found for external financing needs during the last 3 years.
                           External financing needs are defined as planned investments – internally available
                           funds (From COMPUSTAT (data128 - (data18 + data14) + (data3 - data3a) +
                           (data2 - data2a) - (data70 - data70a) - (data71 - data71a))/data128. If less than 3
                           years of data are available, we use the available data. Averages are winsorized at
                           the 5th and 95th percentiles.

SECTION20                  An indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm is a customer of a section 20 bank
                           and is 0 otherwise. Section 20 banks are identified from the Federal Reserve web-
                           site.

PUB_DEBT                   An indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm has public debt outstanding and is 0
                           otherwise. The presence of public debt is identified from COMPUSTAT.

SIZE                       The log value of the firm’s assets in $millions (COMPUSTAT data6), winsorized
                           at the 5th and 95th percentile.

AGE                        The log of the number of years that the company has been listed on the NYSE,
                           AMEX, or NASDAQ as identified from CRSP. The maximum number of years
                           was set at 25.

MUL_REL                    An indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm has more than one banking
                           relationship during the period January 1, 1999 to November 15, 1999, and is 0
                           otherwise. Identified from LPC Dealscan database.

CREDIT_CONSTAINED          An indicator variable that takes on the value of 1 if the firm is credit-constrained
                           and 0 otherwise. Credit-constrained customers are firms that have EFN >0,
                           PUB_DEBT = 0, AGE < Log of 11 years, SIZE < Log of $500 million and
                           MUL_REL = 0.




                                                                                                 33
                                                                        Draft of October 5, 2005
Appendix A
Aggregate Gains and Losses for Financial and Nonfinancial Firms
In the table below, we show our estimates of the aggregate gains and losses for financial and nonfinancial firms. In the most recently available
Census report prior to the passage of FSMA, Enterprise Statistics 1992, “Table 4, Company Statistics by Receipt Size: 1992”
[http://www.census.gov/prod/3/97pubs/es-9201.pdf], we obtain the number of public and private firms in the financial and nonfinancial industries.
For each firm in our dataset, we define the dollar impact as the cumulative abnormal return of the individual firm multiplied by the firm’s market
capitalization on May 5, 1999. We separate our CRSP and Compustat data into receipt categories as defined in the Census report and for each
category calculate the median dollar impact. To obtain the total industry impact, we multiply the number of firms reported in the census report by
the median dollar impact from our sample and sum the values across the receipt categories. Due to the small number of observations in CRSP
and Compustat for firms under $2.5 million in receipts, we omit these firms from this analysis. Given that smaller, more credit constrained
nonfinancial firms are expected to have the largest losses, we assume that this increases the conservative nature of our estimate.

                                               # Non-        Median                             # Public                       Median
                 # Public      # Public      financial    Dollar Impact      Dollar Impact         and       # Financial    Dollar Impact     Dollar Impact
 Receipts per      and       and Private     Firms in     of FSMA per         per receipt        Private      Firms in      of FSMA per        per receipt
   firm (in      Private      Firms (ex.        Our          firm (in          sector (in       Financial        Our           firm (in         sector (in
  millions)       Firms       Financial)     Database      thousands)         thousands)          Firms       Database       thousands)        thousands)
   2.5 - 4.9      170,104        158,994             31      ($1,751)        ($278,462,092)        11,110               4        1,119           12,431,090
    5 - 9.9         94,547        88,156             75       (1,233)          (108,669,901)        6,391              12         (47)               (302,186)
   10 - 24.9        60,999        56,652            187        (679)            (38,451,639)        4,347              64        (225)               (979,205)
   25 - 49.9        19,982        18,522            233        (881)            (16,316,697)        1,460             102        (141)               (206,205)
   50 - 99.9         9,220          8,381           305        (599)             (5,024,159)          839             116         993                 833,204
   100 - 249         5,028          4,468           518       (2,167)            (9,681,262)          560             127        1,734                970,878
   250 - 499         1,761          1,494           389       (2,615)            (3,906,138)          267              70       17,703               4,726,621
  500 - 1000           954            796           347       (2,888)            (2,299,007)          158              54        9,523               1,504,609
  1000 - 2500          645            522           363       (2,081)            (1,086,292)          123              40       62,800               7,724,345
    >2500              452            356           343       (9,747)            (3,469,978)           96              68      385,361           36,994,620

    Totals        363,692        338,341          2,791                      ($467,367,165)        25,351             657                      $63,697,770




                                                                                                                                                 34
                                                                        Draft of October 5, 2005
Appendix A [Table omits the first two categories for Financial Firms, due to small sample size]
Estimates of FSMA-Induced Aggregate Gains and Losses Across the Populations of US Financial and
Nonfinancial Firms
This table shows our estimates of the aggregate gains and losses for financial and nonfinancial firms. From the most recently available Census
report prior to the passage of FSMA, Enterprise Statistics 1992, “Table 4, Company Statistics by Receipt Size: 1992”
[http://www.census.gov/prod/3/97pubs/es-9201.pdf], we obtain the number of public and private firms in the financial and nonfinancial industries.
For each firm in our dataset, we define the dollar impact as the cumulative abnormal return of the individual firm multiplied by the firm’s market
capitalization on May 5, 1999. We separate CRSP and Compustat data into ten receipt classes used in the Census report and for each category
calculate the median dollar impact. To estimate the total industry impact, we multiply the number of firms reported in the census report by the
median dollar impact shown in our sample and sum the values across the receipt categories. Due to the small number of observations in CRSP
and Compustat for firms under $2.5 million in receipts, we omit these firms from this analysis. Because smaller, more credit-constrained
nonfinancial firms are expected to have large losses, this omission is apt to understate the effect on nonfinancial firms.

                                               # Non-        Median                             # Public                       Median
                 # Public      # Public      financial    Dollar Impact      Dollar Impact         and       # Financial    Dollar Impact    Dollar Impact
 Receipts per      and       and Private     Firms in     of FSMA per         per receipt        Private      Firms in      of FSMA per       per receipt
   firm (in      Private      Firms (ex.        Our          firm (in          sector (in       Financial        Our           firm (in        sector (in
  millions)       Firms       Financial)     Database      thousands)         thousands)          Firms       Database       thousands)       thousands)
   2.5 - 4.9      170,104        158,994             31      ($1,751)        ($278,462,092)        11,110               4     Insufficient
    5 - 9.9        94,547         88,156             75       (1,233)          (108,669,901)        6,391              12        Data
   10 - 24.9       60,999         56,652            187        (679)            (38,451,639)        4,347              64        (225)               (979,205)
   25 - 49.9       19,982         18,522            233        (881)            (16,316,697)        1,460             102        (141)               (206,205)
   50 - 99.9         9,220          8,381           305        (599)             (5,024,159)          839             116         993                 833,204
   100 - 249         5,028          4,468           518       (2,167)            (9,681,262)          560             127        1,734                970,878
   250 - 499         1,761          1,494           389       (2,615)            (3,906,138)          267              70       17,703               4,726,621
  500 - 1000           954            796           347       (2,888)            (2,299,007)          158              54        9,523               1,504,609
  1000 - 2500          645            522           363       (2,081)            (1,086,292)          123              40       62,800               7,724,345
    >2500              452            356           343       (9,747)            (3,469,978)           96              68      385,361          36,994,620

    Totals        363,692        338,341          2,791                      ($467,367,165)        25,351             657                      $51,568,866




                                                                                                                                                 35
