                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PRICES, PRODUCTION AND INVENTORIES
                           OVER THE AUTOMOTIVE MODEL YEAR

                                            Adam Copeland
                                             Wendy Dunn
                                             George Hall

                                         Working Paper 11257
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11257


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




We want to thank Ana Aizcorbe, Steve Berry, Andrew Cohen, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Amil Petrin, John
Rust, John Stevens, and seminar participants at numerous conferences and seminars for their helpful
comments. We also thank Bob Schnorbus for helping us obtain and interpret the data from J.D. Power and
Associates. George Hall gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of members
of the Board of Governors or the views of other members of the staff of the Federal Reserve System. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Adam Copeland, Wendy Dunn, and George Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Prices, Production and Inventories over the Automotive Model Year
Adam Copeland, Wendy Dunn, and George Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 11257
March 2005
JEL No. D21, D42, E22, L11, L62

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper studies the within-model-year pricing and production of new automobiles. Using new
monthly data on U.S. transaction prices, we document that for the typical new vehicle, prices fall
over the model year at a 9.2 percent annual rate. Concurrently, both sales and inventories are hump
shaped. To explain these time series, we formulate a market equilibrium model for new automobiles
in which inventory and pricing decisions are made simultaneously. On the demand side, we use
micro-level data to estimate time-varying aggregate demand curves for each vehicle. On the supply

side, we solve a dynamic programming model of an automaker that, while able to produce only one

vintage of a product at a time, may accumulate inventories and consequently sell multiple vintages

of the same product simultaneously. The profit maximizing pricing and production strategies under

a build-to-stock inventory policy imply declining prices and hump-shaped sales and inventories of

the magnitudes observed in the data. Further, roughly half of the price decline is driven by inventory

control considerations, as opposed to decreasing demand.

Adam Copeland                                         George Hall
Division of Research and Statistics                   Department of Economics
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve             Yale University
Mail Stop 82                                          PO Box 208268
20th and C Streets, NW                                New Haven, CT 06520-8268
Washington, DC 20551                                  and NBER
adam.copeland@gmail.com                               george.hall@yale.edu

Wendy Dunn
Division of Research and Statistics
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
Mail Stop 82
20th and C Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20551
wdunn@frb.gov
    Two common features of durable goods markets are high levels of inventories relative to sales and
declining prices over the product cycle. The optimal pricing strategy and inventory management of a
good over its product cycle are classic issues in the industrial organization, revenue management, and
inventory literatures. However much of the work explicitly linking pricing and inventories policies has
been theoretical, while much of the empirical literature has studied either inventories or pricing in isolation.
In this paper we jointly consider the optimal pricing, production, and inventory management policies for a
durable goods producer and quantify empirically the role inventory control has on the time path of prices
within the product cycle.
    We accomplish this by analyzing the pricing and production decisions of an automaker over the model
year, taking into account both the annual introduction of new vintages and the need to maintain sufficient
inventories to facilitate sales. We first document, by vintage, the within-model-year inventory, sales, and
pricing behavior in the U.S. market for new automobiles. We then formulate a market equilibrium model
for new automobiles. We estimate “typical” within-model-year demand curves for each market segment
and vintage and solve a dynamic programming model of the firm with overlapping vintages. The dynamic
production and pricing rules implied by the model incorporate not only the sales life cycle of each vintage
but also the competition across vintages in the new-vehicle market. We find that the interaction between
inventory and pricing policies are key to matching the magnitude of both the observed price declines and
the ratio of inventory to sales.
    Our data on prices, production, and sales of automobiles over the product cycle are the result of merg-
ing two datasets. We match new model-level monthly data on U.S. transaction prices with well-known data
on production and sales. These new price data are of unusually high quality for the automobile industry
because they not only record the actual transaction price (not the list or invoice price) but also take into
account rebates and financing incentives the customer received. Using these data, we document five facts:

   1. For the typical new vehicle, the average monthly decline in retail prices (net of rebates and incen-
      tives) is 9.2 percent at an annual rate.

   2. Although new vintages of a vehicle are introduced annually, the average vintage is sold for 16.7 months.
      Thus, for nearly half of each calendar year, two vintages of each model are sold simultaneously.

   3. When two model years of the same make are selling simultaneously, the old vintage sells for a price
      8.8 percent less, on average, than the price of the new vintage.



                                                       2
   4. Both sales and inventories are hump shaped over the model year, where the mean ratio of inventories
      to sales is 76 days.

   5. All other things being constant, higher inventories are associated with lower retail prices.

    Facts 1 through 3 describe the price path of a typical model within and across model years. Price
declines over the product cycle and the simultaneous sale of multiple vintages of the same product are
not unique to the automobile industry, having been documented for a number of other products, including
textbooks, microprocessors, and consumer electronics. The sale of several vintages of the same good is
a potentially important dimension to the firm’s problem, because the within new-market competition is in
addition to, and potentially more important than, competition from the used market. New goods of an older
vintage are usually quite similar to those of the newer vintage, and they do not suffer from the asymmetric
information problems inherent in the used good market. Most existing theories that seek to explain the
price paths described by facts 1 through 3 focus on intertemporal price discrimination (e.g. Stokey, 1979)
or fashion (e.g. Lazear, 1986; Pashigian, 1988; and Pesendorfer, 1995). These theories, however, place
little emphasis on the firm’s production decisions. Perhaps not surprisingly, we find that with regard to
the market for new automobiles, these theories alone cannot explain the contemporaneous comovements
in prices, sales, and inventories over the product cycle.
    The last two stylized facts regarding sales and inventories are well known within the automobile in-
dustry. Automakers carry an extraordinary amount of inventory relative to sales, as lots at dealerships
are kept fully stocked with vehicles. In combination with declining prices over the product cycle, these
facts suggest that a model with either stable demand or stable supply will be unable to replicate the first
three facts. During the first six months a vehicle is sold, prices are high but declining, quantities sold are
low but rising, and inventories accumulate. This pattern suggests that rightward shifts in the supply curve
dominate changes in the demand curve early in the model year. During the last twelve months the vehicle
is sold, however, both prices and sales fall, an indication that leftward shifts in the demand curve now play
the major role.
    To refine this intuition, we formulate a market equilibrium model for new cars that links the opera-
tions research literature on optimal inventory and revenue management with the economics literature on
discrete-choice models of product differentiation. In particular, we solve a dynamic structural model with
overlapping vintages in which an automaker can adjust both the price and the quantity produced within the
model year. The automaker sells a vehicle that is slightly modified, or changes vintage, every year. While


                                                      3
the automaker produces only the current vintage, the use of inventories allows the firm to sell more than
one vintage of the product simultaneously. Each week, the firm must decide the number of units of the
current vintage to produce and the optimal prices for the vintages in stock.
    Each week the firm faces a different downward sloping demand curve for each vintage. We derive these
demand curves from estimates of consumer preferences for automobiles by employing the econometric
methodology developed in the discrete-choice literature (for example, Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes, 1995;
Goldberg, 1995; and Petrin, 2002; to name a few). Our approach differs from this standard approach in
three main ways. First, we have a better measure of prices, as we use transaction prices instead of the usual
list prices. Second, we estimate our demand-side model at a quarterly, rather than an annual, frequency;
thus, we estimate how the demand curve shifts throughout the model year. Third, we allow consumers to
choose among multiple vintages within and across models. Using our estimates of consumers’ preferences,
we compute average demand curves for each automobile market segment (such as compact cars) and
vintage over the automobile product cycle. An advantage of our approach is that we allow households
to differ across quarters in their distaste for price, hence our model accommodates, at least in part, the
possibility of the firm engaging in intertemporal price discrimination.
    A main result from the demand side analysis is that demand curves for most vehicles shift significantly
leftward over the second half of the model year, and the slopes of the curves undergo small changes.
Further, we estimate that cross-price elasticities between models of different vintages are quite small.
Hence, despite the similarities between vintages of the same model, consumers view vehicles from one
model year as poor substitutes for vehicles in another model year. These estimates play a central role in the
firm’s problem, as they directly affect the firm’s revenue flows from selling multiple vintages of the same
model at the same time. Lastly, we find that households are slightly more price sensitive during periods
of the year when manufacturers typically offer two vintages of a model for sale, relative to those quarters
where only one model year is usually available.
    Taking the demand curves as given, the firm solves a dynamic inventory problem to maximize profits.
The joint production/pricing decision we model is a classic issue in the operations research literature going
back to Whiten (1955) and Karlin and Carr (1962).1 Like many papers in this literature, we assume that the
good must be sold by a fixed deadline, but we extend the theory by allowing the firm to sell two vintages
simultaneously and to have a cost structure of producing vehicles with several nontrivial nonconvexities.
   1 Federgruenand Heching (1999) and Elmaghraby and Keskinocak (2003) provide a nice overview of the more recent rev-
enue management literature within operations research. Also see Chan, Hall, and Rust (2005) for an analysis of a similar pric-
ing/procurement decision.


                                                              4
    A significant aspect of the automotive market that we reflect in our model is the distribution of deal-
erships across the geographic market. Showrooms are instrumental in allowing consumers to learn about
manufacturers’ products and to gauge products’ characteristics. In this industry, for example, consumers
value the ability to observe the vehicle they are considering purchasing and to take possession of the ve-
hicle without delay. Consequently, part of the automaker’s problem is ensuring that there are a sufficient
level of inventories on dealer lots across the national market. The automotive trade press often mentions
the necessity of a showroom presence when discussing manufacturers’ inventories. In a recent issue of
Ward’s Automotive Reports (August 2, 2004), a Cadillac executive stated, “We have 1,000 dealers who
sell less than 50 vehicles a year. They’re holding 300 to 400 days’ supply [that is, inventories over sales]
because they want to display all the models.” We incorporate this need to build-to-stock (that is, invento-
ries are a prerequisite for sales) into the model by assuming that the firm faces a “revenue tax” that is a
function of sales over inventory. We assume that increases in the sales-to-inventory ratio make it harder
for the firm to consummate sales by raising the tax the firm pays per transaction.
    After calibrating the supply-side parameters of the model, we are able to replicate the decline in prices
over the model year along with hump-shaped sales and inventories that we observe in the data. Early in the
model year, the automaker sets the vehicle price high to dampen sales and thus accumulate a large stock
of inventories. Building up inventories, or following a build-to-stock inventory management strategy, is
optimal because it reduces the cost of carrying out a transaction (that is, it lowers the revenue tax). Over
the remainder of the model year, our estimate of leftward-shifting demand lowers the shadow value of
inventories, resulting in a 8.1 percent decline in the retail price of a vehicle over the entire product cycle
and an average vintage premium of 7.9 percent.
    We then solve the model with no revenue tax, thus allowing the firm to manage inventories on a build-
to-order basis. In this case, retail prices fall over the product cycle but by only one-half of the magnitude we
see in the data. Hence, unlike previous work that attributes falling prices to fashion or price discrimination,
our theory implies that build-to-stock inventory management is as important in driving price decline as
these other forces. Further, under a build-to-order policy the paths of sales and inventories do not feature
the prominent hump-shaped patterns seen in the data. These results demonstrate the significance of the
firm’s inventory strategy on the optimal pricing path. Falling demand alone explains about half of the price
decline in automobiles and misses significant comovements among prices, sales and inventories.




                                                       5
1 Data Sources and Empirical Observations

In this section, we outline the sources of the data used in our analysis and document several stylized facts.

1.1 Data Sources

To construct a dataset with information on prices, sales, production, and inventories by model and model
year in the U.S., we combined data from two sources. The first data source includes detailed information
on U.S. retail transactions collected from a sample of vehicle dealerships. It provides information on
prices, by model and model year, and on the distribution of sales, also by model and model year. The
second data source contains information on total sales in North America, by country and model, and on
production, by model and model year.
    The first dataset was constructed by Corrado, Dunn, and Otoo (2004), who obtained the data from J.D.
Power and Associates (JDPA). JDPA collects daily transaction-level information from dealerships across
the U.S., which it aggregates to a monthly frequency. Then, along the product space dimension, JDPA
adds up the data to a model and model-year level. The sample of transactions we use represents 70 percent
of the geographical markets in the U.S. and roughly 15 to 20 percent of national retail transactions. It
contains monthly observations for almost all unique make, model, and model-year light motor vehicles
(for example, 2000 Ford Escort) sold in the U.S. and covers the period from January 1999 to January
2004. Among other variables, the dataset includes information on the number of transactions recorded,
the average transaction price, the average cash rebate, and details about the average financial package
customers received. JDPA attempts to precisely measure the transaction price of a vehicle. This measure
includes the price of accessories (such as roof racks) and transportation costs but excludes aftermarket
options, taxes, title fees, and other documentary preparation costs. Further, JDPA adjusts this price to
account for instances when a dealership undervalues or overvalues a customer’s trade-in vehicle as part of
a new vehicle sale. JDPA’s transaction price does not account for incentives the customer received to help
finance the purchase of the car; hence, we define the average market price of a vehicle as the transaction
price minus the cash rebate minus a measure of the financial incentive offered by the manufacturer.
    In the data, we observe the amount financed, interest rate, and loan term that the average customer
received. The financial data are captured for loans that customers obtained from any financial institution,
as long as the financing was arranged through the dealership. As a majority of car loans arranged through
dealerships are made by the financing arms of manufacturers, we treat the financial data as an approxima-



                                                     6
tion of the average financial package that consumers received from manufacturers. To measure the value of
these financial incentives to consumers, we compare the financial package in the data against a benchmark
package offered by commercial banks. We make this comparison by first computing the net present value
(NPV) of the average amount financed given the interest rate and loan term in the data. We then compute
the NPV of financing the same average amount at the average interest rate reported for 48-month new car
loans at commercial banks.2 The value of the manufacturer’s financial incentive is then defined as the
difference between the two NPV amounts. Finally, we convert the market price into 2000 dollars by using
the BEA’s personal consumption deflator.
    As stated earlier, the data from JDPA provide the market prices of vehicles and the distribution of sales,
by model and model year. Using the total number of transactions across model years in each period, we
compute the fraction of a model’s sales that is accounted for by each available model year.
    We linked the JDPA data to information on the U.S. sales and North American production of General
Motors, Ford, and Chrysler, which we obtained from Ward’s Communications. We excluded foreign man-
ufacturers, as measuring overseas production is difficult. The sales data for these firms (also known as the
Big Three) are available only at the model level, not by model year. Therefore, we constructed estimates
of sales by model and model year on the basis of the monthly model-year distributions in the JDPA sam-
ple. Using information from Ward’s on model changeover dates at North American assembly plants, we
decomposed the production data by model into observations by model year. Finally, using the sales and
production estimates by make, model, and model year, we constructed estimates of vehicle inventories
over the sample period. All told, the work described here results in a dataset with monthly observations,
by model year, on the real average market price, quantity sold, quantity produced, and inventory held for
almost all light vehicle models sold by the Big Three in the U.S. from 1999 to 2003.

1.2 Empirical Observations

As stated earlier, by examining these data we can observe several stylized facts that hold across models and
model years. To provide illustrative examples, we show plots of the price, sales, production, and inventory
data for a midsize car and a pickup truck (figures 1-8). The steady decrease in price over the sales cycle
is immediately evident for both vehicles shown in the figures. In the 2000 model year, the average market
price for the midsize car falls over $2,000, more than 10 percent of the initial price. The declines in prices
for subsequent model years are just as pronounced. For the pickup, the price declines average a dramatic
  2 The   Board of Governors publishes these data in its G.19 Consumer Credit release


                                                               7
                       Market                 Model Year                      All
                      Segment 1999 2000 2001 2002                2003
                      Compact 7.7         5.9     8.1     9.4    17.5     9.5   (2.4)
                      Midsize     9.1     6.7     6.1     9.0    16.4     9.2   (1.5)
                      Fullsize    8.9     7.9     6.4     8.5    13.4     8.9   (2.1)
                       Luxury    11.6 10.3        8.8    13.1    14.9    11.6   (1.2)
                       Pickup     6.6    10.0     7.1     9.2    15.4     9.9   (2.2)
                        SUV       7.0     6.7     7.2     5.2    13.6     8.2   (0.9)
                       Sporty     2.3     6.2     0.4     6.1    10.9     5.1   (2.4)
                        Vans      5.4     9.0     9.3     8.5    15.7     9.6   (1.4)
                        Total     7.4     8.0     7.1     8.1    15.1     9.2   (0.6)
                      Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis

     Table 1: The Average Monthly Price Decline (annual rate) by Market Segment and Model Year



$4,000 for the 2001 through 2003 model years. Both the midsize car and the pickup clearly exhibit the
simultaneous sale of multiple vintages as well as the premium the newer model-year vehicle commands
over the older model-year vehicle. We refer to this difference in price as the “new vintage premium.” The
size of this premium varies, but the average premium for the midsize car is almost 7 percent, while the
premium for the pickup averages about 9 percent. Turning to the figures on sales and inventories, we find
that the sales and inventories of both the midsize car and the pickup exhibit a hump-shaped profile.
   Table 1 provides a summary of the average monthly price decline, the first stylized fact, by market
segment and model year and weighted by sales. For the midsize market segment, the mean monthly decline
in prices of 1999 model-year vehicles is 9.1 percent at an annual rate. On average, midsize automobiles
fall 9.2 percent. Table 1 illustrates the wide range in average price declines both across market segments
and model years. In general, luxury vehicles decline the most in price, followed by pickup trucks. Looking
across model years, 2003 vehicles decline the most in price by far. This reflects especially high incentives
offered by manufacturers in the latter half of the product cycle. Overall, the monthly decline in price
averages 9.2 percent at an annual rate.
   To observe the within-year price declines more generally, we illustrate the aggregate matched-model
price indexes for successive model years as constructed by Corrado, Dunn, and Otoo (2004) (figure 9).
This price index was constructed from the entire JDPA dataset and so includes price data on vehicles
produced by European and Asian automakers. As can be seen, transaction prices for a given model year
are at their highest levels when each model is introduced, and they trend downward in a consistent pattern
over the course of the sales cycle. The overlap of the various model-year price indexes highlights the


                                                     8
                                                                           15.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                               ar                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r
                                                                                                                                                             ye                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                                      el                                   ar                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                el
                                                                                                                                                    od                                 l ye                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              od
                                                                                                                                                  1m                                 de                                                                                                                          9                                                                                             r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           es
                                                                            15                                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                            2000 model year ↓                                                                 a                       m
                                                                                                                                             20                                    mo                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l ye                      02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           al
                                                                                                                                         ←                                 02                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ls
                                                                                                                →                                                        20                                                             ar                                                                                                                                                             de                 ←
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ta
                                                                                                           ar                                                       ←                                                               ye                                                                           8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to
                                                                                                     l ye                                                                                                                      el                                                                                                                                                             01
                                                                           14.5                                                                                                                                              od                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ←
                                                                                                  de                                                                                                                 m                                                                                                                                                                ←
                                                                                                mo                                                                                                                03
                                        prices (in thousands of dollars)




                                                                                           00                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              vehicles sold (in thousands)
                                                                                      20                                                                                                                   ←                                                                                                     7
                                                                            14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           od
                                                                           13.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ↓
                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                           12.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3

                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2

                                                                           11.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                            11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 99




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                              99




                                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                                         01




                                                                                                                                                                       02




                                                                                                                                                                                                           03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           04
                                                                                                9




                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           00
                                                                                         99




                                                                                                                        00




                                                                                                                                                      00




                                                                                                                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                            19




                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l2
                                                                                       l1




                                                                                                                      l2




                                                                                                                                                    l2




                                                                                                                                                                                       l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                 n




                                                                                                       n




                                                                                                                                     n




                                                                                                                                                                     n




                                                                                                                                                                                                   n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ju
                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                     Ju




                                                                                                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                     Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ja
                                                               Ja




                                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                      Figure 1: Average Transaction Prices.                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 2: Monthly Sales.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The dashed line is the sum of sales across model years.




                                   15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40

                                                                                       ← 2000 model year                                           ar
                                                                                                                                              l ye                                 r                                                                                                                                                                                      ← 2001 model year
                                                                                                                                             e                                   a                                                                                                          35
                                                                                                                                         od                              el
                                                                                                                                                                              ye                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ar        ↓ 2003 model year
                                                                                                                                   01m                             od                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e l ye
                                                                                                                                20                               2m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m   od
                                                                                                                           ←                                20
                                                                                                                                                               0                                                                                                                                                           2000 model year ↓                                                                02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    vehicles in inventory (in thousands)




                                                                                                                                                        ←                                                                                                                                   30                                                                                                          20
vehicles produced (in thousands)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ←
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ye
                                   10                                                                                                                                                                              el
                                                                                                                                                                                                          od                                                                                25
                                                                                                                                                                                                        3m
                                                                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ←
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                    5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5


                                    0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                    99




                                                                                                00




                                                                                                                              01




                                                                                                                                                             02




                                                                                                                                                                                              03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   04
                                                                                  9




                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                              1




                                                                                                                                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             99




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                99




                                                                                                                00




                                                                                                                                             00




                                                                                                                                                                              00




                                                                                                                                                                                                              00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           99




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00
                                   19




                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                             l1




                                                                                                            l2




                                                                                                                                         l2




                                                                                                                                                                         l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                          l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l2
                     n




                                                                                           n




                                                                                                                          n




                                                                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                                                                                                          n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n
                                                                           Ju




                                                                                                       Ju




                                                                                                                                       Ju




                                                                                                                                                                     Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ju
Ja




                                                                                      Ja




                                                                                                                      Ja




                                                                                                                                                       Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                       Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                       Figure 3: Monthly Production.                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 4: Monthly Inventories.



                                                                                                            Prices, Sales, Production, and Inventories for a Midsize Car by Model Year
                                                                                                                     Source: J.D. Power and Associates, Ward’s Communications and authors’ calculations




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9
                                                                23                                                                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               18                                                                           01
                                                                                                                                                           ar                                                                                                                                                                                  m   od
                                                                22                                                                                      ye                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             les
                                                                                                                                                  del                                                                                                                                                                                                el
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ye                                        sa
                                                                                                                                               mo                                       ar                                                                                                                  20                                                                                   al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16                                                                                           ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               →                           tot
                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                          01                                       l ye                                                                                                                          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ←
                                                                                                                                                                                 de                                                                                                                                 m od
                                                                                                                                    ←                                        mo
                             prices (in thousands of dollars)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        el                                                                  20
                                                                21                                                                                                      02                                                                                                                                                   ye




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                vehicles sold (in thousands)
                                                                                                                                                                      20                                                                                       14                                                              ar                                                              0  2→
                                                                                                                                                                  ←                                                                                                                                                                 →
                                                                                                          →
                                                                                                       ar                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                l ye                                                                                                                       ar                                  12                                                                                                                                                          0 3→
                                                                20                         d  e                                                                                                                        l ye
                                                                                        mo                                                                                                                       od
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                     00                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                20                                                                                                                           03                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ←
                                                                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8


                                                                18                                                                                                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2

                                                                16                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                 99




                                                                                              00




                                                                                                                             01




                                                                                                                                                             02




                                                                                                                                                                                           03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                99




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        04
                                                                                9




                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                                            3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                            99




                                                                                                              00




                                                                                                                                             00




                                                                                                                                                                           00




                                                                                                                                                                                                           00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             99




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       00
                                                                19




                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                           l1




                                                                                                          l2




                                                                                                                                         l2




                                                                                                                                                                       l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                       l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            l1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l2
                                          n




                                                                                         n




                                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                                                                                                      n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                       Ju




                                                                                                        Ju




                                                                                                                                        Ju




                                                                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ju
                 Ja




                                                                                      Ja




                                                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                                                                      Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ja
                                                                           Figure 5: Average Transaction Prices.                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 6: Monthly Sales.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                The dashed line is the sum of sales across model years.



                                        25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                               ar                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ar
                                                                                                                        l ye                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ← 2000 model year                                                                               el
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ye
                                                                                                                     de                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  od
                                                                                                                   mo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                              00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ar                    03
                                                                                                            20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ar              ye                               20
                                                                                                        ←                                                         ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50                                                                            l ye             el                              ←
                                        20                                                                                                                      ye                                                                                                                                                                                                                      de              od
                                                                                                                                                           el                                     ar                                                                                                                                                                                 mo              2m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     vehicles in inventory (in thousands)




                                                                                                                                                         od                                  l ye                                                                                                                                                                                 01              00
vehicles produced (in thousands)




                                                                                                                                                       1m                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0             ↓ 2
                                                                                                                                                   0                                       de                                                                                                                                                                                ←
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                 20                                   mo                    ar
                                                                                                                                             ←                                   02                     l ye                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                               20                     de
                                                                                                                                                                           ←                        mo
                                        15                                                                                                                                                   03
                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                      ←
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30

                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20


                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10



                                                           0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                            99




                                                                                          00




                                                                                                                          01




                                                                                                                                                          02




                                                                                                                                                                                       03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             99




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       04
                                                                            9




                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                                                           3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                           99




                                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           99




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    00
                                   19




                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                       l1




                                                                                                        l2




                                                                                                                                        l2




                                                                                                                                                                      l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                    l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l2
             n




                                                                                      n




                                                                                                                    n




                                                                                                                                                      n




                                                                                                                                                                                  n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                                                    Ju




                                                                                                                                                                  Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ju
Ja




                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ja




                                                                                     Figure 7: Monthly Production.                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 8: Monthly Inventories.



                                                                                                        Prices, Sales, Production, and Inventories for a Pickup Truck by Model Year
                                                                                                                  Source: J.D. Power and Associates, Ward’s Communications and authors’ calculations




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                 Matched−model Price Indexes by Model Year
                1.02



                  1                                                        00
                                                                      20
                                                                  ←
                                      98               99                                   01                  02               03
                                   19                19                                   20               20                  20
                               ←                 ←                                    ←                ←                   ←
                0.98                                                                                                                     →
                                                                                                                                    04
                                                                                                                                20

                0.96



                0.94



                0.92



                 0.9



                0.88
                               8




                                                 9




                                                                  0




                                                                                      1




                                                                                                       2




                                                                                                                           3




                                                                                                                                               4
                              9




                                                9




                                                                 0




                                                                                     0




                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                0
                           19




                                             19




                                                              20




                                                                                  20




                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                             20
                           n




                                             n




                                                              n




                                                                                  n




                                                                                                   n




                                                                                                                       n




                                                                                                                                           n
                         Ja




                                           Ja




                                                            Ja




                                                                                Ja




                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                                         Ja
                         Figure 9: Matched-Model Price Indexes by Model Year.


second stylized fact–that multiple vintages of vehicles are simultaneously sold for a significant portion
of the model year. In our database of transactions, the mean length of time a vehicle is on the market is
16.7 months. The number of months sold varies little across vehicles; the mean length of the automobile
product cycle has a standard error of only 0.02.
    Turning to the third stylized fact, we report the average new vintage premium by market segment and
model year, weighted by sales (table 2). The table illustrates that the new vintage premium of 2000 model-
year midsize cars over their 1999 model-year counterparts is 10.0 percent. In the sample, the new vintage
premium is 8.5 percent, on average, for midsize cars, and the standard error is 0.4.
    Although the new vintage premium varies quite a bit across market segments and time, overall it
amounts to 8.8 percent, on average, in our sample. This premium is highest for luxury cars and pickup
trucks and lowest for compact cars, sport utility vehicles, and sporty cars, where the difference in premiums
between luxury and compacts is 4.5 percent. Across model years, the average new vintage premium
is typically between 7 and 9 percent, though the premium during the 2003 to 2004 changeover is 13.1
percent. This large premium is related to the steep decline in within model-year prices for 2003 model-
year vehicles, shown in table 1. Both numbers reflect the unusually high incentives the Big Three placed
on 2003 model-year vehicles over the second half of the product cycle.
    One might argue that the new vintage premium simply reflects improvements in quality or additional


                                                                           11
                          Market                 Model Year                                All
                         Segment 2000 2001 2002 2003                        2004
                         Compact 5.9         6.9      6.7    6.9            11.0       7.1    (0.5)
                         Midsize 10.0        5.8     6.1     7.5            11.9       8.5    (0.4)
                         Fullsize    9.9     6.2      7.8    8.2             9.2       8.3    (0.6)
                          Luxury    11.0 11.6        9.8    14.1            11.1      11.6    (0.4)
                          Pickup    10.7     9.8     6.3     8.6            20.0      10.6    (0.7)
                           SUV       5.4     0.4     10.1    8.8            10.9       7.2    (0.4)
                          Sporty     2.6     7.5      3.3   28.9            -7.8       7.2    (0.8)
                           Van       7.7    11.8      3.6    9.1            12.4       8.6    (0.4)
                            All      8.6     7.2      7.1    9.1            13.1       8.8    (0.2)
                         Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis

             Table 2: The Average ‘New Vintage Premium’ by Market Segment and Model Year



features. For example, the 20 percent new vintage premium recorded for 2004 model-year pickup trucks
reflects, in part, a quality improvement made to Ford’s F-series pickup truck.3 For many of the vehicles
in our sample, however, changes in the observable characteristics from one model year to the next were
minimal, and even for vehicles with such changes, the downward-sloping price pattern was still apparent.
To further investigate this fact, we looked at the new vintage premium for a subsample of vehicles that
had not undergone a major redesign. We determined when a model received a major redesign by using
data from Ward’s Communications on the vehicle’s platform. Given that the platform choice designates
the basic structure of the vehicle, we take a manufacturer’s decision to change a vehicle’s platform as a
sufficient, though not necessary, condition that the vehicle has undergone a major redesign. We recomputed
the new vintage premium for these vehicles and found that the average premium differs little from the
figures reported in table 2.
    The fourth stylized fact states that both sales and inventories for a particular model and model year
exhibit a humped-shaped pattern. When we plot the Big Three’s aggregate sales by model year, we see the
distinctive hump shape that sales follow over the product cycle (figure 10). The contour of aggregate sales,
however, confounds the evolution of sales over the product cycle with calender effects, because vehicles of
a given model year are not all introduced in the same month. To separate out these two effects, we define
the dummy variables 1t for t = 1, 2, . . . , 14 as indicators of how many months the model year has been
sold. If 1t=1 is equal to 1, then at this date the associated vehicle is in its first month of sales. For model
    3 Alternatively, if a cheaper base model is introduced, the vehicle premium may be biased downwards (see, for example, the

-7.8 premium for 2004 sporty cars).



                                                             12
                                    1200                                              ar
                                                                                l   ye
                                                                             de
                                                                          mo




                                                                                                                                                                                   r
                                                                                                                                                              ar




                                                                                                                                                                              ea
                                                                     99                                      ar                        ar                  ye
                                                                                                           ye                        ye                 el




                                                                                                                                                                               y
                                                                   19                                el                         el                    d




                                                                                                                                                                            el
                                                               ←                                   od                         od                    mo




                                                                                                                                                                         od
                                    1000                                                          m                          m                 02
                                                                                             00                         01




                                                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                           20                         20                    20
                                                                                                                                        ←




                                                                                                                                                                    03
                                                                                      ←                           ←




                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                            ←
                                    800
                Sales (thousands)




                                    600



                                    400



                                    200



                                      0
                                                 99




                                                                     00




                                                                                             01




                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                    03




                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                          99




                                                                                00




                                                                                                          01




                                                                                                                                     02




                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                             00
                                             19




                                                                   20




                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                        19




                                                                              20




                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                           l2
                                             n




                                                                 n




                                                                                         n




                                                                                                                    n




                                                                                                                                             n




                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                                         l




                                                                              l




                                                                                                         l




                                                                                                                                    l
                                                      Ju




                                                                           Ju




                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                 Ju




                                                                                                                                                         Ju
                                           Ja




                                                               Ja




                                                                                       Ja




                                                                                                                  Ja




                                                                                                                                            Ja




                                                                                                                                                                    Ja
                                                         Figure 10: Big Three Sales by Model Year


years that are sold for more than fourteen months, we define a dummy variable 115+ , which is equal to 1
for sales that take place more than fourteen months after the introduction of the vehicle to the marketplace.
We then run a regression of log sales on these dummy variables, including fixed effects for each model and
controlling for the calender month. Examining the coefficients on these dummy variables then provides
an estimate of the shape of the typical sales path for a vehicle. Using a similar approach, but substituting
inventories for sales, we can also study the shape of the typical inventory path for a vehicle. We report the
estimated coefficients from running these two regressions (table 3).
    Regarding the sales regression, the estimated coefficients imply that sales do indeed follow a humped-
shaped path. After rapid sales growth in the first three selling months, the level of sales then slowly climbs
to its peak six to eight months after the vehicle’s debut before declining. This same pattern can be seen
in the estimated coefficients from the regression using inventories. Inventories peak slightly later, roughly
nine months after a vehicle’s debut, before rapidly falling.
    To better analyze the relationship between sales and inventories, we consider the ratio of inventories
to sales, also known as days’ supply. We use the stock of inventories at the beginning of the period and
sales for the current month. Hence, this ratio measures the number of days the firm could continue to
sell cars if it used only the stock of inventories available at the start of the month, assuming future sales
are equal to the current month’s flow. A major focus of the days’ supply calculation is the large stock of



                                                                                                      13
                                         Sales                          Inventories
                 Parameter    Coefficient Standard Error       Coefficient Standard Error
                    1t=2         0.76          0.038              0.32            0.058
                    1t=3         1.09          0.039              0.50            0.060
                    1t=4         1.24          0.039              0.62            0.061
                    1t=5         1.24          0.039              0.79            0.061
                    1t=6         1.25          0.040              0.94            0.062
                    1t=7         1.26          0.041              1.03            0.066
                    1t=8         1.25          0.041              1.05            0.067
                    1t=9         1.18          0.041              1.11            0.068
                   1t=10         0.98          0.042              1.09            0.067
                   1t=11         0.93          0.042              0.84            0.066
                   1t=12         0.95          0.042              0.38            0.064
                   1t=13         0.82          0.041             -0.07            0.063
                   1t=14         0.60          0.043             -0.45            0.066
                  1t=15+        -0.11          0.034             -0.80            0.047

     Table 3: The Shape of Sales and Inventories by Model and Model Year Over the Product Cycle


 Market Segment Compact Midsize Fullsize                Luxury     Pickup    SUV     Sporty    Vans     All
  Days Supply          73          60     75              80         84       75       83       85    76 (2.1)
 Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis

                          Table 4: The Average Days Supply by Market Segment



inventories that automakers carry relative to sales. On average, automakers carry 76 days’ supply in our
data–implying automakers typically carry enough inventories to sell vehicles for over two months without
any additional production. Table 4 provides a breakdown of the average days supply by market segment
and illustrates the substantial variation in days supply across different types of vehicles.
    Turning to the last stylized fact, we look at the correlation between inventories and prices, by model
and model year. To analyze the relationship between prices and moments when inventories are above
or below trend, we first need to accurately measure when inventories are ample or lean. The residuals
from the inventory regression described earlier provide a measure of the deviations from the usual contour
of inventories over the product cycle. We measure whether prices are correlated with these inventory
fluctuations by regressing the log of price on a lag of these inventory residuals. We find the expected
significant negative relationship between lagged inventory residuals and price: The estimated coefficient
on the lagged residuals is -0.02, and the associated standard error is 0.003.
    The decline in an automobile’s price over the model year and the resulting new vintage premium has


                                                      14
been studied by Pashigian, Bowen, and Gould (1995). They hypothesize that the new vintage premium
reflects optimal pricing behavior in an environment in which demand is driven by fashion. They use
monthly data from the consumer price index to show that at the aggregate level prices for new cars decline
between December and September of the model year. Although the magnitude of the within-model-year
price declines have fallen between 1954 and 1989, Pashigian, Bowen, and Gould find these price declines
are larger for luxury and speciality cars than for compacts and subcompacts. They argue that the larger
the changes in styling and quality improvements between model years, the larger the within-model-year
price declines. Hence, the new-car market behaves like the market for fashionable apparel. In contrast, we
find only marginal evidence of a particular pattern in the new vintage premium across market segments.
As shown in table 2, although luxury cars command the highest vintage premium, other fashion-oriented
vehicle types such as SUVs and sporty automobiles command premiums nearly equal to, or markedly
below, those of the more plain compact and midsize automobiles.
    Given the evidence, we posit that within-model-year price declines are driven more by the used-vehicle
market than by fashion. Consider the case of a 2000 model-year vehicle produced at the end of the product
cycle and a 2001 model-year vehicle produced at the beginning of the product cycle. Although these two
vehicles may have been produced just a few weeks apart, we expect that in the used-vehicle market, the
2000 vintage will be perceived to have been on the road twelve months longer than the 2001 vintage.
    To provide evidence in support of this hypothesis, we estimated a price regression on a separate JDPA
dataset of used-vehicle transactions from 2001-2003. The left-hand-side variable is the log of the trans-
action price for a given model and vintage of a used vehicle. The explanatory variables in the regression
include time and model dummies as well as vehicle characteristics such as engine size. As a proxy for
the vehicle’s physical depreciation, we include the vehicle’s odometer reading when sold. Finally, we also
add a measure of the vehicle’s model age, which equals the calendar year minus the model year plus one.4
We show the resulting coefficients on age and odometer reading, both of which are statistically significant
with greater than 99 percent confidence (table 5). As expected, the coefficient on the odometer reading
is negative and implies a price decline of about 0.4 percent for each additional 1,000 miles on a given
vehicle. Notably, the coefficient on age implies that, even after controlling for the odometer reading and
other vehicle characteristics, a higher model age (that is, an older model year) implies a lower price in the
used vehicle market. All other things constant, increasing the age (as defined by the model year) by one
   4 Because we have a limited set of physical characteristics to control for changes in vehicle quality across vintages of the same

model, we restrict the sample to vehicles of age four or under. This restriction reduces the variation in price across vintages of
the same model due to changes in unobserved characteristics.


                                                                15
                                Variable                  Coefficient   Standard Error
                                  Age                       -0.093          0.004
                      Odometer (thousands of miles)         -0.004          0.000

           Table 5: Coefficients on Age and Odometer from the Used-vehicle Price Regression



year decreases the value of a used vehicle by 9.3 percent, a figure only slightly greater than our estimate of
the new vintage premium. This strongly suggests that the new vintage premium is driven by the difference
in the new vehicles’ values in the used-vehicle market.


2 A Market Equilibrium Model with Overlapping Model Years

In this section, we present a market equilibrium model designed to capture the empirical regularities doc-
umented earlier. We first describe the firm’s problem. We assume the automaker takes market demand
curves as given and solves a dynamic profit maximization problem. As the automaker is able to hold
inventories, at certain times the automaker is able to sell two vehicles, the current year’s vintage and the
previous year’s vintage. The firm’s model parameters are calibrated to match the key features of the firm’s
cost structure and the means of prices, output and inventories. We derive decision rules that govern the
production and pricing of vehicles over the model year. Through numerical simulations, we demonstrate
that the empirical regularities documented earlier are consistent with our derived decision rules under a
build-to-stock inventory policy.
    An essential feature of the firm’s problem is the market demand curve. We posit a semi-log demand
curve whose parameters are price semi-elasticities. We then draw upon the existing demand-choice litera-
ture to estimate these semi-elasticities and their change over the product cycle.

2.1 The Automaker’s Problem

In the interest of tractability, we make several strong simplifying assumptions on the supply side. First,
we assume that each vehicle line within the firm can be considered a separate, independent subfirm or
profit center. Hence, an automaker is modelled as a collection of dynamic programs that can be solved
independently of each other. Second, we integrate the dealership into the automaker and consider a unified
pricing decision. Third, we abstract from issues of bargaining and price discrimination by assuming that
all customers who purchase during a particular period pay the same retail price. Of course, there are many
interesting questions about how the automakers actually decentralize their operations both across products


                                                     16
and between the production and marketing sides of the business. But because these issues are not central
to understanding the facts presented earlier, we defer further consideration to other papers.5
    The automaker sells two products: this year’s vintage and last year’s vintage. The decision period is a
week. There are T weeks in a model year, and a new model year begins the week after the old model year
ends. So the automaker solves an infinite horizon problem by repeatedly solving a T -week model-year
problem. Successive model years are linked because this year’s vintage becomes last year’s vintage at the
end of the T th week. Each week the firm must decide (1) the number of vehicles of the current model year
to produce, qt ; (2) the number of days to operate the plant, Dt , the number of shifts to run, St , and the
number of hours per shift, ht ; (3) the retail price of the current vintage, pthis
                                                                              t ; and (4) the retail price of last

year’s vintage, ptlast (if any are still in stock).
                                         j
    We assume that weekly sales, st , for each of the two vintages depend on each vintage’s own price and
the price of the other vintage:

                      st = µt − ηt log(pt ) + φt log(pti ) for j, i = {this, last} and i 6= j,}
                        j     j     j        j     ji
                                                                                                                         (1)

where µt is a constant term, ηt is the own-price semi-elasticity, and φt is the cross-price semi-elasticity.
           j                        j                                               ji


The demand parameters may vary across the 52 weeks of the year.
                                                                                j
    Unsold vehicles can be inventoried without depreciation. Let It+1 be the stock of vintage j vehicles
that are inventoried at the end of period t and carried over into period t + 1. Current production is not
available for immediate sale, so sales can be made only from the beginning-of-period inventories:
                                                            j        j
                                                           st ≤ It .                                                     (2)

Further, sales cannot be backlogged. Inventories for the current vintage follow the standard law of motion:
                                                  this
                                                 It+1  = Itthis + qt − sthis
                                                                        t .                                              (3)

Because no vehicles for the last model year are produced during the current year, inventories for last year’s
vintage evolve according to
                                                     last
                                                    It+1  = Itlast − stlast .                                            (4)

At the conclusion of the current model year, any unsold vehicles of last year’s vintage are scrapped at a
zero price, and this year’s vintage becomes last year’s vintage:

                                                 I1last = ITthis + qT − sthis
                                                                         T .                                             (5)
   5 Forexample, Bresnahan and Reiss (1985) model and estimate the division of markups between automobile manufacturers
and dealers. For discussions of bargaining and price discrimination in the retail auto market see Ayres and Siegelman (1995),
Goldberg (1996), and Zettelmeyer, Scott Morton, and Silva-Risso (2001).


                                                                17
    We assume the vehicle is assembled at a single plant. Each period, the firm must decide how many
vehicles of the current vintage to produce and how to organize production to minimize costs. As is typical
in most manufacturing industries, assembly plant managers increase or decrease production by altering the
workweek rather than the rate of production. The plant can operate D days a week. It can run one or two
shifts, S, each day, and both shifts are h hours long. We assume the number of employees per shift, n, and
the line speed, LS, are fixed. So the firm’s production function is linear in hours:

                                               qt = Dt × St × ht × LS.                                               (6)

Although the production function is linear, the firm faces several important non-convexities because of
its labor contract.6 The average straight-time, day-shift wage at these plants is about $27 an hour plus
benefits. Workers on the second (evening) shift receive a 5 percent premium. Any work in excess of eight
hours a day, and all Saturday work, are paid at a rate of time and a half. Employees who work fewer than
40 hours per week must be paid 85 percent of their hourly wage times the difference between 40 and the
number of hours worked. This “short week compensation” is in addition to the wages a worker receives
for the hours actually worked. If the firm chooses to not operate a plant for a week, the workers are laid
off. Laid-off workers receive 95 cents on the dollar of their 40 hour pay in unemployment compensation.
Of these 95 cents, the firm pays about 65 cents.
    Given such a labor contract, if the firm decides to produce q vehicles, it must then choose how many
days to operate the plant, how many shifts to run, and how many hours to run each shift to minimize its
cost of production. Given these choices, the firm’s week t cost function is expressed as

       c(Dt , St , ht |qt ) = γqt + (w1 + I(St = 2)w2 ) × (Dt ht n + max[0, 0.85(40 − Dt ht )n]                      (7)

                              + max[0, 0.5Dt (ht − 8)n] + max[0, 0.5(Dt − 5)8n]) + 0.65w1 40(2 − St )n,

where γ is the per vehicle material cost, n is the number of employees per shift, and w1 and w2 are the
hourly wage rates paid to the first-shift and second-shift workers, respectively. The first term is the per-
vehicle cost; it incorporates all costs (such as materials, energy, transaction) that do not depend on the
allocation of production over the week. The first term within the brackets represents the straight-time
wages paid to the production workers. The subsequent terms within the brackets capture the 85 percent
rule for short weeks and the required overtime premium. The last term is the unemployment compensation
  6 For further discussion of the institutional details of labor contracts in automobile manufacturing, see Bresnahan and

Ramey (1994), Hall (2000), or Ramey and Vine (2004).


                                                           18
bill charged to the firm. Let Dt = 0 if and only if St = 0. Thus, the cost function is piecewise linear with
kinks at one shift running 40 hours per week and two shifts running 40 hours per week. This implies that
the firm will minimize average costs by operating the plant with either one shift or two shifts for 40 hours
per week.
     The firm’s objective is to maximize the present value of the discounted stream of profits. For each
model year the automaker’s problem is to maximize
      T    µ         ¶t−1 n                                                                                                  o
                1
     ∑         1+r
                              ptlast stlast (1 − τ(stlast /itlast )ψ ) + pthis
                                                                          t    sthis
                                                                                t    (1 − τ(sthis this ψ
                                                                                             t   /it  )  ) − c(D , S ,
                                                                                                                t t t th |q )
     t=1
                                                                                                 µ         ¶T
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                             +                  V (I1last , 0, 1)   (8)
                                                                                                     1+r

subject to (1)-(6) and where c(D, S, h|q) is given by (7). The terms τ(stlast /itlast )ψ and τ(sthis this ψ
                                                                                                t /it ) are

revenue taxes the automaker must pay if the sales-to-inventory ratio is large. This term captures the
distributional costs the automaker faces, as described previously in the introduction. When inventories are
low, it is harder for potential customers to observe and gauge a vehicle (that is, to test-drive it and view
the choice set), and thus it is more costly to consummate a sale. The tax effectively disappears when the
sales-to-inventory ratio is small.7 The term V (ITlast
                                                    +1 , 0, 1) is a continuation value, which we now define.

     Let V (I last , I this ,t) be the optimal value at week t for the firm that holds in inventory I last of last year’s
vintage and I this of this year’s vintage. Then the firm’s value function can be written:
                                    ½
    last this
V (I , I ,t) = max                    plast slast (1 − τ(slast /ilast )ψ ) + pthis sthis (1 − τ(sthis /ithis )ψ ) − min c(D, S, h|q)
                    pthis ,plast ,q                                                                                 D,S,h
                                                                                                            ¾
                                                         1
                                                    +        V (I last − slast , I this + q − sthis ,t + 1)       for t = 1, ..., T − 1 (9)
                                                       1+r

subject to (1), (2), and (6) and where c(D, S, h|q) is given by (7).
     At week T , this year’s vintage becomes last year’s vintage, and so the value function is
                                     ½
V (I last , I this , T ) = max         plast slast (1 − τ(slast /ilast )ψ ) + pthis sthis (1 − τ(sthis /ithis )ψ ) − min c(D, S, h|q)
                          p ,p ,q
                           this last                                                                                 D,S,h
                                                                                                                                   ¾
                                                                                                    1          this        this
                                                                                              +          V (I + q − s , 0, 1) . (10)
                                                                                                  1+r
   7 We  tried specifying demand as an increasing function of the level of inventories; that is, customers are willing to pay a
higher price if they are more likely to be matched to their ideal vehicle. However, in this case, the model has the counterfactual
implication that, all other things being equal, higher inventories are associated with higher prices. Fact 5 suggests that, even if
demand is increasing in inventories, the supply-side inventory effect dominates the demand-side effect. We also tried replacing
the revenue tax with an explicit inventory-to-sales target; this yields similar results, but the tax is computationally more robust.




                                                                    19
2.2 Parameterizing the Model

There a number of parameters in this model. Our approach is to choose the supply-side parameters in the
firm’s problem based on the first moments in the data and from published information on assembly plants.
For demand parameters, we employ a discrete-choice methodology to estimate consumer’s preferences
over automobiles. We then use these estimates to compute the intercepts, own-price semi-elasticities and
cross-price semi-elasticities that are parameters in the market demand function, equation (1).

2.2.1 Demand-side parameters

Overview: The demand for automobiles is modelled within a discrete-choice framework. Following
Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995), henceforth BLP, we construct the demand system by aggregating
over the discrete choices of heterogeneous individuals. The utility derived from choosing an automobile
depends on the interaction between a consumer’s characteristics and a product’s characteristics. Con-
sumers are heterogeneous in income as well as in their tastes for certain product characteristics. We
distinguish between two types of product characteristics: those that are observed by the econometrician
(such as horsepower and miles per gallon), which are denoted by X; and those that are unobserved by
the econometrician (such as styling or prestige), which are denoted by ξ. Drawing from the nested logit
literature, we also incorporate a correlation in the consumer’s tastes for vehicles of the same model year.
We divide vehicles into G + 1 mutually exclusive groups (that is, model years)–g = 0, 1, 2, . . . , G–where
the outside good is the sole member of group 0. We also allow households’ distaste for price, denoted by
α, to vary from quarter to quarter. This captures the possibility that different types of households show up
to purchase a new automobile at different times of the year. We specify the indirect utility derived from
consumer i purchasing product j, dropping the time subscript, as

                         ui jq = X j β + ξ j − αiq p j + ∑ σk νik x jk + ζig + (1 − ρ)εi j ,                   (11)
                                                         k

where p j denotes the price of product j and x jk ∈ X j is the kth observable characteristic of product j.
The term X j β + ξ j , where β are parameters to be estimated, represents the utility from product j that is
common to all consumers, or a mean level of utility. Consumers then have a distribution of tastes for each
observable characteristic. For each characteristic k, consumer i has a taste νik , which is drawn from an
independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) standard normal distribution. The parameter σk captures
the variance in consumer tastes. The term αiq measures a consumer’s distaste for price increases in quarter
                                                                                               αq
q = {1, 2, 3, 4}. Following Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1999), we assume that αiq =           yi ,   where αq is a

                                                        20
parameter to be estimated and yi is a draw from the income distribution. We assume the distribution of
household income is lognormal, and, for each year in our sample, we estimate its mean and variance from
the Current Population Survey (CPS). The second-to-last term in equation (11) captures correlations in a
consumer’s tastes for products within the same group. For consumer i, the variable ζig is common to all
products in group g and has a distribution that depends upon ρ. Finally, εi j is an i.i.d. extreme value.
    Consumers choose among the j = 1, 2, . . . , J automobiles in our sample and the outside good (denoted
j = 0), which represents the choice not to buy a new automobile from the Big Three. Consumers choose
the product j that maximizes utility, and market shares are obtained by aggregating over consumers.


Implementation: As described in section 1, our sample includes data for the Big Three firms over the
five-year period from February 1999 to January 2004. There are 638 observations of unique model and
model-year vehicles. We aggregate sales and prices to the quarterly frequency because there is a significant
amount of volatility in monthly sales due, in part, to intertemporal substitution. Moreover, BLP’s static
utility maximization approach is better suited to analyzing quarterly data. We do not estimate the model at
an annual frequency because the variation in price and in the consumer’s choice set from quarter-to-quarter
is a significant source of identification in the BLP framework.
    We use vehicle characteristics that include a set of model dummies, a measure of acceleration, vehicle
dimensions, a measure of safety, and fuel efficiency.8 As was done in previous research, we link quantity
sold and transaction price to the characteristics of the base model to produce a vehicle-quarter observation.
To this standard set of characteristics, we also add a measure of how long a product has been sold–the num-
ber of quarters since the vehicle was first introduced. The model dummies, the number of quarters since
introduction, and a quadratic time trend make up the vector of observable characteristic used to compute
the mean utility of a product, X j β. The measures of acceleration, dimension, safety, and fuel efficiency,
along with the number of quarters since introduction, are included in the vector of observable characteris-
tics used to measure heterogeneity in households’ preferences, ∑k σk νik x jk . In essence, the model dummies
help explain the mean utility level of a product, while the measures of acceleration, dimension, safety, fuel
efficiency, and number of quarters since introduction drive the substitution patterns among vehicles.
    Unlike the approach taken in BLP, we also incorporate (through ζ) correlation in consumers’ tastes
across a discrete characteristic, model years. This nested logit approach is folded into the BLP algorithm
in the natural way. Following BLP, we use the number of households in the U.S. as reported in the CPS as
  8 Information   on vehicle characteristics were taken from Automotive News’s Market Data Book (various years).



                                                             21
a measure of market size for the year. We assume that one-fourth of all households in a given year show
up each quarter.
    Our estimation strategy follows the generalized method of moments approach taken by BLP. Given
the vector of parameters θ, we solve for the unique vector of mean utilities such that the model’s pre-
dicted market shares equal actual market shares.9 We then match the moments related to the market-level
disturbance, ξ j , using the assumption that ξ is uncorrelated with the vehicle characteristics, X, or

                                                       E[ξ(θ)|X] = 0.                                                      (12)

As in the typical nested logit exercise, the parameter ρ is estimated through the decomposition of the mean
utility of a product,
                                                δ j = X j β − ξ j + ρln(s j/g ),                                           (13)

where δ j is equal to the difference between the market share of product j and the market share of the
outside good, and s j/g is the market share of product j relative to the market share of the group to which
product j belongs.
    As ξ is correlated with both price and s j/g , an endogeneity problem arises. Berry (1994) provides a
methodology that allows us to use instrumental variables. We follow BLP’s approximation of the optimal
instruments, though in our setting they have a diminished effect. These instruments are based on competing
products’ characteristics, which change at the model-year frequency, though our price and quantity data
vary at the quarterly level. Accordingly, we augment the set of instruments to include indicator variables
for whether multiple vintages of a model are being sold simultaneously. Whether or not another vintage is
being sold at the same time has an effect on price, and this effect can vary at a quarterly frequency. Further,
there is little reason to suspect that the sale of multiple vintages of a model is related to the unobserved
characteristic of a vehicle. New vintages are most often introduced at an annual frequency, and automakers
face large costs to altering the scheduled introduction of a new vintage.


Results: We present a subset of the parameter estimates in table 6. Given their large number, we do
not report our fixed-effects estimates. Instead, we show those estimates that measure the heterogeneity
in consumers’ tastes (σ) along with estimates of the substitutability of vehicles across model years (ρ)
and estimates of a consumer’s distaste for price (α). The coefficients on miles per dollar (measure of
   9 We modified the programs provided in Nevo (2000) to estimate the demand system.   A notable addition to this set of programs
is the importance sampling simulator described in BLP, which is used to integrate over ν to obtain a prediction of market share.



                                                              22
                                   Parameters                   Coefficient    Standard Error
               Taste for Variety                   σ
                                               Constant             0.61           0.968
                                          Horsepower/Weight         3.78           0.905
                                                Height              3.91           1.086
                                                 Size               2.07           0.752
                                             Miles/dollar           0.50           2.806
                                               Air bag              0.93           0.631
                                                 Intro             -0.04           0.154

               Model-Year Nest                    ρ                 0.58           0.014
               Distaste for Price (Q1)            α1               42.31           7.684
               Distaste for Price (Q2)            α2               36.64           7.998
               Distaste for Price (Q3)            α3               34.99           6.823
               Distaste for Price (Q4)            α4               32.95           4.707

                                         Table 6: Parameter Estimates


fuel efficiency), air bag (measure of safety), and intro (number of quarters since introduction) are not
statistically significant. However, we estimate that consumers are quite heterogeneous in their tastes for
acceleration (horsepower over weight), height, and size (length times width of the vehicle).
    The model-year nest and the price coefficients are precisely estimated. The estimate of ρ reflects the
substitutability of models from different model years, where ρ = 0 indicates no substitutability and ρ = 1
implies perfect substitutability. Our estimate of ρ is 0.58, which suggests that consumers do not find
vehicles from different model years to be close substitutes. The estimated value of household’s distaste
for price falls from quarter 1 to quarter 4. The quarters differ from calendar quarters. We defined the first
quarter as the first three months of a typical vehicle’s product cycle: August, September, and October. We
then defined the second through fourth quarters on the basis of this new grouping of months. Although
the differences among the α’s are not significant, they imply that households are more sensitive to price in
quarters when automakers typically offer multiple vintages of vehicles, relative to quarters when only one
vintage is available.
    The estimate of ρ and the magnitude of the price coefficients are more easily interpreted by examining
the implied own-price and cross-price elasticities. These elasticities provide the clearest picture of the
values of the semi-elasticities that we use in our specified demand function. We report the own-price elas-
ticities of individual vehicles averaged across market segments, quarters, and vintages, where the vintage
label signifies whether the vehicle is the newest model year available or not (table 7).


                                                       23
           Vintage    Market Segment       1st Quarter      2nd Quarter   3rd Quarter     4th Quarter
            New          Compact               8.2              9.2           7.9              8.6
                           Full                10.3            11.3           9.1              9.6
                         Luxury                9.8             11.4           8.4              9.0
                         Midsize               9.4             10.5           8.9              9.7
                          Pickup               9.7             10.8           9.1              9.0
                           SUV                 9.7             10.7           8.6              8.6
                          Sporty               10.8            10.9           9.1             10.0
                           Van                 10.2            11.6           9.7             10.1
                            All                9.8             10.8           8.8              9.3

             Old          Compact              7.8              8.3           8.8             8.8
                            Full               10.0            11.4           10.5           10.6
                          Luxury               9.9             11.0           9.2             9.2
                          Midsize              9.4             10.0           8.9             8.1
                           Pickup              9.8             10.8           8.9            11.6
                            SUV                9.9             10.8           9.6             8.6
                           Sporty              9.8             11.7           9.3             8.6
                            Van                10.2            10.9           9.6             5.8
                             All               9.6             10.6           9.3             8.9

    Table 7: The Absolute Value of Own-Price Elasticities by Market Segment, Quarter, and Vintage



    The own-price elasticities generated by our parameter estimates range between 6 and 12, an indication
that manufacturers face quite elastic demand. In the first quarter a car is sold, our results imply that a 1
percent price increase for a typical compact car (roughly $140) causes an 8.2 percent fall in sales, holding
everything else equal. The average own-price elasticity across all vehicles is reported in the “All” row,
and illustrates that elasticities in the first and second quarter are typically higher than those in the third and
fourth quarter for both new and old vintages. This is likely driven by the higher α’s and larger choice sets in
these quarters. In general, our estimated elasticities are higher than those found in the previous literature;
BLP, for example, report a range of elasticities between 3 and 6. It is not surprising, however, that our
elasticity estimates are higher than some observed elsewhere because previous research estimated own-
price elasticities among models–that is, at a level of aggregation higher than that of our data. Indeed, when
we re-estimate the parameters from data aggregated to the model level, the implied own-price elasticities
fall within the range of those reported in BLP.
    Given that automakers sell two vintages of the same model simultaneously for almost half of the model
year, the cross-price elasticity between vintages of the same model is of particular interest to the firm. We



                                                       24
            Vintage         Market Segment         1st Quarter       2nd Quarter     3rd Quarter        4th Quarter
           New to Old          Compact                 0.02             0.01            0.01                0.04
                                 Full                  0.02             0.00            0.00                0.03
                                Luxury                 0.02             0.01            0.00                0.01
                               Midsize                 0.02             0.01            0.00                0.01
                                Pickup                 0.10             0.02            0.03                0.12
                                 SUV                   0.04             0.01            0.02                0.04
                                Sporty                 0.02             0.01            0.01                0.01
                                 Van                   0.02             0.01            0.00                0.00

           Old to New           Compact                0.01             0.03             0.03               0.01
                                  Full                 0.01             0.02             0.00               0.02
                                 Luxury                0.01             0.03             0.01               0.00
                                Midsize                0.01             0.03             0.01               0.00
                                 Pickup                0.06             0.18             0.02               0.05
                                  SUV                  0.02             0.05             0.02               0.05
                                 Sporty                0.01             0.03             0.03               0.00
                                  Van                  0.01             0.04             0.05               0.01
           Notes: “New to Old” indicates the percentage change in the market share of the newer vintage of a model given
           a percentage change in the price of the older vintage. “Old to New” indicates the opposite relationship.

 Table 8: Cross-Price Elasticities Between Vintages of the Same Model by Market Segment and Quarter



report our estimates of the cross-price elasticities between two vintages of the same model, averaged over
quarters and across market segments (table 8).
    For most of the vehicles in our sample, the old and new vintages of the same model are sold simulta-
neously during the first and second quarters (August through January). However, a fair number of vehicles
are introduced at other times in the year, and so we can compute cross-price elasticities throughout the
year. The upper portion of table 8 displays the percentage change in the market share of the newer vin-
tage of a model given a percentage change in the price of the older vintage. The bottom portion of the
table shows the opposite relationship–the percentage change in market share for the old vintage given a
percentage change in the price of the newer vintage. Generally, the estimated cross-price elasticities are
quite small relative to the own-price elasticities. This implies that various vintages of the same model are
typically quite imperfect substitutes.10
    To check the robustness of these results, we estimated several different specifications of the consumer’s
  10 Ana Aizcorbe suggested that geographical factors may explain our low cross-price elasticity estimates. If different vintages
of the same model are rarely offered for sale at the same location, then the degree to which consumers can substitute between
vintages may be limited.




                                                                25
utility function. We rejected a specification of utility for which groups are defined at the model level (that
is, the correlation in consumer tastes is across all available vintages of a particular model) because ρ was
estimated to be greater than 1.11 In addition, both the high own-price and the small cross-price estimated
elasticities are consistent across several different utility specifications.12

2.2.2 Supply-side parameters

For the parameters in the firm’s problem, we set T , the number of weeks in a model year, to 52 and
the time-invariant interest rate such that (1 + r)−52 = 0.95. The interest rate is the only cost of holding
inventories in the model. To parameterize the cost function, we set the line speed, workers per shift, and
wage rates to values typically observed at assembly plants. We set the remaining three parameters, γ, τ
and ψ to match the average retail price, average rate of production, and average days-supply of inventories
observed in the data. Although we would have preferred to estimate these parameters econometrically,
computational issues made such estimation infeasible. The line speed at most North American assembly
plants is set between 40 and 60 cars per hour; thus, we fix the line speed to 50 cars per hour. Using the
employment data from Hall (2000), we set n to 1300 workers per shift, so the firm employs 2600 workers.
We read the wages off the union contract: w1 = $27.00 per hour, and w2 = $28.35 per hour. We set γ, the
per vehicle cost, to the average retail price observed minus $1500; γ effectively scales the cost function
linearly, and thus we allow γ to differ across market segments. We set the revenue tax parameters τ to 1
and ψ to 1.75 such that we match the average days-supply of inventories observed in the data.

2.3 Model Results

Using these parameter values, we solve the dynamic program given by (9) and (10) via an algorithm
suggested by John Rust. Specifically, we merge the T value functions into a single time-invariant Bellman
equation:
                                                          (       µ    ¶t−1 ³
                                                              T
                                                                     1
                       last
                  V (I , 0, 1) =
                                  {pthis ,p
                                             max
                                            last ,q ,D ,S ,h }
                                                               ∑ 1+r          ptlast stlast (1 − τ(slast /ilast )ψ )
                                    t      t       t  t  t  t  t=1
                                                                                                                 )
                                                                   ´ µ 1 ¶T
                            this this ψ
            t st (1 − τ(s
          +pthis this
                                /i ) ) − c(Dt , St , ht |qt ) +                V (ITthis + qT − sthisT , 0, 1) .
                                                                       1+r
  11 Tobe consistent with the hypothesis of random utility maximization, it must be that ρ ∈ [0, 1].
  12 Ingeneral, we were unable to estimate alternate utility specifications that had more parameters than did the specification
described in the paper (such as random coefficients on a set of model dummies). These alternative specifications demanded too
much of the data.



                                                                  26
      Market                  Data                           τ=1                            τ=0
      Segment      Product      Price      D-S    Product      Price      D-S    Product      Price      D-S
      Compact       14,524    $13,622       73     16,208    $13,594       70     16,000    $13,642       12
      Midsize       10,886     19,193       60     12,000     19,273       75     16,333     19,075       11
      Fullsize       7,184     23,772       75      6,167     24,107       77      9,833     23,708       13
      Luxury         3,106     36,032       80      2,167     36,430       80      2,479     36,765        9
      Pickup        35,114     23,662       84     17,812     24,121       67     22,900     24,224        9
      SUV           11,532     28,660       75      9,117     29,140       74     14,500     28,741       11
      Sporty         5,721     27,227       83      3,167     27,331       82      6,500     27,081       21
      Van            8,396     22,716       85      9,667     22,868       80     13,667     22,581       10
      Average                               76                             76                             12

        Table 9: Average Monthly Production, Retail Prices, and Days-Supply by Market Segment



To solve for the fixed point, we carried out the following steps: (1) Guess an initial value for V (I last , 0, 1);
(2) solve the T Bellman equations in (9) and (10) through backward recursions; (3) compute a new value
for V (I last , 0, 1) through policy iteration; and (4) repeat steps 2 and 3 until a fixed point is reached.
    Because of the non-convexities in the cost function, we solve for both the optimal level of output and
the cost minimizing production schedule through grid search. We allow weekly production, q, to take on
values between 0 and 6000 in increments of 50. The grids for Dt and St are set from 1 to 6 and from 0 to
2, respectively, in increments of 1. The plant is closed for the week whenever St = 0. The shift length, ht ,
can take on values of 7, 8, 9 or 10. So there are up to 72 feasible production schedules to evaluate for each
121 possible levels of production.
    We discretize each inventory grid into 26 points from 0 to 60,000. The distance between grid points
increases with the level of inventories. Thus, the grid points are more densely spaced in the region where
the value function has more curvature. For each of the 676 inventory pairs, we maximize the right hand
side of equations (9) and (10) over each sales price and level of output. Points off the two inventory
grids are approximated using bi-linear interpolation. The two sales prices, plast and pthis , may take on any
positive value such that quantity demanded remains positive. Finally, we impose only mild seasonality on
production, assuming that the plant closes for two weeks in July (weeks 51 and 52) for a model changeover.
    In table 9 we report the average monthly rate of production, retail price, and days-supply of inventories
for a typical vehicle in each market segment. We then report the corresponding averages implied by the
model for the case with the revenue tax (τ = 1) and the case without the revenue tax (τ = 0). In general,
the model replicates the average price and quantities produced for each market segment. This should not



                                                        27
                                         18.7                                                                                                                       20

                                         18.6                                                                                                                      19.9
          Shadow Value in 1000 dollars




                                                                                                                                                                   19.8




                                                                                                                                   Optimal Price in 1000 dollars
                                         18.5
                                                                                                                                                                   19.7
                                         18.4
                                                                                                                                                                   19.6
                                         18.3
                                                                                                                                                                   19.5
                                         18.2
                                                                                                                                                                   19.4
                                         18.1
                                                                                                                                                                   19.3

                                          18                                                                                                                       19.2

                                         17.9                                                                                                                      19.1
                                            0                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                             60                                                                                                                        60
                                                20                                                 50                                                                     20                                                 50
                                                                                          40                                                                                                                        40
                                                     40                          30                                                                                            40                          30
                                                                        20                                                                                                                        20
                                                                   10                                                                                                                        10
                                                          60   0                                                                                                                    60   0
                                                                             This Model Year Inventory (in 1000 vehicles)                                                                              Last Model Year Inventory (in 1000 vehicles)
   Last Model Year Inventory (in 1000 vehicles)                                                                             This Model Year Inventory (in 1000 vehicles)




   Figure 11: Week 27 Shadow Value of Inventories                                                                           Figure 12: Week 26 Optimal Pricing Rule for This
   for This Year’s Vintage.                                                                                                 Year’s Vintage


be terribly surprising because, given the estimated demand curves, the parameter, γ, was set to match
these moments.13 With the revenue tax, the model matches the average observed day-supply. Without
the revenue tax, however, the average level of inventories are 1/6 the level observed in the data. As is
well-understood in the inventory literature, it is difficult to match the high level of inventories observed in
many industries without an ad hoc inventory-to-sales target in the firm’s objective function.
     To illustrate the dynamics of the model, we first consider the firm’s pricing decision for a typical
midsize car setting τ = 1. Later we report results for which we shut down the revenue tax by setting τ = 0.
In figure 11, we plot the partial derivative of the value function for week 27 with respect to inventories of
the current model year (other weeks are qualitatively similar). This figure illustrates the shadow value of
inventories, or marginal increase in the firm’s net worth from an additional unit of inventory, at each point
in the state space for week 27. The shadow value of inventories is a decreasing function of the level of
inventories. When the level of inventory for this year’s model is close to zero, an additional vehicle of this
year’s model is worth $18,600 to the firm; however, at the upper bound of the inventory grid, the shadow
value of an additional vehicle from this model year is worth only about $17,960 to the firm–roughly the
average cost of producing a vehicle when the plant operates two forty-hour shifts per week. Given the
non-convexities in the cost function, computing and reporting the marginal cost of an additional vehicle is
bit more involved, but the value for γ (the material cost per vehicle) of $17,693 ($19,193-$1,500) provides
a lower bound on the marginal cost.
  13 The model has difficulty matching the quantities of pickup trucks. While we assume each vehicle is made at a single plant,

several popular pickup trucks (e.g. Ford F-series, Chevy Silverado, and Dodge Ram) are produced at four or five plants.



                                                                                                                     28
    Because the automaker faces a downward-sloping demand curve, the profit-maximizing price sets
marginal revenue equal to the shadow value of inventories next period. If we set the cross-price semi-
elasticities equal to zero and ignore the revenue tax, the optimal price for this year’s model is

                               −sthis
                                   t (pt )   1
                   pthis =                 +     V2 (Itlast − stlast , Itthis + qthis this
                                                                                 t − st ,t + 1),
                             ∂st (pt )/∂qt 1 + r
                    t          this


where V2 denotes the derivative of the value function with respect to the second argument. This is the
standard condition for monopoly pricing, but in this case marginal cost is the shadow value of an additional
unit of inventory next period.
    We then plot the pricing rule for this year’s vintage for week 26 in figure 12. The pricing rule is almost
the shape of the shadow value of inventories. Holding all other things constant, the optimal price is a
decreasing function of the level of inventory—our fifth fact. In figure 13, we plot slices of the pricing rules
for different weeks in the product cycle, holding the inventory of the competing vintage fixed. Prices are
a decreasing function of the level of inventory and the pricing curve shifts down over time. These price
rules are consistent with the findings of Zettelmeyer, Scott Morton, and Silva-Risso (2003) that the average
retail price at a dealership with ample inventory is about $230 per car less than that at a dealership with low
inventory. These pricing rules do not guarantee that prices fall over the product cycle; after week 52, for
example, inventories are monotonically decreasing over time (since there is no replenishment), therefore
prices may go up or down depending on the evolution of inventories.
    In figures 14-17, we plot a simulation from the model for five 52-week model years, time-aggregated
to a monthly frequency. Because the model is deterministic, each of these simulations is identical. These
graphs are designed to be analogous to figures presented in section 1; however note that figures 1-4 are for
a particular midsize car while we parameterize the model for an average midsize car.
    The implied time series from the model are consistent with the five facts put forth in the introduction.
As these figures illustrate, the model generates both downward sloping price paths and hump-shaped in-
ventory and sales. The revenue tax term plays a key role in this. Early on in the model year, inventories
are naturally low, so it is expensive to sell a lot of vehicles. In order to reduce this tax in the future, the
automaker needs to build up inventories. Hence the automaker sets prices high early on in the year to
dampen down sales and allow inventories to accumulate. Once inventories are high (inventories peak in
the seven month of the model year), the tax effectively disappears and the firm lowers prices in order to
stimulate sales. Further exacerbating the fall in prices, demand for the vehicle starts to decrease as the
model year progresses. For forty-one weeks (about three-quarters of the year) the automaker sell both

                                                        29
                                                   21


                                                  20.5

                                                                                  2
                                                                             ek
                                                                           We
                                                   20                  ←
                 Retail Price (in 1000 dollars)



                                                  19.5


                                                                                                       →
                                                   19                                             35
                                                                                             ek
                                                                                           We

                                                  18.5
                                                                                                      5    0→
                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                We
                                                   18

                                                                                                              6 0→
                                                                              →                            ek
                                                  17.5                     70                          We
                                                                    ek
                                                                  We

                                                   17


                                                  16.5
                                                         0   10    20                    30              40          50   60
                                                                            Inventory (in 1000 vehicles)



Figure 13: Optimal Price Rule Over the Product Cycle, Holding the Inventory Level of the Competing
Vintage Fixed.


vintages simultaneously and prices fall from $20,061 to $17,470: a drop of 12.9 percent over the product
cycle or an average monthly price decline of 8.4 percent at an annual rate. This results in a new vintage
premium of 8.1 percent, which is within a single standard error of the 8.5 percent new vintage premium
for a typical midsize car, as reported in tables 2 and 10.
    More generally, as reported in table 10, the model with τ set to 1 is able to match the observed price
declines and vintage premia for all market segments. For seven of the eight market segments, the implied
price declines are within a single standard error of the average declines seen in the data; and the remaining
market segment (luxury cars) is well within the two-standard error band. The model underestimates the
average vintage premia by nine-tenths of a percent (8.8 versus 7.9). While this is outside the two-standard
error band, the model gets the magnitude right. We believe that relaxing our assumption that new vintages
arrive strictly every 52 weeks would enable the model to better match this moment.
    For most of the year in the midsize car case, the automaker produces 4000 vehicles per week running
two eight-hour shifts for five days per week. For the last two months of the model year, the plant runs just
a single shift before shutting down and changing vintages. Comparing figures 3 and 7 to figure 16, it is
clear the model predicts production to be quite smooth relative to what is observed in the data. At most


                                                                                      30
                                                                  20.5                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                        16


                                                                  19.5                                                                                                                                  14




                                                                                                                                                                     sales of vehicles (in thousands)
                                retail price (in 1,000 dollars)




                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                                                                                        10

                                                                  18.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                         8


                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                      18

                                                                                                                                                                                                         4

                                                                  17.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2


                                                                      17                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                        10      15     20    25        30       35          40        45        50        55    60                                        10                                               15    20      25    30    35        40    45    50    55    60
                                                                                                               month                                                                                                                                                                month



                                                                                      Figure 14: Monthly Prices.                                                                                                                                                 Figure 15: Monthly Sales.



                                                   20                                                                                                                                                                                                 50


                                                   18                                                                                                                                                                                                 45


                                                   16                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
production of vehicles (in thousands)




                                                                                                                                                                                                               inventory of vehicles (in thousands)




                                                   14                                                                                                                                                                                                 35


                                                   12                                                                                                                                                                                                 30


                                                   10                                                                                                                                                                                                 25


                                                                  8                                                                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                  6                                                                                                                                                                                   15


                                                                  4                                                                                                                                                                                   10


                                                                  2                                                                                                                                                                                    5


                                                                  0                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                           15    20     25        30        35         40        45        50        55        60                                                                                       10      15      20    25    30       35     40    45    50    55    60
                                                                                                             month                                                                                                                                                                          month



                                                                                Figure 16: Monthly Production.                                                                                                                                                       Figure 17: Monthly Inventories.



                                                                  Simulated Prices, Sales, Production, and Inventories for a Typical Midsize Car By Model Year: τ=1.




                                                                                                                                                                     31
                                  Data                     τ=1                    τ=0
           Market          Price       Vintage         Price    Vintage      Price      Vintage
           Segment       Decline      Premium       Decline Premium Decline Premium
           Compact      9.5 (2.4)     7.1 (0.5)         10.0         9.3       4.6          5.0
           Midsize      9.2 (1.5)     8.5 (0.4)          8.4         8.1       3.1          4.3
           Fullsize     8.9 (2.1)     8.3 (0.6)          7.1         6.4       2.2          4.1
           Luxury      11.6 (1.2) 11.6 (0.4)            10.1        10.7       5.1          5.7
           Pickup       9.9 (2.2) 10.6 (0.7)             9.5         9.1       5.3          6.1
           SUV          8.2 (0.9)     7.2 (0.4)          7.4         6.9       3.4          4.3
           Sporty       5.1 (2.4)     7.2 (0.8)          4.3         4.1       1.7          2.8
           Van          9.6 (1.4)     8.6 (0.4)          8.3         8.7       4.3          5.2
           Average      9.2 (0.6)     8.8 (0.2)          8.1         7.9       3.7          4.7
           Note: The percentage price declines are at annual rates. Standard errors are
           in parentheses.

                    Table 10: Average Price Declines and Vintage Premia (in percent)



assembly plants, production during the first several weeks of the model year is typically below average as
the plant “ramps up” output; further throughout the year, plants regularly close for holidays and in response
to both supply and demand shocks. While these features can be easily incorporated into the model and
would increase the volatility of production, they obscure the intuition of the model.
    The model simulation can also be viewed in price-quantity space. In figure 18 we plot the time path
of the quantity-price pairs over a single model year for a typical midsize car. The stars denote the weekly
realizations from a single simulation from the model. The crosses denote the average observations from
the data for the midsize sector. These quantity-price pairs are interpolated from monthly observations
to obtain weekly points. As the figure illustrates, prices fall over the model year while sales initially
start small, grow, and then decrease. Any model with a stable supply or demand curve will be unable
to match the price and sales patterns in the data; however, the current model successfully replicates the
basic horseshoe pattern. For the first half of the model year, demand is relatively stable while the marginal
revenue curve rotates counter-clockwise toward the demand curve as the firm accumulates inventories and
reduces the revenue tax. The shadow value of inventories (i.e. the supply curve) also shifts right. This
generates decreasing prices and increasing sales. After about 30 weeks, the demand curve starts to shift to
the left and continues falling for the remainder of the model year. This causes both prices and sales to fall
during the second half of the product cycle.
    To isolate the role inventory policy has on the optimal price paths, we resolve the model removing



                                                     32
                                                  20.5




                                                   20
                price (in thousands of dollars)



                                                  19.5




                                                   19




                                                  18.5




                                                   18




                                                  17.5
                                                         0   500   1000   1500      2000         2500   3000   3500   4000
                                                                                 quantity sold



Figure 18: Weekly (quantity,price) pairs over the model year. The stars are realization from one simulation
from the model. The blue stars denote this year’s model. The green stars denote last year’s model. The
red crosses (this year’s model) and purple crosses (last year’s model) are the observations in the data.


the revenue tax (i.e. setting τ = 0). This simulation can be interpreted as allowing the firm to engage in
a build-to-order rather than a build-to-stock inventory policy. In figures 19-22 we plot the price, sales,
production, and inventory pathes under a build-to-order policy while still allowing for multiple vintages.
To ease comparison, we set the scales of the figures consistent with those in figures 14-17. Under a build-
to-order policy, the firm sets a downward sloping price path that is far less dramatic than the price path
with the revenue tax. Prices fall only $838 (from $19,369 to $18,531) or 4.3 percent (3.1 percent at an
annual rate) over the product cycle. For the first 40 weeks the firm essentially builds to order, producing
and selling roughly 4000 cars per week (corresponding to operating two 40 hours shifts). As the firm nears
the 52nd week, the firm moderates the price declines to dampen sales and accumulates modest inventories
to carry over into the next model year. The firm then sells last year’s vintage for only fourteen weeks
into the following model year with an average vintage premium of 4.3 percent. Hence a model with
just declining demand yields within-product-cycle price declines and vintage premia that are half of the
declines generated by a model with a build-to-stock inventory motive. Furthermore, under the build-to-
order policy neither sales nor inventories have the pronounced hump-shaped pattern seen in the data.



                                                                                  33
                                                                               20.5                                                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16


                                                                               19.5                                                                                                                                      14




                                                                                                                                                                                      sales of vehicles (in thousands)
                                             retail price (in 1,000 dollars)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10

                                                                               18.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                18

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4

                                                                               17.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2


                                                                                17                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                  10        15    20    25   30        35     40   45    50    55        60                                                                   10    15      20    25    30     35      40    45    50    55    60
                                                                                                                      month                                                                                                                                   month



                                                                                                 Figure 19: Monthly Prices.                                                                                                                Figure 20: Monthly Sales.



                                        20                                                                                                                                                                       50


                                        18                                                                                                                                                                       45


                                        16                                                                                                                                                                       40
production of vehicles (in thousands)




                                                                                                                                                              inventory of vehicles (in thousands)




                                        14                                                                                                                                                                       35


                                        12                                                                                                                                                                       30


                                        10                                                                                                                                                                       25


                                         8                                                                                                                                                                       20


                                         6                                                                                                                                                                       15


                                         4                                                                                                                                                                       10


                                         2                                                                                                                                                                               5


                                         0                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                               15      20        25    30    35        40     45    50    55        60                                                                    10       15      20    25    30     35      40    45    50    55    60
                                                                                                              month                                                                                                                                          month



                                                                                       Figure 21: Monthly Production.                                                                                                                   Figure 22: Monthly Inventories.



                                         Simulated Prices, Sales, Production, and Inventories for a Typical Midsize Car By Model Year: τ=0.




                                                                                                                                                         34
    These patterns hold across the other market segments as well. As can be seen in table 10, under the
build-to-order policy the average price decline is only 3.7. This is less than half of the average price
decline implied by the build-to-stock models (8.1) or seen in the data (9.2). Furthermore the implied
vintage premia with τ = 0 is only 60 percent on average of the vintage premia with τ = 1 (4.7 versus 7.9).
While it is certainly the case that the demand for a particular vintage of new vehicle falls over the model
year, this alone explains about half of the price decline in automobiles and misses salient comovements
among prices, sales and inventories.


3 Conclusion

We have documented a set of stylized facts for the within-model-year pricing and sales of new automobiles.
Prices decline steadily over the model year while sales and inventories are hump-shaped. It is not the case
that prices only fall during the overlap period between vintages when dealers shout over the radio “We are
slashing prices to make room for the new model year!” To understand these facts we formulate and solve a
market equilibrium model for a single vehicle line. While falling demand over the product cycle explains
about one half these price declines, our model suggests that the other half of these declines is driven by
build-to-stock inventory management.
    Advances in production and information technology have made it easier to implement build-to-order
policies. For example, the computer maker Dell, has been successful in selling built-to-order computers.
It is our understanding from discussions with industry executives that the automakers would like to move
toward an inventory policy in which a larger fraction of consumers order their new vehicles rather than
buy whatever is on the dealer’s lot. Our analysis suggests that enacting such a policy will dampen within-
model-year price declines and reduce the period in which consecutive vintages compete with each other.
    Finally we view this paper as part of a larger research agenda to understand how firms adjust prices and
production when faced with demand shocks. While the analysis presented above is entirely deterministic,
in future work we plan to add persistent demand shocks and a richer cost structure to the model. We
can then ask whether a negative demand shock will result in lower prices (e.g. rebates or other financial
incentives) or in shutting down the plant. Given the important non-convexities in production scheduling at
automobile assembly, it may be optimal at times to cut prices to keep the plants running while at other times
it may be optimal to shut plants down for an “inventory adjustment”. Ultimately, we want to understand
the shape of the supply curve for new vehicles and how it varies over the model year.



                                                     35
References

 [1] Ayres, I., Siegelman P., 1995. Race and gender discrimination in bargaining for a new car. American
     Economic Review 85, 304-321.

 [2] Berry, S., 1994. Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. Rand Journal of Eco-
     nomics 25, 242-261.

 [3] Berry, S., Levinsohn J., Pakes A., 1995. Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Econometrica 63,
     841-890.

 [4] Berry, S., Levinsohn J., Pakes A., 1999. Voluntary export restraints on automobiles: Evaluating a
     trade policy. American Economic Review 89, 400-430.

 [5] Bresnahan, T., Reiss, P., 1985. Dealer and manufacter margins. Rand Journal of Economics 16, 253-
     268.

 [6] Bresnahan, T., Ramey, V., 1994. Output fluctuations at the plant level. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 109, 593-624.

 [7] Chan, H., Hall, G., Rust, J., 2005. Price discrimination in the steel market. manuscript, University of
     Maryland.

 [8] Corrado, C., Dunn W., Otoo M., 2004. An initial look at incentives and prices for motor vehicles:
     What has been happening in recent years? manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.

 [9] Federgruen, A., Heching A.,1999. Combined pricing and inventory control under uncertainty. Oper-
     ations Research 47, 454-475.

[10] Elmaghraby W., Keskinocak P. 2003. Dynamic pricing in the presence of inventory considerations:
     Research overview, current practices, and future directions. Managment Science 49, 1287-1309.

[11] Goldberg, P., 1995. Product differentiation and oliogopoly in international markets: The case of the
     U.S. automobile industry. Econometrica 63, 891-951.

[12] Goldberg, P., 1996. Dealer price discrimination in new car purchases: Evidence from the consumer
     expenditure survey. Journal of Political Economy 104, 622-654.


                                                    36
[13] Hall G., 2000. Non-convex costs and capital utilization: A study of production scheduling at auto-
     mobile assembly plants. Journal of Monetary Economics 45, 681-716.

[14] Karlin, S., Carr R., 1962. Prices and optimal inventory policy. in Studies in Applied Probability and
     Management Science, K. Arrow, S. Karlin, H. Scarf (ed.), Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

[15] Lazear, E., 1986. Retail pricing and clearence sales. American Economic Review 76, 14-31.

[16] Nevo, A., 2000. A practitioner’s guide to estimation of random coefficients logit models of demand.
     Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 9, 513-548.

[17] Pashigian, P., 1988. Demand uncertainty and sales: A study of fashion and markdown pricing. Amer-
     ican Economic Review 78, 936-953.

[18] Pashigian, P., Bowen B., Gould E., 1995. Fashion, styling, and the within season decline in automo-
     bile prices. Journal of Law and Economics 38, 281-310.

[19] Pesendorfer, W., 1995. Design innovation and fashion cycles. American Economic Review 85, 771-
     792.

[20] Petrin, A., 2002. Quantifying the benefits of new products: The case of the minivan. Journal of
     Political Economy 110, 705-729.

[21] Ramey, V., Vine D., 2004. Tracking the source of the decline in GDP volatility: An analysis of the
     automobile industry. NBER working paper 10384.

[22] Stokey, N., 1979. Intertemporal price discrimination. Quarterly Journal of Economics 93, 355-371.

[23] Whiten, T., 1955. Inventory control and price theory. Managment Science 2, 61-80.

[24] Zettelmeyer, F., Scott Morton F., Silva-Risso J., 2001. Cowboys or cowards: Why are internet car
     prices lower? manuscript, Yale School of Management.

[25] Zettelmeyer, F., Scott Morton F., Silva-Risso J., 2003. Inventory fluctuations and price discrimina-
     tion: The determinants of price variation in car retailing. manuscript, Yale School of Management.




                                                   37
