NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEFINING A UNITARY BUSINESS: AN ECONOMIST'S VIEW

Charles E. McLure, Jr.

Working Paper No. 1125

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

May 1983

This paper is forthcoming in Charles B. McLure, Jr., editor, State
Corporation Income Taxes: Issues in Worldwide Unitary Combination
(tentative title), (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press). The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1125
May 1983

DEFINING A UNITARY BUSINESS: AN ECONOMISTS VIEW

Abstract

The definition of a unitary business has figured prominently
in several recent decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court on the
constitutionality of state corporate income taxes. This paper
employs economic analysis to frame a three part test of whether a

unitary business exists. Underlying the tests is the notion that

a

unitary business exists when separate accounting cannot
satisfactorily isolate the profits of individual firms. The first
test is common control. The' second is whether transfer
priees on
transactions within the group could be manipulated or are diifjou1t
to verify or substantial vertical integration, shared costs,
economies of scale or scope, or other forms of economic

make isolation of profits of affiliated
The thIrd test i.s one of substantiality.

interdependence
impossible.

Charles

firms

E. McLure, Jr.

Hoover Institution
Stanford, CA 914305
(1415) 1497 —

0713

March 11, 1983
DEFINING A UNITARY BUSINESS:
AN ECONOMIST'S VIEW
Charles E.. McLure, Jr.*
Hoover Institution, Stanford University

I.

Introduction
There is no longer significant disagreement that formula apportionment

is required to divide the domestic income of a multistate firm engaged in a
single unitary business among the states in which it has taxable nexus.1
Separate accounting, whether applied on a geographic or functional basis,
simply does not generally provide a satisfactory division of the income of

a unitary business among the various states.2 The reason for the made—
quacy of separate accounting under these conditions, as stated in words
that have become part of the conventional wisdom in this area, is its fail—

ure to recognize that the various parts of the unitary business (split
along functional or geographic lines) are "dependent upon or contributory
to each other. 3
Some states respect the legal distinction between separately incorporated firms, no matter how closely the various members of groups of firms

may be affiliated. These states employ separate accounting for each firm
and, at most, ask whether a given firm is engaged in more than one unitary

business. Other states look beyond the legal fiction of separate incorpor—
ation to ask whether two or more members of a group of affiliated firms are

jointly engaged in a unitary business. If they are, they are required (or
allowed) to file a combined rport in order to determine the income that is
to be taxed by the state in question.4 Unitary combination is

practiced

most notably by California, but increasingly other states are applying this

2.
-

approach, especially in taxing oil companies.5

Taxpayers generally argue that combination can result in taxation of
extraterritorial values (prohibited by the due process clause of the U.S.
Constitution), discrimination against interstate commerce (a violation of
the commerce clause), and, when applied on a worldwide basis, violation of

U.S. treaty obligations.6 States, for their part, typically argue that
separate accounting cannot adequately isolate the income of firms engaged
in a unitary business and that combination is required if firms are not to
be allowed to use legal form to reduce taxes artificially, especially
through manipulation of the internal transfer prices required for separate

accounting predicated on legally distinct incorporation. The treatment of
arguably foreign source income and of intercorporate dividends, as well as
the definition of a unitary business, have figured especia.lly prominently

in cases recently decided by the U.S. Supreme Court or before it as'this is
written .

The need to define a unitary business with clarity and certainty is
readily apparent from even this brief description.8 Indeed, in Mobil the
U.S. Supreme Court stated clearly and unequivocally that "the linchpin of
apportionability . .

. is

the unitary—business principle,"9 and in Exxon,

ASARCO, and Woolworth, as well as in Mobil, the Court considered explicitly
-

whether unitary businesses existed)0

Whether a unitary business exists in a given instance depends on the
economic realities ——

the

presence and strength of the contribution and de-

pendency between the activities of various affiliated firms or parts of

firms. Yet little has been written by economists about the proper test for
a unitary business, at least outside the context of litigation. The pre—
sent paper is an attempt to provide an ob5ective and nontechnical —— and in

3.

some respects still preliminary ——

discussion

of what an economist would

reasonably consider a unitary business to be.
In

focusing on

the definition of a

unitary business, I deliberately
set aside important related issues, including the general need for interstate uniformity in taxing corporate income and the particular need for
uniformity in determining taxing nexus and in choosing the apportionment

formula to be applied.1- Moreover, I avoid the highly controversial —— and
partly noneconomic ——

issue

of whether unitary combination should be ap-

plied on a worldwide basis.12

Suppose that the ProMax group consists of

two commonly owned and con-

trolled firms, A and B. Our conceptual problem is to determine whether (1)
ProMax consists of one unitary business

or (2) firms A and B are ech en-

gaged in separate businesses. The basic test to be applied is whether,
within a reasonable degree of accuracy,

separate accounting can be used to

isolate the individual profits of the two affiliated firms. If not, the
two firms should be deemed to be engaged in a unitary business. To answer
the question we examine various

reasons separate accounting might not

measure profits adequately. Not surprisingly, vertical transactions and
various forms of interdependence will be found to lie at the heart of

economic unity. I do not initially discuss

the role played by common

ownership and control, which is the subject of the fourth section. For the
purpose of the second and third sections it will be convenient

to assume

that common ownership of firms A and B is complete and that there is no
issue of common control.

The definition of a unitary business

adopted here is, to a large

degree, tautological. That is, formula apportionment —— and

combination,

4.

in the case of mu)tiple firms ——

is

needed because, in general, separate

accounting cannot satisfactorily divide income among affiliated firms or
parts of one or more firms engaged in a unitary business.'3 By implication, then, a unitary business is the smallest division of a firm or group
of firms, the income of which can generally be accurately indicated by

separate accounting.14 The remainder of this paper is an elaboration of

this basic tautology. Of course, there may be instances in which separate
accounting cannot, strictly speaki,pg, isolate the income of individual

firms, and yet the potential error in measurement of income would be so

small that it would be unreasonable to require combination. Thus provision
is made (in the fifth section) for a de minimus test of substantiality.

The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section discusses vertical integration and the potential for manipulation, inaécuracy,

or nonexistence of transfer prices. The third section examines vane
other potential types of economic interdependence between firms. TF
fourth section examines the roles of ownership and control and stre

importance of autonomous decision making in the test of unity. The
section discusses the need for a test of substantiality, summarizes

discussion up to that point, and compares my criteria for finding t
unitary business exists with several others, especially that of Jer
Nellerstein, a vocal advocate of a particular, somewhat more restri

but more objective test. The final section briefly compares the tc
unity employed by the Supreme Court in Mobil, ASARCO, and Woolwortl
the criteria I propose.

5.

II. Vertical Integration and Transfer Pricing
In the next section we examine a variety of
that might link two affiliated firms

economic interrelations

together so closely that it would be

conceptually impossible to use separate accounting to divide their joint
income between them satisfactorily, if the interrelations are substantial.
In such cases the firms should be treated

as unitary for state tax pur-

poses. In the first part of this section we examine a much simpler case ——

one in which, by assumption, there
are no such interrelations.15 In such
cases the firms involved are not inherently unitary,

since, in principle,

separate accounting could, by assumption, isolate the income of the various

firms. Nonetheless, if there is a substantial volume of transactions
among
the firms, it may be possible, in the absence of concerted administrative
action, for affiliated firms to manipulate the

prices, fees, or other

charges made for the transfer of goods and services between them and therefore to attribute too much income to low—tax (or no tax) states and too

little to high—tax states.16 Moreover, even under these very restrictive
assumptions of independence of operations there may he cases where it is
conceptually impossible to isolate the income of the various affiliated

firms. Unitary combination is generally appropriate if the volume of
interaffiliate transactions in goods and services with no readily deter-

mined value is substantial. Finally,

more far—reaching vertical intégra—

tion may be based on economic interdependence that renders accurate
separate accounting impossible and leads to a finding of unity,

A. Simple Inaccuracy of Transfer Pricing
Suppose that affiliated firms A and B each operate in one state (A and

B, respectively) and nowhere else. State A has an income tax and state B

does not. Firm A operates a large couercia1 farm on which it raises wheat

6.
and hogs. Firm B buys wheat from firm A, mills it, and sells flour in bulk
to bakeries. It also sells some of the by—products of milling for use as

animal feed; firm A buys some of these by—products to feed its hogs. Except for common ownership and control there is no other interdependence

between the two firms. Assume for argument's sake that the markets for
wheat, flour, the milling by—products used as animal feed, and hogs are
perfectly

for each

competitive, so that there are readily identifiable market values
of the four commodities. Finally, assume that the prices of all

other inputs of both firms are also beyond the control of those firms.
Given these very restrictive assumptions, there is no conceptual dif-

ficulty in isolating the income of the two firms.7 But there is also no
difficulty in seeing how transfer prices could be manipulated to shift income from firm A and state A, where it would be taxed, to firm B aiid state

B, where it would not be taxed. Wheat could simply be sold by firm A to
firm B at below the market price, or milling by—products could be sold by

firm B to firm A at inflated prices. A slightly more sophisticated approach would be for firm A to sell wheat on credit to firm B, charging
interest rates below market rates, or for firm B to sell to firm A on
credit

at above market rates)8

There are basically two ways to deal
employ

with this problem. One is to

separate accounting, supplemented by a standard of arm's—length

pricing. This is the way international transactions between affiliated
firms are treated under section 482
other

of

the U.S. Internal

Revenue

Code. The

is to avoid the administrative burden of such an approach by ruling

that substantial intercorporate transactions between affiliates constitute

prima facie evidence that a unitary business exists and that combination ——

and with it formula apportionment of the income of the two firms ——

is

ap—

7.

propriate in such cases.

There can be little doubt that under the highly restrictive assurnp—
tions of the example just presented separate accounting is the conceptually

preferred approach. But once costs of administration and compliance are
considered, the proper choice becomes less obvious.'9 The precision made
possible by separate accounting may simply not be worth the cost of verify—
ing the transfer prices employed in thousands of transactions between af-

filiates. This conclusion is strengthened once one adds more realism to
the example.

B. Absence of Arm's—Length Prices
Suppose, for example, that we are dealing with components of automobiles manufactured by firm A expressly for firm B and sold to no one else,
rather than with the relatively simple set of transactions outlined above.
(At this point we do not relax the assumption that there is no other inter-

dependence between the firms.) In
verifiable

to
to

this

case there is no

independently

arm's—length price to use in auditing transfer prices assigned

the components, and

surrogates

must

he

found,

if

separate

accounting. is

be employed. Troublesome problems also arise in valuing patents that are

not generally licensed, specialized services provided only to affiliates,
and loan guarantees.
The U.S. Internal Revenue Code provides three methods of determining
transfer prices for tangible property when, as in this example, there is no

comparable uncontrolled price.20 These are (1) resale price, (2) cost
plus, and (3) other methods. The resale price method

attempts to compute a

transfer price by deducting the customer's gross markup (value added plus

profit margin) from the amount realized on resale after further processing.
By comparison, the cost plus method bases the allowable transfer price on

8.

the supplier's cost plus a profit margin. In both cases the problem is to
determine the appropriate markup, something that is generally inherently

impossible to do with precision.2' The regulations provide no guidance in
applying the third (other) method that can he used if neither of these
surrogates for an uncontrolled price provides a satisfactory estimate of
transfer prices.

Implementation of section 482 is notorious for its many difficul-

ties.22 It is hardly surprising that many states have not wanted to follow
the federal government down the road to separat.e accounting and have opted

instead for combination and formula apportionment in instances where a substantial volume of transactions occurs between affiliated firms.

Though one can have considerable sympathy with this state reaction,

another important question arises: in

the

simpler case described in the

first part of this section, should proof of actual manipulation of transfer
prices

be required for a finding of unity, or is the potential for manipu-

lation enough? (Presumably the conceptual impossibility of accurate trans-

fer prices

for a substantial flow of products would ordinarily justify a

finding of unity.) On the one hand, unused potential to manipulate trans
fer prices does not result in actual mismeasurement of income. But basing
the test on actual manipulation would mean

that

states would have to per-

form mini—482 audits to see whether manipulation was occurring and would

allow (indeed, encourage) firms to play an audit lottery. Besides that, it
would contribute greatly to uncertainty. All things considered, it seems
that where transactions between affiliates are virtually all in homogeneous

products and occur on commercial terms, including easily verifiable free—
market prices and interest rates, and there is no other important inter—
dependence, separate accounting is appropriate; otherwise, the potential

9.

for substantial mismeasurement should

generally he enough to justify com-

bination.

C. Reasons for Vertical Integration
If two commonly owned firms (or divisions within a single firm) were
connected by a flow of goods and payments

occurring strictly at market

prices and nothing more, we might wonder why they were commonly owned. In
fact, this state of affairs is probably quite

rare; especially in manufac-

turing, a substantial volume of vertical transactions

probably generally

implies something not captured in market prices.., namely vertical integration.23

Oliver Williamson has emphasized savings in transaction costs as an

important explanation of vertical integration. When vertical activities in
the production—distribution chain are organized within one firm, there is
less need to shop around, less difficulty in appraising products and
services, less expense in contracting, more certainty of supply (and of

markets), and more flexibility in adapting to changing conditions.24
Williamson argues that contracting via markets may be especially difficult when major investments in highly specific fixed assets are required

at various stages in the production—distrjbtj0 process or where there is
substantial possibility that product quality may be debased; under these
circumstances firms may integrate forward or backward. Specificity bf

as-

sets is important because no one wants to be left "holding the bag" —— when
the bag contains an expensive single—use
does

asset ——

if

a

supplier or customer

not perform as expected. Vertical integration can overcome this im-

pediment based on limited knowledge and fear of treachery.25
firms can assure the quality of supplies
the

Similarly,

by integrating backwards or assure

quality of distributors by integrating forward and thereby avoid de—

10.

basement of quality.26 Advantages of vertical integration based on these
types of savings in transaction costs are difficult to quantify and allocate between the various firms in a group (or divisions within a firm).
Certainly they may not be adequately captured and allocated by transfer
prices, and uncontrolled market prices are, in the nature of things, likely
to

be virtually nonexistent. I

return to this point in the surrmary

of

this

section.

Economies of scale (described more fully in the first part of the next
section) can also make vertical integration attractive. In many areas of
American industry there is room for only a few firms that can fully realize

economies of scale. This leads to at least two (potentially related)
reasons for vertical integration. First, industries with only a few firms
often tend to be characterized by noncompetitive pricing. Where this is
true, downstream (upstream) firms may be able to capture some of the profits from noncompetitive pricing by integrating backwards (forwards).27

Where this occurs, it is difficult to know how to allocate the extraordinary profits between affiliates via separate accounting.28
Second, vertical integration may sometimes be a defensIve strategy.

That is, suppose that one firm sees its competitors absorbing some of its
formerly independent upstream suppliers, perhaps for reasons such as those

specified above.29 Rather than being left in the precarious position of
relying on the even smaller number of suppliers left after the mergers,

including those owned by its competitors, the firm may decide to absorb a

supplier (or start its own supplying firm or division). Again, profits of
the affiliates may be hard to isolate under these circumstances.

One alleged result of economies of scale that illustrates several
points

made thus far figured significantly in the finding of economic unity

11.

in the Exxon case. Refining is a highly capital—intensive link between the
production of crude oil and the distribution of refined
of the enormous fixed costs and relatively modest

products. Because

operating costs, it is

crucial to run refineries at near full capacity. Therefore, the state of
Wisconsin argued, it is important to assure both reliable sources of supply
and dependable markets, and profits attributable to the Dductiort, refining, and marketing functions of an integrated oil company cannot be isolated.30

In a fully competitive environment, this argument would have little
weight, since crude oil could simply be obtained on the open market and
refined products could be sold at competitive prices. But in an imperfectly competitive world, avoiding shortages, squeezes, gluts, and so forth

can be vital. ,Even if transfers of crude oil and refined products-commonly
occur at market prices, in such a world, separate

accounting might fail to

recognize the contribution reliable sources of crude oil and outlets for
products would make to the profitability of the refining function.

Similar

situations obviously exist in other industries.

The Supreme Court also

found that other aspects of Exxons operations

suggested a unitary business: centralized purchasing; use of a uniform
credit card system; and uniform packaging, brand names, and promotional
displays all run from the national headquarters.31

Particularly inter—

esting is an exchange agreement, whereby gasoline sold in Wisconsin was

obtained from another company.32 Though one could imagine that these
exchanges were carried Out by Exxon's marketing department, in fact
were arranged by the supply and refining departments,

discrediting any

suggestion that the marketing function was not integrated with
ID. Summary Statement: Manipulation or Synergism?

they

refining.

12.

In this section I have identified three "levels" of vertical interactions that could lead to a finding of unity. Of course, these three are
not

always easily distinguishable. First, there are situations in which

standardized products with readily determinable prices pass vertically

between affiliates. In this case the primary issue is whether transfer
prices are being manipulated or for some other reason fafl to reflect

market prices. If no further interdependence is present, such cases are
not inherently unitary, and separate accounting could satisfactorily
isolate the income of the various affiliated firms, since, by assumption,

uncontrolled prices exist. On the other hand, it is easy to understand the
states' preference for.the administrative convenience of formula apportionment in such cases.
More complicated are situations in which vertical transactionè involve
nonstandardized products for which there are no readily known free-market

prices. In such cases tax administrators auditing returns based on separate accounting must resort to tests such as those provided in section 482

for use when uncontrolled prices do not exist. In this case the argument
LUL UIILLd £ LULIIULLLd L LULL L

strative

____1_
ULULLI

LLU

Ut

___11
1__._i UltLe
—
W J.. L)ULU
dUILIJ[I.L

convenience; in extreme cases accurate separate accounting may

simply not be feasible.

The third level of complication involves such complete vertical integration that it is basically hopeless to employ separate accounting in the

effort to isolate the income of vertically related affiliates. In such
cases economic interdependence is so great that even if uncontrolled prices
exist, their use may not adequately reflect the contributions of the com-

ponent parts to the income of the entire unitary business. In such cases
formula apportionment is appropriate.

13.

This may be a useful point at which to introduce a distinction between
two somewhat different reasons separate accounting may fail to isolate the

income of affiliated firms.33 In the first case the total income of two
firms does not significantly depend on whether or not they are affiliated,

hut the division of income between them for tax purposes may. The simple
vertical transactions described in the first part of this section illus-

trate this case. Sharing the expenses of a constant—cost operation (described in the next section) is another example. In both cases we are
dealing primarily with the division between firms of a total amount of

profits that does not depend on whether the firms are affiliated. In such
cases, the failure of separate accounting —— and the need for unitary com-

bination ——

is

primarily administrative, not conceptually inherent. Sec-

tion 482, at least implicitly, is designed to deal with this situation.

In the second case the joint profits of the two affiliated firms are
substantially greater than the sum of the profits of the two firms would be

if they acted independently.34 Among reasons for this phenomenon that we
have already identified are savings in transaction costs (based on specificity of assets and avoiding debasement of quality) and economies of

scale. Other important sources of economic interdependence that create
this type of synergism are discussed in the next section. In these cases
the firms are conceptually unitary in the sense that it is inherently
impossible to split the joint profits between them with scientific pre-

cision. Separate accounting based on arm's—length pricing rules are bound
to fail under these circumstances.35

The case of automobile components described above could fall in either

of these categories, depending on the facts. Advocates of section 482 procedures implicitly assume that it falls in the first. Advocates of unitary

14.

combination, on the other hand, contend that the prerequisites for applying
a section 482 approach are unlikely to be found in practice.

III. Contribution and Dependence
Thus far we have concentrated on vertical patterns of interdependence.
More controversial is what might he called horizontal interdependence ——

interrelations
the other ——

between affiliated firms in which one is not the customer of

that

call for a finding of unity.

(Of course, in any given

case, horizontal and vertical interdependence may be found together.) All
the important reasons for a finding of unity based on horizontal
interdependence fall iit the second (synergism) category described in the
last part of the previous section.

A. Interdependence in Supply: Economies of Scale and. Scope
Economies of scale constitute one of the most pervasive potential

sources of interdependence in supply. Such economies exist when output can
be increased by some given multiple (2 for example) by increasing all

inputs by a connon, hut smaller multiple (say by 1.8). Common examples
include those based on the technical relationship between diameter and
area; when the diameter ——

and so forth —

is

of

pipelines, cylindrical storage facilities,

doubled, capacity is four times as large. This implies

that two equally large and adjacent markets can be served by a trunk

pipeline only some 40 percent (the square root of two, minus one) larger

than that needed to serve one of them. If affiliated firms A and B served
the two markets but shared the joint trunk pipeline, we could not sci—

entifically determine the profit of either, for there is no way of knowing
what fraction of the total cost of the large pipeline (between 41.4 percent
and 100 percent of the cost of a separate pipeline) to allocate to one of

15.

the markets and the firm serving it, and how much to the other.36
The implications of this example go well beyond those of an attempt to
employ separate geographic accounting for several firms (and jurisdictions)
served by one pipeline or by common

storage facilities. Economies of scale

exist in the maintenance of inventories

that, from an economic and

mathematical point of view, resemble those just discussed. This implies
that two firms acting jointly can maintain an optimal level of inventories
at lower total cost than if each maintained its

own inventories. Again, it

would be impossible to determine the separate profits of two affiliated
firms following such a course.
If two affiliated firms shared

a pipeJine or storage faci]ities or

maintained joint inventories, they might be seen immediately to benefit
from important economies of scale; this would probably lead directly
to a

finding of unity. What may be less obvious is that the same theory applies
to inventories of a very important commodity held

of their line of business: cash balances.

by all firms, regardless

That is, two firms with ready

access to the same pool of financial resources

can economize on the cash

they need to keep in their vaults or in low—interest

liquid deposits.37

Fixed costs resulting from indivisibilitjes are a second important

source of economies of scale. Once the initial

investment has been made in

accounting systems, legal departments, research labs, and so forth, it may
be possible to expand their output without

increasing their inputs (and

their costs) proportionately. Various rules of thumb are used by cost
accountants to allocate fixed costs among firms. For example, if variable
costs can be attributed accurately to the two firms, fixed costs may be
allocated in the same proportion.

Nonetheless, there is no scientific

basis for this or any other allocation of fixed

costs. Thus, profits of

16.

individual

firms sharing the facility characterized by fixed costs cannot

be measured accurately by separate accounting.

It is important to note that many economies of scale of this type may

be

available over only a relatively limited range of output. That is,

there may be economies of scale, for example, in processing credit charges
and patent applications, hut only up to a point; beyond that, these may

essentially be constant—cost activities.38 Where constant costs prevail at
all levels of output, there is no synergistic effect of affiliation; there
is only the need to determine the costs attributable to each of the affil-

iates. Even econondes of scale that are exhausted at a scale far below the
actual scale of operation do, strictly speaking, imply that not all profits

can be split accurately between two firms sharing the fixed facility. But
these unallocable costs may be so small, in relative terms, that they can
safely be ignored without seriously affecting the division of income be-

tween the firms. Where that is true, it would be improper to characterize
otherwise separate activities as part of a unitary business.39 Much the
same thing can he said of economies that may be small in relative terms,
even though they are not fully exhausted at the actual level of operation.
It

makes no sense to predicate a finding of unity on scale economies that

could not possibly significantly distort the

measurement of incotne.4° In

any given situation the relative importance of economies of scale resulting
from fixed costs ——

or

from other sources ——

is

an empirical question.

This point is pursued further in the fifth section.

Top—level management may be one of the inputs to modern corporate activity in

which the range of potential economies of scale based on indivi—

sibilities

is the greatest.41 Economies of scale in rese.arch and develop—

ment (R and D) and the exploitation of knowledge based on R and D may also

17.

lie near this end of the spectrum. The point is not that additional experiments can be conducted with the same set of test tubes and scientists;
indeed, much research may, after a point, be characterized by roughly con-

stant returns to scale. The important thing about research in the present
context, aside from the synergism that sometimes occurs in large industrial
labs, is the fact that once discovered, knowledge can he applied to produce

output ranging from negligible to virtually unlimited. For example, once a
given pain killer has been discovered, one capsule or one billion capsules

can be produced. Similarly, the technology of under water exploration and
development can be used by the petroleum industry to drill one well or one
hundred.

Much of what has been said up to this point in this section can he

reoriented slightly and brought together under the general headingof
economies of scope, a term that has appeared in the economics literature

only within the past decade.42 Such economies exist when the cost of
producing two or more products jointly is less than the sum of the costs of
producing them separately. They arise from the sharing or joint use of. inputs; for example, if a given input is imperfectly divisible or has the
property of a public good, once the input is acquired for one use it is

available for others.43 Economies of scope have been offered as reasons
for

both horizontal diversification and vertical integration.
B. Transaction Costs and Horizontal Diversity

The existence of economies of scope sets the

stage for one explanation

for the existence of multiproduct firms. In some instances economies of
scope can be realized by a sparate firm that sells services subject to
these economies to other entities. (For example, a firm that owns a pipeline might sell transportation services to two separate firms serving

18.

nearby markets.) But in others it will be more economical to save transaction costs by organizing activities internally (for example, by having
expensive, highly specialized assets owned by one member of a multiproduct
group of firms).
One explanation for the benefits of organization of production and
distribution within firms (or groups of firms), rather than between
unaffiliated firms, emphasizes the savings in transaction costs it

a1lows.4 Following Williamson, Teece has emphasized the role of
"transactions difficulties" in explaining the existence of multiproduct

firms where know—how is an important input.45 Because of the peculiar
nature of information ——

"its

value for the purchaser is not known until he

has the information, but then he has in effect acquired it without cost" ——

it

is difficult for markets to effect its transfer between firms effici-

ently;46 buyers have difficulty in determining the value of information,

and sellers are reluctant to disclose it. These problems are compounded by
the fact that know—how often cannot simply be transferred via b!ueprints or
instruction manuals, because it involves an important element of learning—

by—doing. Markets are most likely to handle the transfer of information
between firms satisfactorily where the information to be transmitted is not
proprietary, the application is not specialized, and transfers are infre-

quent.47 But where information is proprietary, it is used in specialized
applications, and transfers of know—how occur frequently, it is more likely
that new applications will he effected within multiproduct firms or groups
of firms, rather than through market transactions.

Teece identifies technological know—how, transfer of managerial and
organizational know—how, and goodwill (including brand loyalty) as types of
assets where market mechanisms may fail and for which intrafirm transfers

19.

are superior to interfirm transfers. The very nature of this argument
suggests that there is no market price for the services being provided, and
that affiliated firms able to benefit from the sharing of such knowledge

will have lower costs than if they were unaffiliated. Therefore the
profits of the individual affiliated firms making joint use of this kind of

information cannot he isolated. If the savings in transaction costs
resulting from internal organization are substantial, unitary combination,
rather than separate accounting, is the proper approach.

It may be worthwhile to emphasize at this point a potentially crucial

difference between this and the previous case of shared costs.48 Some
shared activities may occur at near constant costs or may be ancillary to
the basic operation of a business and sufficiently unimportant in relative
terms that their allocation èould not seriously affect the divisiofl of

income between firms arguably engaged in different businesses; legal or

accounting services may be an example. In such cases, separate accounting
with arbitrary allocation of the shared costs may be appropriate, and com-

bination may produce quite artificial results. y comparison, the important feature of some expenses may be not that they are shared but that they
create such interdependence between activities of various affiliated firms
that separate accounting cannot isolate the income of the firms engaged in
joint activities; where this occurs unitary apportionment is required, even
if the expenses are relatively minor.
C. Externalities
External economies and diseconomies, or externalities, exist when the
activities of one firm create benefits or costs for another firm for which
the first is not compensated.49 Examples of external diseconotnies are

legion; pollution in its many forms is the best example. Important exter—

20.

nal economies are harder to find. Standard examples include general training (that is, training that is not job—specific) and the flower gardener

who cannot collect for the benefits the apiary realizes. In what follows I
concentrate on external costs. External benefits are treated at various
other points in this paper. For example, the benefits of advertising sponsored by one firm that spill over to affect the demand for the product of
an affiliated firm (considered further in the fourth part of this section)

can be treated as a special kind of externality. (See also "Reasons for

Vertical

Integration" in the preceding section •for a consideration of

avoidance of debasement of quality as a

potential

reason for vertical

integration.)
Suppose that for technologic—geographic reasons firm A is in a position to create air or water pollution that adversely affects the ability

(costs) of affiliated firm B to produce or distribute its product.St Under
certain conditions totally unaffiliated firms would reach bargains by which

firm B would compensate firm A to limit its pollution.51 So, by the same
token, might affiliated but autonomous firms reach similar bargains, independently of any direction from above predicated on a desire to maximize

joint profits of the ProMax group. In such a case, separate accounting
might well accurately reflect the distinct income streams of the two affiliated firms, just as it might in the case of totally independent, unaffili—

ated firms. In other words, the economic interdependence assumed to result
from the pollution would not necessarily justify characterizing the firms

as part of one unitary business. But there is no reason to believe that
affiliated firms that are not autonomous would strike exactly the same bar-

gain as unaffiliated firms. Indeed, the interaffiliate "bargain" on pollution might simply he a sophisticated way of transferring taxable income

21.
between

the affiliates.

Alternatively, if no such bargain were reached between the affiliated
firms, it might appear that this is prima facie evidence that separate accounting would be satisfactory, as it is for affiliated firms where there
is uncornpensated pollution. But the ProMax board might decide that the
profit—maximizing approach for the group would be to let firm A pollute and

have firm B live with the pollution. Alternatively, the board of ProMax,
might simply mandate that firm A install pollution abatement equipment or
otherwise avoid pollution in order to protect the position of firm B, if

that were the lowest—cost approach.52 In either case it appears that a
finding of a unitary business would be proper.

It thus appears that in this case objective evidence tells us rela-

tively little about whether or not a unitary business exists. Failure to
prevent pollution could he consistent with either total autonomy of firms A
and B or with a conscious decision that allowing pollution would be the op-

timum policy for the group. Conversely, pollution abatement could occur if
either firms A and B were autonomous but reached an agreement whereby A
would limit pollution in exchange for compensation, or a higher—level decIsion were made that group profits would be higher if firm A would limit
pollution.

The issue is confused even further by the fact that efforts to

avoid pollution may he
than

based

on generally applicable regulations, rather

on the goal of maximizing group profits. It may be that in such cases

the only way to determine whether the firms are truly unitary is to examine
the records of meetings of the boards of directors and executive committees

of ProMax. In the absence of such an extreme move, it may be advisable 'to
take important externalities between affiliates, or efforts to prevent them
that do not have benefits beyond the group, in the case of diseconomies, as

22.
evidence

that firms are engaged in a unitary

business.

Of course, as in

the case of other forms of interdependence, trivial externalities should
not he allowed to generate a finding of unity.
B. Interdependence in Demand

Interdependence can occur on the demand side of firms' transactions,

as well as on the cost side. This can clearly be true when the outputs
produced by two firms are vet; itrorig complements or very strong substi—

tutes. Thus, for example, one might argue that it would be difficult to
separate the profits of affiliated firms operating in the following pairs

of industries producing complements: flashlights and batteries; small

boats and outboard motors; automobiles and gasoline.53 ut there is something wrong with this argument as stated thus far. The problem is that

market structure has not been considered. Suppose that both flashlights
and batteries were manufactured and sold under perfectly competitive con-

ditions. The products of the two industries might, indeed, be complementary; but the products of all firms in one of the industries would he in-

terchangeable. Thus no single firm producing flashlights could substantially alter the demand for the batteries produced by its affiliate, say by

altering the price of its own product. Only if neither of the industries
were perfectly competitive (that is, only if neither faced a perfectly
elastic demand curve) would complementarity between products interfere with

the

adequacy of separate accounting to isolate the profits of the two

firms. Two important empirical and judgmental questions must therefore be
answered: how great is the complementarity between the particular products

of

affiliated firms, and how much complementarity is required for a finding

that a unitary business exists?
This

is

a useful place to consider the role of advertising. One ir—

23.

portant purpose of advertising -—

out

——

is

in addition to moving the demand curve

to differentiate the advertised product from others and thereby

reduce its elasticity of demand. But brand awareness generated by advertising will often carry over to (or span a range of) related products.

(This is, in a sense, a form of jointness or external benefit.) If advertising simultaneously creates the same brand identification for both batteries and flashlights, the two demand curves are not totally elastic or
mutually independent and separate accounting cannot isolate the profits of
two firms producing flashlights and batteries that are linked by advertis-

ing but are otherwise distinct. That is, where brand loyalty based on
advertising is important, interdependence cannot be handled adequately by
simply attributing part (or even all) of the advertising expense to one of
the activities; the activities should be treated as unitary.
-

Of course, the potential for advertising to unite activities does not

stop with products that are complementary in use. For example, General
Electric's brand indentification and product loyalty can be expected to
span an entire range of otherwise quite unrelated household appliances..54

Much the same thing can be said about substitutes as about comple-

ments. Though they are not perfect substitutes, coal, fuel oil, wood, and
sweaters are all means of staying warm. Suppose that one firm owned a

woodlot and its affiliate manufactured woolen sweaters. Since both of
these industries are fairly competitive, it seems unlikely that the demand

curves faced by the two affiliates would be highly interdependent. Thus
there seems to be little reason to combine operations of the two firms in
one state tax report, despite the substitutability between wood and wool at
the industry level.

Consider now the situation of coal and fuel oil. Here it seems much

24.

more likely that there might he enough interdependence at the firm

level

to

warrant a finding that separate accounting could not isolate the profits of
two related firms operating in the t.'o fields. But it remains an empirical
question whether the important interdependence occurs on the demand side.
On balance, it seems far more likely that a finding of unity in this case
should be based on shared technology and the savings of transaction costs
discussed in the second part of this section.55

Market sharing is a final example of interdependence in demand. Suppose that two affiliated firms control a significant fraction of output in

a given industry. Their profits may be greater than if they were unrelated
(or even affiliated, bit autonomous) firms competing with each other.

Moreover, which of the two firms actually supplies various markets, and
therefore the division of taxable income among the states,. may be largely

under the control of the central management of the affiliates. In such a
case it seems only proper to treat the two firms as part of a unitary business 56

Yet another form of interdependence deserves brief mention, though it

..

—..
.4
.
...
4
4
neaciy uner eicner suppiy or ceTnanc Inceroepencence. sin—
noes not nc
-

4

deed, it has one foot in each.) This is reciprocal buying. Suppose that
affiliated firms A and B have no transactions with each other and exhibit

none of the forms of interdependence discussed thus far. But the ProMax
board determines that firm A should buy from a third unaffiliated firm C

only if firm C buys from firm B. (Presumably such an arrangement would
make sense only if none of the three firms operated in a competitive in-

dustry, a point we take as given in what follows.) Clearly such a practice
is likely to prevent the books of account of firms A and .B from accurately

stating their respective incomes; indeed, it may be theoretically

25.

impossible to determine the income of the individual firms under such

circumstances. A conclusion that a unitary business exists is proper if
purchases (sales) resulting from reciprocal buying constitute a large share
of the total purchases (sales) of firm A (firm B).

E. Risk Sharing
Sharing of risks is another form of interdependence that

might warrant

a finding that a unitary business exists. Moreover, it emphasizes that in
some contexts the test for unity must be placed in a particular time frame.
Suppose, for example, that a given oil company that owns well—established

reserves operates in several states. One interpretation of the facts might
be that (leaving aside.home office expenses, other shared costs, problems
of transfer pricing, and various other complications raised elsewhere in
this

tion

paper) separate accounting might he employed to determine the produc—
income realized in each state, since petroleum has a readily discern-

ible market value., But this approach would

generally be appropriate only

if a very short—run view of the question were taken or if the discovery of

petroleum involved no risks.57 Such a "snapshot" view of an uncertain and
knowledge—intensive activity may fail to give adequate weight to the interdependence between present activities in a given state and research and
exploration conducted previously or elsewhere.
To see this, suppose that we were talking about jurisdictions smaller
than states and that nature was such that only one well ——

either

a produc-

ing well or a dry hole —— could be drilled in each jurisdiction, with the
chances of success being totally random and independent of what has occur-

red in neighboring jurisdictions. Would we want to attribute all income of
the producing wells to the jurisdictions where they are located and none to

the "dry—hole" jurisdictions? I think not. If, for some reason, investors

26.

could invest in only one well, on an all—or—nothing basis, there might be

relatively little exploration and, consequently, litt]e production.58 In
reality, however, firms diversify by drilling in a larger number of places,
relying on the "law of averages" to give them a mixture of successes and
failures

that

approaches the global probabilities. Moreover, success is

not totally random: firms learn about geological structure from each well,

regardless of whether it is drilled in the same state. That being the
case, it seems inappropriate not to treat a firm with winners and losers
unevenly scattered across jurisdictions as a unitary business.59
When combined with savings in transaction costs in the transfer of
knowledge (discussed ir the second part of this section) and the potential
for manipulation of transfer prices, the above argument assumes special
significance. Suppose that a given manufacturing firm (A). undertakes

research only in a high—tax state but sells or leases for a nominal amount
all the resulting patents for a nominal amount to an affiliate (B)

producing in a low—tax state. In the absence of combination, firm A would
deduct the cost of both successful and unsuccessful research in reaching

taxable income. But firm B would realize the profits resulting from the
research. This is, essentially, what the states claim happens because of
the federal tax incentives for investment in Puerto Rico.6° They understandably argue that the two firms in this example should be considered
engaged in a single unitary business.

An extreme version of the argument that sharing risks is one attribute
of a unitary business would lead to the conclusion that many conglomerate

corporate groups should be subject to combination. In this view
diversification based on a low covariance of earnings would be enough to

demonstrate unity. I am not comfortable with this view. First, conglomer—

27.

ation may provide no diversification that the individual investor cannot

duplicate in the market. If it does not, it does not reduce the group's
cost of capital and there is no gain from affiliation.6' Second, even if
pooling of risks does reduce the group's cost of capital, I am not sure
that that justifies a conclusion that the income of various otherwise
separable firms cannot be isolated.62

IV.

Centralized

Decision Making and Unitary Business

A. Common Ownershp and Control
Ownership, along with operation and use, is one of the tests of a unitary business known as.the "three unities" enunciated in Butler Brothers v.

McColgan and condoned by the U.S. Supreme Court.63 Majority ownership is

usually thought to be necessary for a finding that a unitary business
exists, and some observers have suggested that it should also be sufficient.64 Although there may he much to be said for such a straightforward
rule from the point of view of simplicity, certainty, and uniformity, from
an economic point of view common (majority) ownership is neither necessary
nor sufficient for the existence of a unitary business.65
If the division of income between two companies is to be manipulated

to produce a misleading picture of the firms' respective incomes for tax
purposes, it is generally necessary that the two firms be under common con-

trol. Where common control is lacking, economic interdependence ordinarily
should not lead to a conclusion that a unitary business exists, since it
can generally be assumed that those responsible for running the various

firms will look to the profits of their respective firms. The important
question is the meaning of "control" in this context.66
The distinction Fama and Jensen make between decision management and

28.

decision control is particularly useful.67 Whereas management involves
initiation of proposals and implementation of those that are ratified, control involves ratification and monitoring of proposals initiated and imple—
inented by management. In this terminology, representatives of owners, as
residual claimants, exercise control but not management in large open

corporations. The crucial question for our purpose, then, is whether
common ownership—control (in the Fama—Jensen sense), when combined with
substantial vertical transactions or other forms of interdependence, is
enough to justify a finding of unity, or whether common (centralized)
management at the operational level is required.68
It appears to me that common control (as Fama and Jensen use the term)
is the relevant concept and that a requirement of common operational management

goes too far. Further light can be shed on this q.uestion by con-

sidering the maxim that "a condition of near—decomposability will carac—

terize strategic and operating decisions in a well—managed firm."69 The

general office is responsible for strategic decisions and operating decisions are lodged in the managers of semiautonomous entities. Williamson
notes

that, "a presumption that the general office favors profits over

functional goals is warranted."7° The implication is that in a unitary
business central (controlling) management makes decisions with an eye to
the profits of the whole, not the parts.71

Actual patterns

not

a

of control should be examined in

assessing hether or

unitary business exists; these patterns may be suggested by patterns

of ownership, but they may not be. The existence of a majority of common
board members or of comrnoii top—level management would be especially in—

structive. Some of the more aggressive states and the Multistate Tax
Commission (MTC)

have even argued that examination of minutes of meetings

29.

of hoards of directors and executive committees is neccessarv if common
control, as manifested in pursuit of common objectives, is to be
discovered. 72

B. Autonomy and Central Control
The autonomy of various affiliated firms or divisions within single
firms has been raised in the Exxon, Woolworth, and ASARCO cases. This is
conceptually quite proper, for the top management of a firm (or group of
firms) interested in maximizing aggregate profits can generally concede
autonomy to its constituent divisions (or firms) only under

very

restrictive conditions.73 These conditions are essentially those under
which we would probably find that the divisions (firms) were not involved

in a unitary business. If the conditions under which

attempts by

divisional managers to maximize the profits of their djvjsons will

maximize the profits of the entire firm

are violated, top—level management

interested in maximizing profits will either abandon decentralized decision
making or adjust the price signals sent to lower—level managers in such a
way as to induce behavior that will maximize profits for the entire firm.
In either event, we would conclude that there is a unitary business. This
is, of course, as it should be, since we would expect decentralized decision making based on unadjusted transfer prices to lead to the

maximization of the profits of the entire firm only if separate accounting

accurately measures the profits of hidividual d1vis1n5. What then are
some of the reasons decentralized decision maldog aimed

at maximizing

divisional profits may fail to maximize aggregate profits?
First, decentralized management cannot be expected to act properly in
the face of declining costs resultiing from economies of scale in the use of

shared facilities.74 Economies of scale would lead to a natural monopoly

30.

internal

to the firm. Pricing of the decreasing cost activity to maximize

profits of the division responsible for it would cause it to be underutil-

ized. Profit maximization for the firm requires that internal decisions be

based on transfer prices set equal to marginal (incremental) cost. But if
this is done, divisions responsible for activities subject to declining
costs will incur accounting deficits, since average cost exceeds marginal
cost.

Second, external costs (and benefits) flowing between divisions are
likely to lead to improper decisions, in the same way that pollution (and

external benefits) prevents the achievement of maximum social welfare. In
the absence of Coase—type bargains, lower—level managers will make the
proper decisions only if pricing signals are adjusted from above to reflect
externalities.

Third, if

there

is interdependence in production or in demand for the

output of the various divisions (or possibilities for profitable reciprocal
purchases), division managers may not take due account of the effects of
their actions on the profitability of other divisions.75
Fourth, if their outlook is restricted to their own (perhaps artificially limited) sphere of activity and the profits of various divisions

have

a low covariance, managers may be more risk—averse than is appropriate

from the group's point of view. Top—level management may need to adjust
signals to lower—level management or
Finally,

otherwise induce more risk taking.

and in a somewhat different vein, if transfer prices deviate

from market prices (or marginal costs) because they are being manipulated
to minimize taxes (or for other reasons), there is no reason to expect that
the profit—maximizing actions of lower—level managers will lead to global
profit maximization.

31.

All these (and other) examples of the potential failure of decentralized decision making can be overcome (at least in prinicple) by centralizing certain decisions or by adjusting the pricing signals to which lower—

level managers respond. Either centralization of important decisions or
significant adjustments in pricing signals should thus be considered prima
facie evidence that a unitary business exists.76

Conversely, one prerequi-

site for a finding that a unitary business does not exist would seem to be
heavy reliance on transfer pricing based on marginal costs and

virtually

total autonomy from central direction.77

V. Summary Statement of Criteria
The analysis of the section II and III suggests that there are two
reasons that are conceptua]ly distinct, though often found together, for
determining that the members of a group of commonly owned and controlled

firms are engaged in a unitary business. First, substantial transactions
between affiliated firms can make it

administratively difficult, and per-

haps impossible, to verify that transfer prices are not being manipulated
to shift income between affiliated firms, and therefore between jurisdic-

tions. This problem is most likely to be significant where there are vertical transactions in goods and services with no uncontrolled market price,

and it becomes insuperable as vertical integration becomes complete. Se—
cond, various kinds of interdependence may make it conceptually impossible
to determine the income of the individual firms.

Particularly important

are shared costs and other economies of scale and scope and shared

know—how. Though interdependence exists particularly in vertically
integrated production and distribution, it can also explain horizontal
diversification and demand a finding of unity.

32.

Neither of the difficulties described above is likely to be a significant source of misstatement of income for tax purposes unless affiliated
firms are under common control, for in the absence of common control, affiliated firms can be expected to pursue their own objectives, much as

totally unaffiliated firms do. Thus it appears that a finding of common
control should be one sine qua non of a finding of unity. Conversely,
total autonomy of the individual firms would generally indicate the absence

of unity. Common ownership is usually, but not always, indicative of
common control.

A. Substantiality
For shared costs to justify a finding of unity the costs must be
substantial enough that how they are allocated between firms could seriously affect the calculation of profits of the various corporate entities

sharing them. The same is true of interdependence and intercorporafe
transactions; they must be substantial enough that they could cause separate accounting to fail badly to isolate the profits of the various enti-

ties.78 In other words, it seems essential to have a de minimus provision
that prevents even commonly controlled affiliated firms with only insignificant amounts of shared expenses, interdependence, or intercorporate
transactions from being swept into the net of unitary combination.

The following example illustrates the need for such a rule, in the

case of shared costs. Suppose that firms X and ? both operate in states A
and B, only the former of which levies a corporate tax. Suppose further
that the formula used by state A would result in that state's taxing the
following fractions of the income of the two firms under separate account-

ing and under combination: firm X, 66 2/3 percent; firm'?, 25 percent;

combined, 50 percent. Suppose that each firm has sales of $2,400 and that

33.

expenses directly allocable to firms X and Y are $2,000 and $1,LLOO,

respec-

tively. Expenses that cannot be allocated are $200. (This could also be
the possible error in transfer pricing; see below.) Thus total profits of
the two firms are $1,200.

If the two firms file a combined return, state A will tax $600 of this

income. If separate accounting is used, the allocation of the unallocable
expenses becomes important. Suppose, however, that these expenses are attributed entirely to firm Y, the one with the least presence in state A,
the income tax state, as indicated by the apportionment formula.

(This

allocation maximizes the tax base of state A under separate accounting.)
Firm X would report $267 (66 2/3 percent of $400) of income to state A and

firm Y would report $200 (25 percent of $800). The total is only $467, or
substantially less than under unitary combination. Even if the unallocable
expenses were claimed as a deduction by neither firm, under separate accounting the total taxable income in state A would be only $517, still less

than under combination. Combination of the high-income firm with
presence

less

in state A with the low—income firm with greater presence in state

A increases the base apportioned to state A by more

than

the amount of tax

base at stake in the arbitrary allocation of the unal]ocable expenses.
Though this example was constructed to produce an extreme result, its
lesson is of general applicability. Minor amounts of unallocable expenses
—— with nothing more —— should
not be allowed to force use of a combined
report.79 Much the same argument can be made for potential errors in
transfer prices. If transactions between affiliated firms are so insignificant or the conceivable range of transfer prices is so small that no

imaginable amount of manipulation could seriously affect the division of
income via separate accounting, unitary combination should not be required.

34.

These de minimus rules should not be interpreted as emasculating the

unitary principle. They are intended to apply when there are minor un—
allocable costs, small potential errors in transfer prices, or insignificant amounts of interdependence, but little or no other interdependence.

In many instances the contribution to group profits cannot be adequately
recognized simply by adjusting transfer prices or the allocation of shared

expenses. Examples might include major benefits of technological know—how,
brand identification, unique managerial capabilities, and vertical inte-

gration. There generally are not well—defined market prices in these
cases, and even if there are, the increased profits such arrangements make

possible may be so considerable that separate accounting cannot adequately
deal with them.

B. A Three—Stage Test

The above line of reasoning suggests a three—level test of unity. At
the first level a finding of complete managerial autonomy to act on the

basis of market—determined pricing signals for inputs and outputs (or
transfer prices approximating them) would constitute presumptive evidence

that a single unitary business does not exist. On the other hand, absence
of autonomy, as evidenced by coimnon control, would suggest that a second

level of investigation is warranted. At this second level of investigation
the manipulation of transfer pricing, the impossibility of determining accurate transfer prices, or vertical integration would lead to a finding
that a unitary business might exist and would lead to the third level in-

vestigation into substantiality. So would important shared costs, other
economies of scale and scope, and other forms of interdependence that make

isolation of the profits of individual firms impossible. Commonly con—
trolled firms between which there were few if any shared costs or other

35.

economies of scale or scope, only minor amounts of transactions for which
transfer pricing could be an issue, and no other important interdependences
would not be found to be unitary.
This three—level test can be presented schematically as in Figure 1.
FIGURE 1 GOES HERE

If test 1 reveals that there is no common control, a finding of unity can-

not be supported. Only if there is common control do we go to test 2,
whether there are shared expenses, other economies of scale or scope,

intragroup transactions, or other economic interdependence. Test 3 distinguishes cases in which minor interdependence or allocation of relatively
small amounts of income and expense are involved from those in which problems of shared expenses, transfer pricing, and interdependence are so vital
that separate accounting cannot be used; this test must also be answered
affirmatively for a finding that there is a unitary business.
Any test of unity must provide a yes or no answer to the cuestion of

whether combination is appropriate. A determination that two or more firms
are "a little bit" unitary or "mostly" unitary cannot be employed to sug-

gest that a little bit of combination or a lot is proper.8° This is unfortunate, because the need for an all—or—nothing answer raises the stakes

involved in reaching the right answer. It a)so makes it especially desirable to he able to specify conceptually clear and relatively objective
tests of what constitutes a unitary business.8'
It might be relatively easy to legislate simple quantitative standards

for some kinds of shared expenses and intercorporate transactions. It
should also be possible to recognize whether common control exists in given

situations, though specifying the test in law might he more difficult. But
it seems almost impossible to legislate a quantitative standard for the

-

Figure 1 Three—Stage Test for a Unitary Business

Test 1: Is there common control?
If No:

If Yes then ly Test

Nonunitary

Are there shared expenses, economies of scale or scope,
intragroup transactions, vertical integration, or other
economic interdependence?
If No:

Nonunitary

2:

If Yes, then appj Test 3:
Are these substantial?
If No:

Nonunitary

If Yes:

Unitary

36.

type or amount of interdependence of various types that would be required

for a ruling of unity.82 Here there seems to be no substitute for subjective consideration of the facts in individual cases.83
C. Comparison With Other Tests

Among the questions states have asked in determining whether groups of
affiliated firms are engaged in unitary businesses is whether the various
firms share insurance, legal, accounting, and tax preparation services;

purchasing; employee benefit plans; and training.84 In and of themselves,
these do not appear to me to be adequate predicates for a finding of a

unitary business. Many of these activities probably confer little benefit
(savings) on the group that would riot

be available to the individual

members. Only if there are substantial economies of scale, other sources
of saving (for example, quantity discounts from common purchasing) or
other reasons separate accounting would fail to isolate the income of the

members is a finding of unity in order. If, for example, the liability for
employee benefits became the joint liability of the group, it might be

impossible to untangle the profits of the various firms. At best, an
affirmative answer to any of these questions should he only the starting
point for further investigation of the economic reality of the matter; it
should not be dispositive.

Whether firms are in a similar line of business is another commonly

mentioned test of unity that is suggestive but should not be dispositive.85
If vertical integration or market sharing exists, or if there are other
forms of interdependence, affiliated firms in a similiar line of business
are clearly unitary. But if 'there is simply common ownership of two firms
operating in totally different markets with no important economic

interdependence, there is no unitary business. This is true even if

there

37.

is counon control, so long as there is no coordination of poflcies.

It may

be difficult to know how to split the cost of central management between

the firms. But in most cases the magnitudes are not large enough that the
split could significantly alter the results of separate accounting.
Other tests are likely to he much more indicative of a unitary busi-

ness under certain circumstances. For reasons described earlier, joint
advertising and other common aspects of public relations, including logos

and stationery, intercompany finance and loan guarantees, interchange of
expertise, and coordination via shared officers and directors may make it

impossible to rely on separate accounting. These are also discussed briefly in the next part of,this section.

D. An Alternative Test: Operational Interdependence
It

appears that the criteria suggested here are broad.ly consistent

with those

proposed by Jerome

though they may be some'what

more judgmental and may result in a finding of unity in some instances
where Hellerstein's would not.87 He has suggested that "a business is not
unitary unless interdependent basic operations are carried on to a
substantial extent in different states by the branches or subsidiaries that
comprise the controlled enterprise."88 The italicized words show agreement
that common control is necessary and that interdependence must be

substantial.89 e appear to differ about whether sharing of certain
activities that are not part of basic operating functions in and of itself
could, in principle, lead to a finding that a unitary business exists.
Hellerstein argues that:
The non—basic operating functions of a business, such as
providing managerial, accounting, personnel, legal, patent or
similar services, centralized advertising, pension and bene—
fit plans, and the like, or furnishing capital, important
though they be to the profits of the enterprise, were not the

38.

types of activities that gave rise to, or that necessitated
apportionment. In determining the profits of a branch or
subsidiary, the costs of such internal, non—basi" •.'perations
can, and often are, regularly determined and charged on a
cost, gross receipts or similar basis. Obviously, the fairness of these charges needs to be scrutinized closely, but
they present nothing like the virtually insurmountable problems of determining arm's length transfer prices on sales of
raw materials, or goods manufactured by one branch or controlled corporation and sold to another, or on resale by a
mercantile company of purchased goods. Patents and know—how
created and owned by one segment of the enterprise, secret
processes, or the results of research done by one segment of
the business and made available to the others, are more elusive and more difficult to pin down. Unless they are basic
to the enterprise, these items can also be charged on a cost
or similar basis, or if there is licensing to nonaffiliated
interests, ona comparable basis.90

As a practical matter, I would share Hellerstein's view on the items
listed in the first sentence, with the possible exceptions of management,

advertising, and finance. As noted in the previous part of this section,
it- is generally unlikely that any savings resulting from sharing the other

expenses listed or any possibility of manipulation of intercorporate
charges for them could be great enough to distort materially the

calculation of income of the various component firms. On the other hand,
basing combination on them could cause serious distortions of the division
of income, in the way illustrated by the example presented in the first

part of this section. The same may often be true of advertising; it is
unlikely that advertising ordinarily looms large enough to matter much.
But where advertising is an important expense or brand identification
spills over from one division or affiliated firm to another, it may not be

enough simply to charge for advertising costs.9' Like technical knowledge,
brand identification based on joint advertising may justify a finding that
a unitary business exists.

Finance also causes me to worry, since manipulation of interest rates

39.

is

a troublesome area in the administration of the federal tax on multi-

national firms. This concern is compounded by considerations that a subsidiary of a major corporation may be able to borrow on substantially more
favorable terms ——

from its parent or externally —— than if it were totally

independent. Finally, it appears that one must look carefully at the type
and amount of control exercised by central management, along the lines

suggested in section IV. This may or may not be indicative of a unitary
business.

In its brief to the Supreme Court, counsel, for the Container

Corporation, relying on Hellerstein's writing and its reading of the
decisions in ASARCO and Woolworth, requested that a substantial flow of
products between affiliates be made the bright—line test for the existence

of a unitary business. Such a test would, of course, be much more
restrictive that that proposed in this paper, since under it the various
other types of interdependence described earlier could not be used to

justify a finding of unity.92 Whether it would actually be less
restrictive that Hellerstein's is difficult to know, given the difficult of

defining

precisely the term basic operational interdependence, but it

appears that

it would

be.

VI. Mobil, AARCO, and Woolworth

It

may be worthwhile to examine briefly the Mobil, ASARCO, and

worth cases to see how the U.S. Supreme Court's apparent views on what

constitutes a unitary business compare with those presented here.93 I concentrate on the tests of unity the Court seems to have applied, rather than

on whether it applied them correctly.94 Thus I base the discussion on the
descriptions

and appraisals of the factual situations found in the majority

40.

and minority opinions.95
A. Mobil
In Mobil the U.S. Supreme Court provided a description of a unitary

business (and the need for the concept) that appears to be totally consistent with what has been written above.
Separate accounting, while it purports to isolate
portions of income received in various States, may fafl
to account for contributions to income resulting from
functional integration, centralization of management,
and economies of scale. Because these factors of
profitability arise from the operation of the business
as a whole, it becomes misleading to characterize the
income of0he business as having a single identifiable
'source.

The Court seems tQ have found a unitary business in

Mobil largely by

default, since Mobil did not offer any serious argument that no unitary

business was involved.97 To the extent this is true, one can hardly fault
the Court on that part of its decision.98 It seems, however, rather far—
fetched to believe that Mobil is engaged in a unitary business with most of
the firms listed in footnote 9 of the dissenting opinion by Justice
Stevens, absent evidence that it controls these firms
ities), in which Mobil had only minority interests.99

(mostly public utilAt most, it would

appear to be engaged in a unitary business only with the three firms listed
in footnote 5 of the majority opinion, three

wholly owned subsidiaries and

a joint venture (ARANCO), in which it had a 10 percent share. In these
cases one has little difficulty believing there was a unitary business,

even though ARANCO raises the special issue of how to treat joint ventures.

B. Woolworth
The majority also appears to have applied principles consistent with

those outlined above in the Woolworth case. It went into considerable detail in documenting the absense of central control

("eJach subsidiary per—

41.

forms these functions autonomously and independently of the parent company"100) and the lack of important shared expenses, intercorporate

actions, or other interdependence ("'oolworth's operations ere not
functionally integrated with its subsidiaries"'0' and "There is no flow of

international business. Nor is there any integration or unitary operation

l02.
The minority opinion by Justice 0Connor gives three reasons for dis-

agreeing with the majority decision: frequent corunicaticn heteen the
managements of the parent and the subsidiaries, approval of major financial
decisions by the parent, and the publication of consolidated financial

statements.103 There is no suggestion that the frecuent corunications
either invalidated the judgment that the subsidiaries were independent of

the parent or otherwise rendered the firms unitary. The third objection
(consolidated statements) seems to lack substance. Only the second seems
to hold any possibility of being important; but even here there is no sug-

gestion how parent oversight of debt and dividend policy caused distortion
of the division of income between Voolworth and its foreign subsidiaries.
L. ASA.KL)

The Court considered that the relationship between ASARCO and Southern
Peru posed the closest question of the five affiliates considered in this

case. ASARCO owned 51.5 percent of Southern Peru and bought 35 percent of
its output. Even so, the court found that (1) ASARCO did not control
Southern Peru and (2) intercorporate transactions occurred at prices over

which the two firms had no control.104 It thus found no evidence of a
unitary business.

In the other parent—subsidiary relations under examination, the Court
found that ASARCO owned 52.7 percent of a subsidiary but had never elected

1L2.

an officer, was prohibited by a consent decree from voting it stock in two
companies in which

it

held roughly 34 percent interests, and had been re-

quired by the fexican government to divest itself of 51 percent of the sub-

sidiary's stock.105 In none of the four instances did the Court find that
ASARCO exercised control over the subsidiaries, all of whom were found to

operate independently. ioreover, the Court found no other

unitary

evidence of a

business and explicitly rejected the view that a uritarv

business

exists if stock is "acquired, managed, or disposed of for purposes relating
or contributing to the taxpayer's business,"106 noting that "this definition of unitary business would destroy the concept."107
The dissenting opi,nion, again delivered by Justice O'Connor, argued on

three grounds that ASARCO was involved in a unitary business with its sub-

sidiaries: ASARCO used its knowledge of the nonferrous metals industry to
decide whether to invest in these firms;108 its investment may have
involved interim investment of idle funds from its own primary business;109
and it had effective operational control over at least three of the com-

panies.11° The first of these arguments appears to have no substance. The
second is more difficult to appraise hut is not one that I find convin-

cing.111 The third also seems lacking, except perhaps in the case of the
}iexican subsidiary. At any rate, it is interesting that even the dissent
emphasized control, not mere majority ownership.
D. Appraisal

It appears that the Supreme Court agrees with the need to examine the
facts in a given situation to determine whether a unitary business exists.

It said in Exxon, "The court looks to the 'underlying economic realities of
a unitary business,' and the income must derive from 'unrelated business

activity' which constitutes a 'discrete business enterprise.'"312 In

43.

ASARCO

it

said, "(T)he application of the unitary—business principle re-

quires

in

each case a careful examination both of the way in which the

corporate

enterprise

is structured and operates, and of the relationship

with the taxing state.'413 The Court's language leaves considerable latitude for alternative interpretations, but the issues to be determined

appear to be roughly those described in Figure 1 above.114 Unfortunately,
the answers to most of the crucial questions are not easily quantifiable.
As Walter Hellerstein has written, "While one can derive some guidance for
the future from the Court's discussion of the facts, the Court's approach
in ASARCO seems to invite an endless stream of litigation over the requisite flow of goods, services, personnel and so forth, that are necessary to
constitute a unitary business."115

FOOTNOTES

*The author wishes to thank Jack Hirshleifer, F.M.

Scherer, Roger

Sherman, and Carl Shoup, as well as the participants in the conference, for

Comments on an earlier version of this paper. He is,

however, solely

responsible for the opinions expressed here.

1. This sentence is deliberately worded to preclude the need to consider two issues, the treatment of arguably foreign source income and the
test of taxable nexus, in order to allow us to focus on a third, the def-

inition of a unitary bustness. On the first of these, see George N.
Carison and Harvey Galper, "Water's Edge Versus Worldwide Unitary

Combination," in This Volume, chapter

,

and the references cited there.

Nor do I consider either the choice of the formula to be used In
apportioning income or the definition and measurement of the "factors" in

the formula. On these questions, see Peggy B. Musgrave, "The State
Corporate Income Tax: PrInciples for the DIvIsIon of Tax Base," This

Volume, chapter
2. If separate accounting could be applied satIsfactorily on a
geographic basis, it could substitute for formula apportionment.

Func-.

tional separate accounting would presumably need to be supplemented by
formula apportionment to divide the income attributed to the various
functions among

the

states.

3. This statement of the problem is found in George T. Altman and
Frank P4. Keesling, Allocation of Income in State Taxation (New York:

Commerce Clearing House, 1946), p. 101: "The essential test is whether or

2.

not the operation of the portion of the business within the state is
dependent upon or contributory to the operation of the business outside

the state. If there is such a relationship, the business is unitary."
Virtually identical wording is contained in Edison California Stores,
Cal.

30

2d. 1472 (19147) at 1181, the classic case that gave this test judicial

sanction. For a brief history of the development of the unitary concept,
see, for example, Benjamin F. Miller, "Worldwide Unitary Combination: The

California Practice," This Volume, chapter

Unitary

,

or

William D. Dexter, "The

Concept in State Income Taxation of Multistate—Multinational

Businesses," The Urban Lawyer 10, no. 2 (Spring 1978): 181—212.

4 In a combined report income of the firms engaged in the unitary
business is added together and intercorporate transactions between the

firms (most notably dividends) are eliminated. The income of the unitary
group is then apportioned between the taxing state and others on the basis
of the factors (e.g., payroll, property, and sales) of the entire group.
For the distinction between a consolidated return and a combined report,
see Miller, "Worldwide Unitary Combination."
5. See Comptroller General of the United States, Report to the

Cha1rrnanHouseCot on Ways and Means, Key Issues Affecting State
Taxation of MultijurisdiCtionlal Corporate Income Need Resolving,

(Washington: D. C.: U. S. General Accounting Office, July 1, 1982) for a
recent compilation of state practices in this area.

California practice

is described in detail in Miller, "Worldwide Unitary Combination."
6.

This

and the next sentence of the text are not intended to provide

a complete catalog of business grievances or state responses. For more
complete discussions of these grievances and responses, see the papers by
Jerome R. Hellerstein, "State Taxation Under the Commerce Clause: The

3.

History

Revisited," all in this volume. Carison and Ga].per, "Water's

Edge;" and Walter Hellerstein, "Dividing the State Corporate Income Tax
Base: Developments in the Supreme Court and the Congress," all in this

volume. While state and corporate interests are generally aligned as
described

in the text, there are instances in which

firms

wish to employ

unitary combination and states attempt to deny it; see especially the
peculiar

case presently before the U.S. Supreme Court (Chicago Bridge and

Iron Co. v. Caterpillar Tractor Co., U.S. No. 81 — 3149, Oct. 1981), in
which Chicago Bridge and Iron has taken up a case abandoned by the state
of Illinois in attempting to prevent Caterpillar from employing worldwide
combination.

7.

The cases decided during the Court's 1980 and 1982 sessions are

Mobil Oil Corp. v Commissioner of Taxes, 14145 US. 425, 10.0 S. Ct. '1223
(1980); Exxon Corp. v. Wisconsin Dept. of Revenue, 14147 U.S. 207, 100 S.

Ct. 2109 (1980); F. W. Woolworth Co. v. Taxation and Revenue Dept. of the

State of New Mexico, _U.S., 102 S. Ct. 3128 (1982); and ASARCO Inc.
v. Idaho State Tax Comm. _U.S.,,_,,, 102 S. Ct. 3103 (1982). Container
Corp. of America v. Franchise Tax Board (U.S. No. 81-523, Oct. 1982),
presently before the Court, is the first case (aside from Chicago Bridge
and Iron v, caterpiiiar, in which the record is quite skimpy) to reach the
Court in whiôh the legality of worldwide application of unitary
combination is explicitly challenged.

8. Carlson and Galper, "Water's Edge," n. 11, state: "The major
remaining controversy in the domestic area surrounds the question of what

constitutes a unitary business operation." Walter Hellerstein, "Dividing
the State Corporate Income Tax Base," expresses a similiar sentiment:
"Since the existence of a unitary business is an essential predicate to a

z.
state's apportionment of income generated by that business, the criteria
for

determing whether a business is unitary are crucial."

9. 445 U.S.

at ]437.

10. See the citations in note

7 above.

It may be well to note at this

point that Exxon involved primarily the question of whether separate
accounting could be used to determine the functional breakdown of
operating income
corporation.

among

the various divisions of Exxon, a single

By comparison, the other three cases involved the question

of whether nondomiciliary states could include intercorporate dividends in

the apportionable income of a taxpayer. The Court ruled that the answer

in each case hinged onthe existence of a unitary business.
11. For an earlier expression of my views on such issues, see
E.

McLure, Jr.', "Toward

Analysis,"

Uniformity

Tax Notes Vol. 13,

Charles

in Interstate Taxation: A Further

no. LI (July 13, 1981): 51-63. I

have argued

elsewhere, in Charles E. McLure, Jr., "The State Corporate Income Tax:
Lambs in Wolves' Clothing," in The Economics of Taxation ed. Henry J.
Aaron and Michael J. Boskin (Washington, D.C: Brookings Institution,

)I.
I JJ/ JjJ. 3 f ?U,
Federal

. ftA...1
2
afluA .Ln
OJLW1L2 I. 'Ji

..

System," in Canadian Tax Journal 30, no. 6

J1IULL!

(Nov.-.Dec.

LU

1982):

8110—859 and in Tax Assignment in Federal Countries, ed. Charles E, McLure,

Jr. (Canberra: Centre for Research on Federal Financial Relations,

forthcoming) that states should not attempt to tax corporate income, in

inherent difficulties of dividing income among
(2) the demonstrated unwillingness of states to achieve an

part because of (1) the
states,

acceptable

degree of uniformity in definitions of taxable income

and

means

of dividing it among states, let alone tax rates, and (3) the geographic
distortions inherent in origin—based taxes that are not uniform across

5.

states. Thus

we are, at best, dealing with what I consider a second—best

situation.

12. See, however, the papers by Carison and Galper, "Water's Edge,"
by Miller, "Worldwide Unitary Combination," and by Walter Hellerstein,

"Dividing the State Corporate Income Tax Base" and the comments by
Franklin C. Latcham, Norman J. Laboe, and David R. Milton, all in this

volume, and references given there. Of course, the tests of economic
unity presented here are, in principle, as applicable to multinational
groups of affiliated firms as to wholly domestic groups it combination is
to be applied on a worldwide basis.

13. Note the words of the California Supreme Court in Butler Bros.
v. McColgan 17 Cal.2d. 667—68 (191M): "It is only if its business within
this state is truly separate •and distinct

.

.

. so

that the segregation of

Income

maybe

method

may properly be used." The entire discussion of this paper is
in terms of determining whether formula apportionment (and

framed

combination,

made clearly and accurately, that the separate accountlng

in the

case of legally

distinct affiliates), rather that

.s appropriate for the division of business income
states. It appears, however, that the same test of unity would

separate accounting,

between

in determining whether, in the

applicable

intercorporate
Mobil,

found to be

dividends

absence of combination,

dividends should be taxed to the payee corporation, as

ASARCO, and Woolworth. Note 80

engaged in

a

in

below argues that if two firms are

unitary business, combination

should

be applied;

should not simply be included in apportionable income, as in

Mobil.

I should

presented at

the

note

that

In

the

be

text of the version

of

the paper

conference, which has been extensively revised, but not

6.

altered substantively, the following paragraph precedes this one:
The discussion that follows is predicated on the view

that the goal of state tax policy in this area is (or
should be) to tax
Various

corporate

income where it

originates.

Supreme Court pronouncements about the illegality

of taxing extraterritorla]. values leads one to believe
that

the Court agrees. In

apportionment

this view of things, formula

is a necessary evil forced upon us by the

inherent difficulty of using separate accounting to
divide the taxable income of a unitary business among the
various jurisdictions in which it .s earned.

*

Jerome Hellerstein based his conference comments, which follow this
paper, on that paragraph and also relied on it in his "The Basic
Operations Interdependence Requirement of a Unitary Business:

A

Reply to Charles E. McLure, Jr.," Tax Notes 18 no. 9: 723—31. I
have omi.tted the above paragraph in revising the paper for
publication,

since upon relection I

feel that what it says is not

really germane to the issue at hand, and, indeed, detracts from
consideration of the central topic of the paper, defining a unitary
business.

My reasoning is explained further in "Ctitle to be

determined)" Tax Notes, forthcoming.

7.

14. The repeated use of "in general" and "generally," in

combination with "accurately" or "satisfactorily," in these

is intended to indicate that the presence of the
characteristics of a unitary business described here creates a
sentences

presumption that separate accounting will not isolate the income of
the constituent parts of a unitary business and that formula
apportioent must be employed

in

such cases. It is not

proposed

that

separate accounting could be used to overturn this
presumption, except in those cases in which the obstacles to

isolation of the Income of the components are so minor that they
would be covered
V

below. For a

unitary
- -

treatment over separate accounting for the taxation of

affiliated
15.
draws

by the de rninimus provisions discussed in sectIon
statement of the California presumption
in favor of

firms, see Miller, "Worldwide Unitary Combination."

'

Peggy Musgrave, in "The State Corporate Income Tax," also

this

distinction.

need for combining firma into the so—called unitary
business . . arises under . . . two sets
of circumstances. The first occurs where the firms are in a
position to manipulate their accounts so as to shift
accounting profits . . . The second situation arises
where there is structural linkage among the firms which
renders the separatIon of their profits an arbitrary
procedure . . . It is to be noted that this second
situation provides the more fundamental rationale for
combination. In the absence of these structural inter—
dependencies, the need for combination merely rests on
the lack of administrative capability for enforcing
"The

arm's—length pricing.

This distinction helps to explain the reasoning that may lie behind the
following statement by the staff of the California Franchise Tax Board in
Senate Committee on Finance, "Staff Observations Regarding Income Tax

Provisions of Legislative Proposals," State Taxation of Interstate

8.
Commerce, Hearings before the Subcommittee on State Taxation of Interstate
Commerce, 93rd

Cong.,

1st sess., Sept. 18 and 19 1973, p. 229, quoted in

Carlson and Galper, "Water's Edge": "The use of a combined report [unitary
method]

for determining income is not based upon the concept that members

of a unitary business have not acted at arm's—length. It is used because
separate accounting, regardless of its mathematical accuracy, does not

properly reflect the income of a unitary business."
16. Of course, transfer prices may be manipulated for reasons other

than shifting taxable income between states. For our purpose what matters
is the possibility that income of the individual firms may be mismeasured,
not why ——

or even whether -— transfer prices are being manipulated. Any

inaccuracy of transfer prices, whether due to deliberate manipulation or

not, is reason

for concern, if it

is substantial. We also ignore the

possibility that different transfer prices may be reported in different
states, something made easier (and perhaps legal) by the failure of the
states to adopt uniform tax laws and to audit firms jointly.
17. Note that even here there could be difficulties, for example, if,
_._l.____.
JLiL
LA) JI.4L UU1}J L.LJLL,I.._
I.L

also

£ __ L1d.LU
_.......J
— £a
'.LWILIJULI t,UVd

L

iit1e; see

the first part of section III.

18. Implicit in this example is the assumption that both firms face
the same opportunity cost for funds in the capital market. If this is not
true, interpretation becomes more difficult.

19. Note that firm A could sell to an unrelated third party at an artificially reduced price at the same time that firm B made an equivalent
purchase from the same party under identical terms (plus a small
commission). This subterfuge would shift income from firm A to firm B, but
would be more difficult

to spot than

simple use of artificially low

9.

transfer

prices.

20.

I.R.C. regulation

21.

Jack Hirshielfer, "On the Economics of

l.1482—2(e)(1).

Transfer Pricing," Journal

of Business 30 (July, 1956): 175 notes that where two integrated firms are
each other's only supplier and customer, the optimal transfer price is the
marginal cost (including normal return to capital) of the supplier. But
the marginal output, by assumption, yields no economic profit, and this

rule for profit maximization says nothing about the division of
inframarginal profits between the two firms, something that is important
for

tax purposes

and

depends

on the entire cost schedules of the two firms.

Mote also that since all the activities in

the wheat—hogs example are

assumed to be competitive, none is yielding more than a normal return to
capital,

alleged

at least in the long run. As

the discussion of distortjons

to result from the use of one formula

in all circumstances (for

example, in the Container Corporation's brief) indicates, it is the
existence of arguably different profitability ——

relative

to payroll,

property, sales, or whatever else enters the apportionment formula —-

in

varIous actIvItIes or locations that makes the proper definition of a
unitary

business important. Moreover, vertical integration may create

savings

that are

not captured by any of'

these approaches; see also the

third and fourth parts and of this section.
22.

See, for example, "Multinational Corporations and Income

Allocation

Under Section Z182 of the Internal Revenue Code," Harvard Law

Review 89, no. 6 (Apr. 1976): 1202—1238; Comptroller
General of the United
States, Report to the Chairman House Committee on Ways and Means, IRS
Could Better Protect U.S. Tax
Interests in Determining the Income of'

Multinational

Coryoratlons (Washington, D.C.: U.S. General Accounting

10.

Office

Sept. 30, 1982); Geoffrey John Harley, International Division of the

Income Tax Base

Michigan Law

of

Multinational Enterprise, (Ph.D. diss., University of

School,

1980;

Boulder,

Cob.: Multistate Tax Commission,

1981); and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development,
Transfer Pricing and Multinational Enterprises (Paris: OECD, 1979) and

literature cited there. Note, however, that whereas the Comptroller
General is critical of transfer pricing, as applied by the IRS, the OECD
strongly endorses the arm's—length approach and would permit the use of
formula apportionment only if it is consistent with arm's length

principles. For more on this, see Carlson and Galper, "Water's Edge."
23. On the nature and advantages of vertical integration, see any
intermediate—level textbook on industrial organization, such as F. M.
Scherer, Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance (Chicago:
Rand McNally, 1980), pp. 88—91, or Roger Sherman, The Economics of Industry
(Boston: Little Brown and Co., 19714), pp. 161—63, and references therein.

In what

follows we do not discuss such obvious technological reasons for

vertical

integration as the combination of the various hot—metal operations

in steel making. Of course, the economies involved in such cases would

render isolation of profits via separate accounting impossible.
214. See Oliver E. Williamson, "The Vertical

Market Failure

Integration

of Production:

Considerations," American Economic Review 61, no. 2 (May

1971): 112—23. At this point we discuss only vertical integration,

artificially postponing until section III the discussion of
similar Influences that can lead to horizontal diversification; the two
will often be found together. See also note 1414 and literature cited there.
somewhat

25. Oliver E. Williamson, "The

Attributes,"

Modern

Corporation: Origins, Evolution,

Journal of Economic Literature 19, no. 14 (Dec. 1981): 15145—146,

11.

identifies the simultaneous existence of bounded rationality and

opportunism as the source of difficulties in contracting: "IHiuman agents
•

differ

.

from economic man .

. . in that they are less competent in

calculation and less trustworthy and reliable in action." Williamson would
therefore "assess alternative governance structures in terms of their
capacities to economize on bounded rationality while simultaneously
safeguarding against opportunism."
26. Williamson notes that much of the success and failure of attempts

at vertical integration in

of

the nineteenth century can be explained in terms

three characteristics: economies of scope, asset specificity, and

externalities in demand (the potential debasement of quality) ibid., pp.
1551_5Z1.

Economies of scope are described in first part of section III

below.

27. See Sherman, The Economics of

Industry, pp. 167-69.

-'

28. This is a possible reason for difficulties in knowing the profit
margins

of

to use in

constructing arm's—length prices noted in the second part

this section.
29. BesIdes inducing Oil firms to manipulate transfer prices to

realize as much income as possible at the crude oil stage, the provision of'
percentage depletion in the tax code (now ended
companies)

encouraged vertical integration of'

for large integrated

refiners

into exploration and

production, reducing the availability of supplies to nonintegrated

refiners. See Soberer, Industrial Market Structure, p. 91 and references
cited there.

30. 100 S. Ct. 2121 (1980), quoting testimony of an Exxon senior vice

president

who had contended during hearings on divestiture that Exxon was

unitary. For a theoretical case for vertical integration in a somewhat

12.

different context of uncertain supply, see Kenneth J. Arrow, "Vertical
Integration and Communication," Bell Journal of Economics 6, no. 1 (Spring
1975): 22—59.

31. It would be interesting to know to what extent these involve
relatively minor joint costs whose

allocation

could not possibly distort

measurement of income significantly and to what extent they truly

the

create interdependence that suggests unity. See also the discussions of'
interdependence

first part of'

in section III and of quantitative substantiality in the

the

concluding section.

32. The purpose of

tation costs;

these

exchanges was

apparently

to save transpor-

see 100 S. Ct. 2115 (1980). There is no suggestion of'

"reciprocal buying" in the sense used in the fourth part of section III.
But it may be that such exchanges are a natural defensive response-to the

small—numbers environment in which the oil companies operate. They allow

the companies to hold each other hostage, so that a competitors denial of

supplies
33.

denial in other markets.

See also note 15 above.
"i-'..
Ii 4 S

,li

used

in one market can be countered with

L

LI. .1. .1.

£

%,I.44

tfl.7
T JL .I. TJ.I.,.I

VL& .L

4 J .1 J .1.1 £ I.. .k'J 14, ft

,.,.4.
1 I'.)
S

4%,4.
1L
I.,—
Q

.L 4

"in determining unity is whether or not the earnings of the group have

been materially greater because of affiliation than they would have been if
they

had operated separately."
35.

For the present purpose, comments by Jack Hirshleif'er in

"Economics of the Divisionalized Firm," Journal of Business 30 (Apr. 1957):
105—107 on the profitability of' abandoning a division are particularly

relevant. He notes: "rT]heapparent profit (or loss) of' any

will

division

not equal the change in total profits for the firm as a whole when

the operations of that division are considered incrementally" (p. 108).

13.

36. Each of the two firms might market in only one state, with the
shared pipeline being the only interdependence between them.

If one firm

the pipeline and carried the other's product for a fee, or if

owned

affiliated firm owned the pipeline,

it

a third

is not obvious what transfer price

to employ, especially if there are no comparable uncontrolled sales.
Leaving aside the basic problem noted in the previous note, a case could be

for. either average cost or marginal cost. Thus neither state could
accurately determine the income of either firm.
made

37. This line of reasoning might seem to have been more persuasive before the development of money market instruments in which excess balances

can be placed for periods as short as one day. But the fact remains that
the possibility of pooling financial requirements can generate important
savings.

38. Economies of scale generally give rise to decreasing costs-'

(average costs that fall as output increases). By comparison, constant
returns to scale (e.g., doubling Inputs doubles output) generally imply
constant average costs.

39. If the savings from joint activity are so small, one might then
ask why the firms bother to share the facilities. In such cases there may

.

be other even stronger unitary ties.
occur,

The

best examples must be in information; since crowding does not

a given coat of obtaining information can be spread over an

arbitrarily large quantity of output. In making this argument we must

careful

be

not to decide that affiliates held together by the kinds of

economies

of transaction costs based on proprietary information discussed

in the next part of this section are not unitary just because shared costs
are small. This caveat is explained further there.

14.

J• For a discussion of the usual ranges over which economies of' scale
exist, including those of' management, see Soberer, Industrial Market
Structure, pp. 811—88.

42. This literature is largely attributable to W. J. Baurnol, J. C.

Panzer, and B. ID. Willig. See Elizabeth E. Bailey and Ann F. Friedlander,

"Market Structure and Multiproduct Industries," Journal of Economic
Literat*re 20, no. 3

(Sept. 1982) for a recent survey of that literature,

including the contributions of Baumol, Panzer, and Willig.
43. It

supply

hardly seems necessary to note that in extreme cases of' joint

(e.g., refining of crude oil into gasoline, kerosene, and various

other products), it would be hopeless to attempt to employ separate
accounting
1414

to determine the profits attributable to the various products.

The

seminal article is B. H. Coase, "The Nature of the Firm,"

Economic Journal Il (Nov. 1937): 386—405. See also Oliver E.
"Vertical

Williamson,

Integration;" Robin Marris and Dennis C. Mueller "The

Corporation, Competition, and the Invisible Hand,"

Journal of' Economic

Literature 18, no. 1 (Mar. 1980): 32—63; Richard E. Caves, "Industrial
Organization, Corporate Strategy and Structure,"

Journal of Economic

Literature 18, no. 1 (Mar. 1980): 64—92; and especially Williamson, "The
Modern Corporation." In this last

absence

article Williamson notes that in the

of' savings in transaction costs transfers will

be organized by

markets, rather than within firms, because scale economies may be
easily

realized (if

optimal

the

demand of' any firm

more

is small relative to the minimal

output), markets can aggregate uneorrelated demands to achieve

sharing of' risks, and markets may achieve economies of scope if various

firms do not need all services that can be provided more cheaply together
than

separately (p. 1547).

15.

See David J. Teece, "Economies of Scope and

Zj5

Enterprise," Journal

of

the

Scope of the

Economic Behavior and Ornization 1 (1980): pp.

223—47.

This fundamental paradox of information is usually attributed to
Kenneth Arrow. This quotation is from Kenneth J. Arrow, "Economic Welfare
'46.

and the Allocation of Resources for Invention," The Rate and Direction of
Inventive

Activity:

University

Economic and Social Factors (Princeton: Princeton

Press, 1962), p. 615.

'47. See Teece, "Economies of Scope," pp. 230-31 or Oliver E.

Williamson, "Transactions—cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual
Relations," Journal of Law and Economics 22 (Oct. 1979): 233—61,
'48. See also the

discussion of the fourth part of section II.

'49. Households can also generate externalities, and they can benefit
from them or be harmed

by them. Because of

the object of the present

discussion, that is ignored. The usual result is that externalities cause
economic resources to be nhlsallocated, in the sense that too few resources

are devoted to activities generating

external

benefits and too many

to

actvt1es causing external costs. For more on the nature of external
economies (benefits) and diseconomies (costs) and their tendency to cause
market failure, see any intermediate—level textbook in government finance,
such as Richard A. Musgrave and Peggy B. Musgrave, Public Finance in Theory
and Practice, 3d ed. (New York: McGraw—Hill, 1980), chaps. 3 and 311. At
this point we consider only technological externalities (those that involve

costs or benefits to society, as well as to the firm). But for the present
purpose, pecuniary externalities (those that cause the expenses of the

other firm, but not the costs to society, to be greater or less) are
equally relevant.

16.

50.

It may, for example, be upstream or upwind. For analytical

convenience we concentrate on the case where the potential for damage is
asymmetrical (unidirectional), to minimize the likelihood that the firms
would simply agree to limit mutual damage to each other.

51. See R. H. Coase, "The Problem of Social Cost," Journal of Law and
Economics 3 (Oct.

1960):

,_4Z4 and the voluminous literature it has spawned,

including D. M. G. Newberry, "Externalities: the Theory of Enviormental
Policy," in Public Policy and the Tax System, ed. G. A. Hughes and C. H.

Heal, (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1980), pp. 106149 and works cited
there. The market solutIon stated in the text would occur only If property
rights were such that firm A enjoyed the legal privilege of freely

disposing of its wastes, unless paid by firm B not to do so. If, by
comparison,

the law gave firm

might compensate firm B

the

B the right to

clean air and

water,

firm

A

to accept some pollution. In either event, under

Coasian view the level of pollution would probably be similar, but the

distributIon of income between the firms would be different.
52. If the ProMax board acts in either of these ways, the external
costs

are "internalized."

pollution

When

this occurs the

which this paper was

President

of

is presumably set at what the ProMax board considers the optimal

level from the group's point of view.
53. See also note 75 below.
5l• It is interesting to note that on

at

residual amount

the

first day of the conference

presented I received a mass mailing from the

of Mobil Oil Credit Corporation, encouraging me

credit card from Montgomery gard, one of

Mobil's

to apply for a

subsidiaries. One must

wonder whether, in such a case, separate accounting can accurately Isolate
the income of the two firms. Many unaffiliated firms have also recently

17.
engaged

in joint promotional efforts (for example, Disneyworld and Eastern

Airlines).

But in such instances commercial arrangements and market

transactions determine the division of costs and income between
participants. For similar arrangements between affiliated firms, the
division of costs may be set by top—level management and separate
accounting may not accurately split the resulting profits.
55. See Teece, "Economies of Scope," for a discussion of how

proprietary technological information might be transferred within firms (or
between affiliates) engaged in the petroleum industry and in geothermal
energy,

nuclear power, or coal mining.

56. This argument Is developed more fully in Charles E. MeLure,

Jr.,

"Operational Interdependence Is Not the Appropriate 'Bright Line Test' of a
Unitary Business —— At Least Not Now," Tax Notes 18, no. 2 (Jan.
1Q, 1983):

107—110. Note that there is no presumption that central management'
determines shares in output only with an eye toward minimizing state taxes.

57. This is, essentially, the view underlying the support for geographic separate accounting for the oil industry in McLure, "Uniformity in
Interstate TaxatIon." For a very brief earlier statement of the argument
in the text, which was based on an example suggested by William Dexter, see
Charles E. McLure, Jr., "State Corporate Income Taxes," in State and Local
Finance

in

the '80s, ed.

George Break (MadIson:

University of Wisconsin

Press, forthcoming).

We might anticipate an objection to the entire line of reasoning
based on risk and diversification: if individual investors can diversify
58.

away risk by holding a portfolio of investments whose risks are

uncorre—

lat.ed, there is no social benefit from diversification within a firm.

It

seems, however, that this has little to do with the basic question at hand,

18.

whether

separate accounting should be used to measure the income of affil-

iated firms (or divisions) engaged in risky ventures in different states,
or they should be treated as unitary businesses for state tax purposes.
59. This line of reasoning seems to have played a part in Superior Oil
Co. v. Franchise Tax Board, where the California Supreme Court said:

"[Ejach producing well in a particular state is the end product of
interstate activities which may involve many other unproductive wells in

many other states" (60 Cal., 2d ii6 [1963]). It is also part of the argument by W. J. Baumol in his testimony against Alaska's use of geographic

separate accounting for the oil industry (Superior Court for the State of
Alaska,

Third Judicial District, Atlantic Richfield Co. v. State of Alaska,

No. 3AN—79—1903 Civil and State of Alaska V. Exxon Corp., No. 3AN—80—15142

Civil.) Of course, it has little force if there is enough exploration in
each state to produce adequate diversification. Baumol also emphasizes
that

economies of' scope

benefiting

in activities conducted in

the

lower 148

states,

but

discovery and production in Alaska, including research on

technologies for exploration and production, make it impossible to isolate
profits from Alaskan operations.
60.

See also, James Nunns's discussion of Steven H. Sheffrin and Jack

Fuicher, "Alternative Divisions of the Tax Base: How Much Is at Stake?" in

this volume. The situation differs, of course, in that under federal law
separate accounting Is used to split income between Puerto Rico and the
rest of the country, whereas

applied

in our

example formula

apportionment would

be

to the respective incomes of firm A and firm B.

61. For a survey of thecry and evidence in this field, see MichaelC.
Jensen,

"Capital Markets: Theory and Evidence," Bell Journal of Economics

and Management Science 31 (Autumn 1972): 357—398. For a brief summary, see

19.

Scherer,

Industrial Market Structure, pp. 1014—107.

62. Note that in contrast to the case of shared fixed costs considered

where each firm faces costs

earlier,

decline

that are lower because average costs

with quantity, in this case costs to each affiliate are lower, but

presumably constant or rising with quantity.
63. 17 Cal. 2d 6614 (19141); 315 U.S. 501 (19111).

614. Eugene F. Corrigan, "Toward Uniformity in Interstate Taxation,"
Tax Notes 11, no. 11 (Sept. 15, 1980): 507—114, would make majority owner-

ship

prima

fade evidence of the existence of aunitary business, and P.

Musgrave, "The State Corporate Income Tax," seems to be leaning in that

direction.
combined

Frank M. Keesling, generally recognized as the father of

reporting, has retreated from his earlier view that he could

recognize a unitary business and has written in "The Combined Report and

Uniformity in Allocation Practices," Seventh Annual Report of the -'
Multistate Tax Commislon, (Boulder, Cob.: Multistate Tax Commission, June
30, 19711), p. 112, "I am inclined to the view that all income from
owned business

commonly

activities should be combined and apportioned without in-

quiring as to whether such activities are unitary or separate in nature."
65. Carlson and Galper, "Waters Edge," note that the interpretation
of control under section 1482 of the Internal Revenue Code can be quite
broad. I.R.C, regulation l.1482—1(a)(3) states that the term "includes any
kind

direct or indirect, whether legally enforceable, and
however exercisable or exercised. It is the reality of the control which
of control,

is decisive, not its form or the mode of its exercise."
66. It Is hardly novel to note that ownership and control are not
necessarily

identical. A variety of institutional arrangements provide

control without ownership. For example, under terms of debentures,

20.

creditors may effectively

control a corporation, even though they do not

own a majority of Its stock. (There is little advantage in inquiring in
the present context whether under these circumstances debt instruments take

on the character of ownership claims.) Moreover, firms sharing majority
boards could engage in manipulation, even if not commonly owned. In what

follows we ignore these possibilities. An especially important question is
how to treat joint ventures where control is vested in a small group of
corporate owners, no one of which has majority ownership. In such cases a
finding of unity may be well founded, despite lack of majority ownership.
A conference celebrating the fiftieth anniversary

of

Eerie and Mean's The

Modern Corporation and Private Property, which emphasized the separation of
ownership and control, was

held at the Hoover Institution a week after the

conference at which this paper was presented. The proceedings of that
conference are forthcoming

in

a special issue of the Journal of Law and

Economics.

67. See Eugene F. Fama and Michael C. Jensen, "Separation of Ownership
and Control," Journal of Law and Economics, forthcoming.
68,

The varIety of (often unclear) meanings given to terms that are

virtually synonymous in common usage confuses discussion in this area. It

appears

that when the Supreme Court refers to "centralized management," it

has in mind centralized control, in the Fama-Jensen sense. The context
should indicate the meaning of terms used in this paper.
69. This quotation Is from Oliver E. Williamson, "Organizational Form,
Residual

Claimants, and Corporate Control," Journal of Law and Economics,

forthcoming.
70. Ibid.

71. Miller, "Worldwide Unitary Combination," quoting the California

21.

court, notes, "[I]t is the parent's control and supervision over 'major
policy matters' that counts."
72. For example, in an Oregon case, Multistate Tax Comm.

v. Dow

Chemical Co., No. 1835 (Or. T.C. 1982), the MTC has been granted access to
minutes of meetings of board committees of Dow

Chemical

Co.

73. A standard part of most courses in applied microeconomics is a

demonstration that under certain conditions households attempting to maximize their welfare and firms attempting to maximize profits will produce

outcomes that maximize social welfare. If those Conditions are not met,
the hedonistic instincts of households and entrepreneurs will generally not

gratuitously

result in achievement of

this outcome. A standard

nonmathematical presentation is found in Francis M. Bator, "The

AnalytIcs
(Mar.

also

Simple

of Welfare Maximization," American Economic Review 147, no.

1

1957): 22—59. Most intermediate—level textbooks on rnicroeconomjcs
present this argument. An analogous argument can be made about the

advantages of decentralized decision making within a firm. See, for
example,

William J. Baumol

and Tibor Fabian, "Decomposition, Pricing for

Decentralization and External Economies," Management Science 11, no. 1
(Sept. 19611): 1—32. For an earlier treatment, see Hirshleifer, "Economics

of the Divislonalized Firm." In what follows I

objectives

of the firm and the division

take as given the parallel

managers to maximize the profits of

the firm and of the divisions, respectively. I do not otherwise address
the agency problem of how the central management of the firm can induce its

divisional managers to share its objectives. On this, see, for example,
Stephen A. Ross, "The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal#s Problel,"
American Economic

of

Review 63, no.

2 (May 1973) or Marvin Berhold,

"A Theory

Linear Profit—Sharing Incentives," Quarterly Journal of Economics

85,

22.
no.

3

firm

(Aug. 1971). The remainder of this section is written

in terms of a

and its divisions. Analogous reasoning applies to a group of

affiliated firms and the affiliates.

VL In what follows, behaving properly is used as a shorthand way

of

saying that profit maximization by division managers leads to profit max-

imization

by the firm. It is interesting to note the simplifying

assumptions on which Hirshleifer bases his initial analysis of the proper
prices to use for transfers within a vertically integrated firm:
Unless stated otherwise, we shall assume that both
technological independence and demand Independence apply
between the operations of the two divisions.
Technological independence means that the operating
costs of each division are independent of the level of
operations being carried on by the other. Demand

independence means that an additional external sale by
either division does not reduce the external demand for
the products of the other. ("Economics of Transfer
Pricing," p. 173; emphaSis in original)

Thus Hirshleif'er initially explicitly assumes away the first three problems

listed in the text and then reintroduces them.
75.

Hirshielfer

notes that "cost interdependence between products is.

almost a necessary condition of
devolution

of

decision—making

." ("Economics of

'divisionalization,'

that is,

the

authority among autonomous 'profit centers'

the Divisionalized Firm," p. 96.)

Similarly,

on

interdependence in demand, he writes, "A firm producing both cameras and

photographic film should consider, in setting its

prices

for cameras,

the demand for film" (p. 99).
76. In Exxon

the Supreme Court speaks of

"an umbrella of centralized

and controlled interaction" 100 S. Ct. at 2120 temphasis added].
77. We have argued above that the existence of minor shared costs,

management

externalities, sharing of

risks,

and so

on, should not lead to a conclusion

23.

of

unity. The reasoning of this section would be that if interdependence

of this type is felt by central management
divisions are

given

to

be so unimportant

substantial autonomy despite its presence,

that
there

is a

strong case against a finding of unity.

78. Thus Miller, "Worldwide Unitary Combination," quoting the
California Board of Equalization, notes, "Implicit in either test, of
course, is the requirement of quantitative substantiality."
79. Where

this

would otherwise occur, perhaps firms should be given

the option of simply filing separate returns and taking no deduction for
such shared expenses in calculating taxable income they report to states

that require unitary combination. Similarly, states requiring unitary
combination could allow each firm with taxable nexus the optIon of setting
a value on transactions with affiliates (within a reasonable range) that

its tax base in the state, rather than requiring it to file a
combined report. This is not meant to be an exhaustive consideration of'

maximizes

the

form safe—haven rules such as this might take. It is intended to

support the view that minor difficulties with separate accounting should

not force unitary combination that might lead to quite artificial results.
80. As has

been

suggested elsewhere, for example, in Jerome R.

Hellerstein, "Allocation and Apportionment of Dividends and the Delineation
of the Unitary Business," Tax Notes, 111, no. 11 (Jan. 25, 1982): 160 n. 112,
only the proportionate parts of

joint ventures might be combined with their

corporate owners. But that is really a different matter. For an argument
that combination of less than wholly owned subsidiaries, as currently

practiced, taxes extraterritorial income, see Norman Laboe's discussion at
Benjamin Miller's "Worldwide Unitary Combination" in this volume.

81. eased on

arguments presented in

this paper, I have suggested in

2.
"Operational

Interdependence" that the Supreme Court should not adopt a

flow of products as the bright—line test of a unitary business, as
requested in the Container Corporation's brief. Yet one can hardly deny

the benefits of' a conceptually clear test of whether a unitary business

exists.

I have little sympathy with the view quoted by Carison

and Galper:

"[T)he proposal that each state publish the criteria to be applied in
determining whether a particular business is unitary, without major
clarification, would cripple if not destroy the concept . . .

believe that the

over

We

do not

states should be required to lock into a definition that

a period of time may be unrealistic" ("Water's Edge," n. 135).

82. This difficulty is compounded when we ask how patterns of shared
costs, interdependence, and intercorporate transactions would be aggregated
in a single quantitative test.

83. Thus Miller, "Worldwide Unitary Combination," writes of California
practIce

in

subjective

determining whether a unitary business exists, "tI]t involves a

examination of a variety of criteria."

84. Among the many places such lists of characteristics commonly

attributed to unitary businesses may be found are Miller, "Worldwide
Unitary

Combination," and the questionnaires in

the

appendices to Revised

Procedures for Determining a Unitary Business: The States' Response to
ASARCO and Woolworth (Washington, D.C.: Federation of' Tax Administrators,
Dec. 1982), Research Memorandum 5117, mimeographed.

85. This test is included in the regulations promulgated by the MTC.

86. See, for example, Hellerstein, "Allocation and Apportionment."

For

earlier

statements in the same vein, see

Developments in State Tax Apportionment and

Jerome R. Hellerstein, "Recent

the

Business," National Tax Journal 21, no. 14 (Dec.

Circumscription of

1968):

1187—503, and

Unitary
"The

25.

Unitary Business Principle and Multicorporate Enterprises: An Examination
of the Major Controversies," The Tax Executive (1975): 313—329, and Jerome
R. Hellerstein and Walter Hellerstein, State and Local

Taxation:

Cases and

Materials, l4th ed. (St. Paul, Minn.: West Publishing Co., 1978), pp.
5 12—20.

87. Note, however, that interaffillate transactions conducted at
market prices would not lead to a finding of unity under my criteria,
whereas they could under Hellerstein's.

88. Hellerstein, "Allocation and Apportionment," p. 165 (emphasis
added).
89.

We do, however, use "interdependence" slightly differently.

Hellerstein includes intragroup transactions in this term.
90. Hellerstein, "Allocation and Apportionment," pp. 165—66.
91. One must wonder,

for

example, what would be a fair price to impute

to the appearance of the Exxon tiger in advertisements for Exxon office
equipment or to Mobil Credit's endorsement of

Montgomery

Ward mentioned in

note 511 above.
92. It is interesting to note that this bright—line test might

actually exclude the express companies (and their modern equivalents) to

which the unitary concept was first applied! For a critique of the
Container position, see my "Operational Interdependence." Jerome
Hellerstein has replied in "The Basic Operations Interdependence
Requirement of a Unitary Business."
93.

1 do not comment on Exxon, which involved a vertically integrated

firm that posed a far clearer case of unitary business.
911. I should, however, make one general comment. I believe that the

finding that a unitary

business exists should imply that combination is

26.

required. It is logically inconsistent to argue that dividends flowing
within a unitary business should be taxed to the recipient as part of its
apportionable income, without combination, as was done in Mobil and

attempted by the states in ASARCO and Woolworth. For further elaboration

this view, see MeLure, "Uniformity in Interstate Taxation." Thus I
believe that the Court's now oft—repeated Identification of apportionabil—

on

ity

with a unitary business, while adequate in the context of a single

firm, should ideally have been stated as follows in a multifirm context:
"The linchpin of combination, and therefore apportionability .
unitary business concept"

95.

.

. is

the

(underlined words added).

Note, however, the following perceptive comment by Walter Heller—

stein, "Dividing the State Corporate Income Tax Base": "While It may be a
matter of small moment, except to the parties, whether the majority or the
dissent more accurately portrayed the record, the considerable sparring in
the opinions over the proper perception of the facts and their
constitutional implications enhances the probability that the battle lines
of future

unitary

business controversies will be drawn

over

such factual

issues."
96. 100 S. Ct. at 1232 (citations omitted).
97. The Court seems to have taken special pains to note that

"appellant has

made no effort to demonstrate that the foreign operations of

its subsidiaries and

affiliates

. . " Also: "In the
enterprise . . ." (100 S.

are distinct .

absence of any proof of discrete business

Ct. at

1232, 1233). See also Walter Hellerstein "Dividing the State Corporate
Income

Tax Base," at n. 614.

98. This is not to

proper.
Based on the reasoning of note 914 above, I have elsewhere characterized the
say that I think the outcome in Mobil was

27.

decision in Mobil as a "travesty." See also

McLure, "Uniformity in

Interstate Taxation."
99. 100 S. Ct. at 12141, ri.

10.

100. 102 S. Ct. at 3135.

101. Ibid., p. 3136.
102. Ibid., p. 3139.
103. Ibid., p. 31140.

1014. 102 S. Ct. at 3111—3112. Although ASARCO owned a majority of
Southern Peru, It elected only six of thirteen directors.

The other owners

elected six directors, and the thirteenth was elected by the first twelve.

Eight votes were required to pass any resolution. Miller notes in
"Worldwide Unitary Combination" that in a California case ASARCO was held

not to control Southern Peru. As a result, there was no unitary bisiness
and the two firms could not be made to file a combined report.
105. Ibid., p. 3113.
106. Ibid., p. 31114,

quoting

the state's brief.

107. Ibid.

108. Ibid., pp. 3117—3119.
109. Ibid., pp. 3120—3121.

110. Ibid., p. 3121. O'Connor emphasized the veto power ASARCO held
in the case of Southern Peru, the potential to elect a director where it
had never done so, and the fact that ASARCO remained the largest
shareholder in the Mexican subsidiary.
111. For more on this issue, see Jerome

Hellerstein, "State Taxation

Under the Commerce Clause," and Walter Hellerstein, "Dividing the State

Corporate Income Tax Base." I should note that I do not think that states
should tax intercorporate dividends. See also McLure, "Uniformity in

28.

Interstate Taxation."
112. 14117

U.S. at 223; 100 S. Ct. at 2120 (quoting

Mobil Oil

Corp.

Commissioner of Taxes, 100 S. Ct. at 1232).
113. 102 S. Ct. at 3115 n. 22.
1114. Walter Hellerstein, "Dividing the State Corporate Income Tax
Base."
115. Ibid.

v.

