NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN LABOR HAS A VOICE IN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Olubunmi Faleye
Vikas Mehrotra
Randall Morck
Working Paper 11254
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11254
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005

We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Andrei Shleifer, and from participants in the University
of Alberta Finance Seminar; and to John Poole for providing initial seed money for this project, and the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council and University of Alberta for additional funding. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Olubunmi Faleye, Vikas Mehrotra, and Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

When Labor Has a Voice in Corporate Governance
Olubunmi Faleye, Vikas Mehrotra, and Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 11254
March 2005
JEL No. G3, J0
ABSTRACT
Equity ownership gives labor both a fractional stake in the firm's residual cash flows and a voice in
corporate governance. Relative to other firms, labor-controlled publicly-traded firms deviate more
from value maximization, invest less in long-term assets, take fewer risks, grow more slowly, create
fewer new jobs, and exhibit lower labor and total factor productivity. We therefore propose that labor
uses its corporate governance voice to maximize the combined value of its contractual and residual
claims, and that this often pushes corporate policies away from, rather than towards, shareholder
value maximization.
Olubunmi Faleye
Northeastern University
o.faleye@neu.edu
Vikas Mehrotra
University of Alberta
vmehrotr@ualberta.ca
Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca

When Labor Has a Voice in Corporate Governance
I.

Introduction
On July 12, 1994, as shareholders approved the recapitalization that rendered United the

largest majority employee-owned company in the world, UAL stock closed at $99.25. On
December 9, 2002, UAL became a penny stock as, unable to sustain the industry’s highest labor
costs, it filed for bankruptcy protection. Other airlines vehemently opposed aid to UAL, arguing
that it had brought on a crisis in the industry by relentlessly driving labor costs up. Robert Roach,
Jr., the General Vice President for Transportation at the International Association of Machinists
and Aerospace Workers, United'
s largest union, responded, "Everybody is shocked and
concerned that the federal government would not be there for American workers as they are for
rebuilding Afghanistan.”1 Sam Buttrick, an airline analyst at PaineWebber summarized that “At
the root of the problem is the simple fact that labor has excessive structural leverage”.2
Employee-owned equity blocks are surprisingly commonplace in the United States.
According to the National Center for Employee Ownership, as of 2002, employees owned
several hundred billion dollars worth of their employers’ stock. This includes 11,000 Employee
Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs), stock bonus plans, and profit sharing plans through which 8.8
million workers have over $400 billion primarily invested in their employers’ stocks – an
average investment of about $45,000 per employee. In addition, some 11 million employees hold
over $160 billion of their employers’ stocks through some 2,200 401(k) plans – about $14,000
per employee. In the past decade, the biggest growth in employee stock ownership has been
1

Quoted in “Unions Vow to Press Fight for Aid Reconsideration”, by Matt Richtel and Steven Greenhouse, New
York Times, December 5, 2002.

through broad based stock option plans and employee stock purchase plans. Some ten to 25
million employees own several hundred million dollars worth of their employers’ stock through
some 8,000 of these plans.
These figures translate into a significant tier of employee-owned stock in many large,
publicly traded companies. Although employee ownership of public companies through ESOPs
and 401(k) plans seldom exceeds ten percent, and that through broad based option and purchase
plans seldom exceeds 30%, these stakes are nonetheless substantial enough blocks to matter at
shareholder meetings. Since most ESOPs pass voting rights through to employees, and 401(k)
plans, broad based stock option plans, and stock purchase plans usually give employees full
voting rights, these stakes give employees a substantial voice in the corporate governance of
many large publicly traded US firms.
Proponents of employee equity ownership hold that these developments are desirable.
Vanek (1965), Drucker (1978), and Aoki (1984) argue that employee equity ownership leads to a
convergence of employees’ interests with those of shareholders, empowers employees, and
lengthens workers’ time horizons. They propose that these effects lead to better overall corporate
performance. Another argument in favor of employee stock ownership is that labor markets, like
capital markets, are imperfect; and that these imperfections might induce managers to make
suboptimal decisions. Giving labor a role in corporate governance might mitigate labor market
imperfections and improve overall economic welfare. Garvey and Swan (1994), echoing a
similar argument, contend that labor ownership may motivate enhanced efficiency given costly
and imperfect contracting. Their main premise is that employees, as well as shareholders, are

2

The September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington devastated the US airline industry.
However most airlines analysts recognize that they accelerated an already looming industry financial crisis. See
“Righting United Airlines: Nine Flight Plans”, by Julie Edelson Halpert, New York Times, September 10, 2000.

residual claimants under incomplete contracting, so vesting some control with labor is ex-ante
efficient.
In contrast, Jensen and Meckling (1979) argue that employee equity blockholdings have a
dark side – they create an entrenched workforce with corporate governance power. Entrenched
labor, like entrenched management, can destroy value as it strives to maximize its utility.
Moreover, like entrenched management, entrenched labor cannot be got rid of easily.
Our objective is to test empirically these competing hypotheses regarding the effects of
labor ownership and control. We compare several dimensions of corporate decision-making by
firms with labor equity ownership and other firms, controlling for exogenous firm characteristics.
We find that publicly-traded firms whose employees have a greater voice in corporate
governance deviate more from value maximization, spend less on new capital, take fewer risks,
grow more slowly, create fewer new jobs, and exhibit lower labor and total factor productivity.
These results are highly robust.
We interpret our findings as evidence that extending residual claims to the generality of
employees is often not an efficient way to align shareholder and labor interests. Employees, like
creditors, primarily hold a fixed claim on the firm’s cash flow, in the form of wages and salaries.
If labor as a fixed claimant acquires equity ownership, it obtains a residual claim and a voice in
corporate governance in addition to its fixed claims. Our evidence is consistent with labor using
its corporate governance voice to maximize the total value of its two claims – the fixed,
primarily salary-based, claim and the residual equity-based claim.
The corporate strategies that lead to shareholder value maximization and those that
maximize the combined value of employees’ residual claim and expected future wages and
benefits can differ markedly. This is especially so since workers’ equity claims are usually small

compared to the largely fixed claims associated with their wages and benefits. Yet, in a widely
held firm, labor’s stake may give it a major voice in corporate governance. We propose that this
imbalance often allows labor to use its governance voice to push corporate policies away from,
rather than towards, shareholder value maximization.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we discuss the
behavior of labor as a corporate stakeholder and present an overview of the relevant literature.
We describe our sample selection procedure in Section III, and report our empirical results in
Section IV. Section V contains a brief summary and concluding remarks.

II.

Labor as a Corporate Stakeholder
Labor’s contractual stream of wages is similar to risky debt, in that it consists of a fixed

claim on the firm (current and retired labor’s stream of promised wages and benefits) less a put
option (whose exercise price is the expected value of labor’s claim in bankruptcy). That is, as
long as the firm’s value exceeds the value of labor’s claim in bankruptcy, the value of labor’s
wages is invariant to firm value. For firm value less than labor’s claim under bankruptcy, labor’s
wage claim is reduced a dollar for every dollar reduction in firm value below this threshold.
Figure 1 illustrates.

Here we generalize the term “bankruptcy” to include any corporate

reorganization that reduces or eliminates wages – even if not implemented under formal
bankruptcy procedures. Fama and Jensen (1983) argue that governance power should be vested
in those who receive a firm’s residual claim, and point out that American law reflects this
premise. If the put option of bankruptcy is unlikely, employees are usually contractual claimants,
receiving a fixed wage, and need no voice in corporate governance. Consequently, American
courts hold that corporations be run in their shareholders’ interests, with management choosing

policy variables to maximize shareholder value. Employees’ and other creditors’ governance
rights only come into play in the event of bankruptcy, when their contractual claims expire and
they become residual claimants.
A hypothetical alternative legal regime would give complete corporate governance power
to current labor.3 Labor would choose policy variables to maximize the value of its fixed
contractual claims less that of the put option. Given that employees’ careers with their firms are
finite, we suppose labor has a horizon limitation, beyond which it employs an infinite discount
rate. Under these assumptions, labor’s objective is equivalent to minimizing the value of the put
option. Applying standard results in option pricing theory to a comparison of the two regimes
lets us predict how corporate governance in our hypothetical labor-controlled firm might differ
from corporate governance in shareholder-controlled firms.
First, all else equal, the option value (which labor seeks to minimize) is lower if cash
flows within labor’s time horizon are larger. However, what happens to cash flows in periods
subsequent to labor’s horizon does not affect the option’s value. In contrast, the value of a
shareholder-controlled firm is larger whenever sacrificing near-term cash flows raises future cash
flows sufficiently over any time horizon. Consequently, our hypothetical labor-governed firm
would avoid some long-term investments that a shareholder-controlled firm would undertake.
Arguably, debt contracts extending beyond current labor’s tenure might alleviate this underinvestment.

However, this cannot be a complete solution, for external creditors’ claims are

subordinate to current labor’s claim if debt payments are scheduled beyond current labor’s
employment tenure.

3

German corporate governance law goes far in this direction, for its codetermination rules grant half the seats on
corporate supervisory boards to employee representatives.

Second, all else being equal, the option value is lower if the variation in operating cash
flow is smaller during current labor’s horizon. Thus, labor generally finds projects with volatile
cash flows undesirable, regardless of their net present values. This implies that our hypothetical
labor-controlled firm should avoid risks that a shareholder-controlled firm would accept.
Third, these differences should slow the growth rates of our hypothetical labor-controlled
firms relative to those of shareholder-controlled firms. Possibly, as an unintended benefit, labor
ownership might eliminate the over-investment free cash flow problem identified by Jensen
(1986). However, labor-managed firms need not follow the NPV rule at all, since labor would
rank projects with sufficient cash flows and low risk ahead of potentially higher NPV projects.
This suggests that labor-controlled firms might have lower shareholder values, as measured by
average Tobin’s q ratios, than otherwise similar shareholder-controlled firms.
Finally, it makes sense to envision worker effort as a corporate governance variable in a
worker-controlled firm. Shareholder-controlled firms use a variety of incentive systems to
encourage workers to work harder. These tools are also at the disposal of our hypothetical
worker-managed firm. All else equal, however, labor is only concerned with generating enough
cash flow to cover its wages. Any further increase in operating cash flow is unimportant to labor.
These considerations suggest that labor-controlled firms might invest less than would
shareholder-controlled firms in marginally increased productivity if current cash flows exceed a
certain level. In addition, labor may use its governance voice to alter its labor-leisure tradeoff to
permit greater leisure. Thus, we would expect lower productivity levels in such firms.

II.A

Labor Control Associated with Equity Ownership by Labor
In the United States, labor does not gain corporate control rights without acquiring an

equity stake. However, if other shareholders’ stakes are small, as is often the case in large US
firms, equity ownership might give labor a corporate governance voice out of proportion to its
equity block holding. Morck et al. (1988) argue that holding a five percent block of stock lets top
managers dominate corporate governance. Other authors argue for a higher threshold of control,
though there is broad agreement that a stake well below 50% can confer de facto complete
control on the blockholder.
These considerations suggest that labor equity ownership might lead to labor gaining a
controlling voice in corporate governance for a small share of the firm’s residual cash flows. In
such cases, labor’s desire to protect its human capital and its fixed wage and benefit contract
within a finite horizon has a real effect on corporate policy. Specifically, labor control, obtained
with only a small labor ownership stake, might lead to reduced long-term investment, risk
avoidance, slower growth, less concern with share value maximization, and/or reduced
productivity.

II.B

Previous Work
Previous work searches for productivity and incentive effects of labor equity ownership.

One approach consists of examining abnormal returns around labor’s acquisition of equity blocks
through ESOPs. An ESOP is a tax-qualified defined contribution retirement plan established
under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of 1974 that invests most of its
assets in the employer’s stock. Thus, the creation of an ESOP can result in employees acquiring a
significant block of shares. Consequently, an examination of ESOP announcement returns could

provide an insight into the effect of labor ownership. However, results of ESOP announcement
studies have been inconclusive. For instance, while Chang (1990) finds positive abnormal
returns, Gordon and Pound (1990) report an insignificant average announcement period return.
ESOPs enjoyed special tax privileges and are subject to provisions not applicable to other
ownership plans. This can create problems in interpreting empirical findings and may be partially
responsible for the inconclusive results. For example, does a positive abnormal return upon an
ESOP announcement reflect expectations of changed labor productivity or expectations of tax
breaks? Scholes and Wolfson (1990), Chaplinsky and Niehaus (1990), and others argue that the
tax effects of ESOPs are limited and not necessarily bigger than those provided by other
employee compensation plans. However, Beatty (1995) reports that ESOP announcement
abnormal return is significantly positively related to estimated tax benefits.
Further interpretation problems arise because ESOPs often arise in connection with
corporate takeover defenses. Gordon and Pound (1990) argue that the management of a potential
takeover target can create an ESOP to modify the firm’s ownership structure in its favor by
placing a block of shares in friendly hands. Thus, ESOPs could be used as a managerial
entrenchment tool. However, as Stulz (1988) argues with respect to anti-takeover activities in
general, management might also use the ESOP as leverage to gain better terms for shareholders
in a takeover contest. For these reasons, it is difficult to understand the complete effects of
employee ownership by analyzing ESOP announcement abnormal returns.
Another approach is to estimate the effect of employee ownership on labor productivity
and accounting measures of corporate performance. Again, results have not been conclusive.
Bloom (1986) utilizes a series of augmented Cobb-Douglas production functions to evaluate the
effects of employee ownership on productivity at the firm level. He estimates the functions

cross-sectionally and longitudinally for a large sample of manufacturing and non-manufacturing
firms. He concludes that employee ownership has little or no impact on corporate performance.
In contrast, Beatty (1995) performs a similar analysis and reports that ESOPs increase sales per
employee in the first two post ESOP-adoption years if the ESOP replaces no other retirement
benefit plan. Park and Song (1995) report significant improvements in performance (as measured
by return on assets, Tobin’s q, and market-to-book ratio) in the three years following plan
establishment. However, such improvements are contingent on the presence of an external
blockholder. Lougee (1999) investigates the long-term effects of ESOP adoption. She concludes
that her tests provide no evidence that ESOPs improve firm performance.
A potential problem with studies that focus on the immediate post-ESOP years is that
they may capture the residual effects of financial circumstances associated with takeover threats
or defenses. This matters since ESOPs are sometimes created as takeover defenses or liquidity
enhancements programs in the presence of financial difficulties. In addition, given the stock
allocation rules followed by most ownership plans, it apparently takes time for corporate policies
and results to reflect the effects of employee influence on management.
We address these difficulties in two ways. First, we consider all labor-owned equity
blocks, not just those associated with ESOPs. Since much labor ownership in US publicly traded
firms does not arise out of ESOPs, this provides us with a substantially larger sample and affords
us the opportunity to examine possible differences arising from the mode of labor ownership.
Second, to avoid temporary or unusual financial circumstances associated with the events
leading up to an ESOP, we require that blocks of labor ownership be in place for several years
before we admit a firm to our sample of labor-controlled firms. By not including the immediately

ensuing years, we examine firms more likely to be subject to labor’s governance influences. We
thus focus on long-term steady state implications of labor equity ownership.
Another concern with focusing on labor ownership is that control does not automatically
follow ownership. Chang and Mayers (1992) discuss how de jure labor equity blocks can
become de facto management ownership. Indeed, corporate management, not labor or its
representatives, explicitly votes many labor equity blocks. Including such blocks is appropriate
in other contexts, but not in this study. This is because control over voting shares translates into
corporate governance influence, and hence into the strength with which labor’s objectives
become manifested in corporate policy.
Labor-voted equity stakes clearly give labor a voice in corporate governance decisions.
McElrath and Rowan (1992) find that unions view employee ownership as a way of influencing
strategic decision making and restricting management’s largely “unchecked independence”.
Anecdotal evidence concurs. For example, Northwestern Steel & Wire Co. places at least one
ESOP representative on its board if its ESOP owns a minimum 5% of the outstanding shares.
Similarly, labor nominates four of Weirton Steel’s fourteen directors; and three of UAL’s twelve
directors represent employees. McKersie (1999) reports that most corporate boards make major
decisions by consensus, and that this often gives labor-nominated directors significant leverage.
He quotes one labor-nominated director: “If you work within the system, you can either get a lot
accomplished or get some projects struck down, even though your opinion may at first be in the
minority.” McKersie quotes another labor-nominated director’s experience with consensus: “On
what I thought was a fairly minor issue, but one that I felt strongly about, I cast the only
opposing vote on the board. It caused a great deal of problems; the other directors could not
understand how I could be opposed after hearing their point of view. Because there is a tendency

to move only on unanimity, it gives (labor-nominated) directors much more influence than I ever
expected we had.”
In other cases, employees influence corporate policies directly, i.e., without necessarily
having board representation. For example, the labor union at Marriott International, working
with other investors, won a 1998 proxy contest to prevent Marriott’s proposed dual-class
recapitalization. The company had intended the dual-class structure as an integral part of its plan
to split its food service and hotel businesses. Similarly, UAL aborted its acquisition of USAir in
1995 because of employee opposition. Voting power clearly enhances employees’ ability to
influence corporate decisions. We are therefore interested in firms where labor votes its stock,
but not in firms where managers vote labor’s shares.

III.

Empirical Framework

III.A Sample Construction
We begin with the 3,823 definitive proxy statements filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission in 1995. We then exclude filings by mutual funds, real estate investment
trusts, limited partnerships, subsidiaries, and firms with incomplete data in COMPUSTAT. This
yields an initial universe of 2,165 proxy statements. We read each of these filings to determine
the proportion of voting shares owned by employees of each firm.
We identify 277 firms where employees own at least five percent of outstanding shares as
reported in the beneficial ownership section of the proxy statement. In 22 of these firms,
management exercises the right to vote employee-owned shares. For example, corporate
executive officers, serving as ESOP trustees, vote a twenty percent ESOP block in Security
National Financial. Similarly, five company officers exercise voting control over the 17.95%

block of Central Steel & Wire’s profit sharing plan. Since we are interested in labor’s corporate
control voice, not simply de jure labor ownership, we drop these 22 firms, reducing the sample
to 2,143. Of these, employees control at least five percent of voting shares in 255 firms. We
classify these as subject to some degree of labor voice in corporate governance.4
We then checked earlier proxy statements for each of the 255 labor voice firms to
determine the year labor ownership passed the 5% threshold. We denote this as the event year for
the firm. We exclude 29 firms with event years later than 1990. This is because we wish to
examine the steady state effects of employee voice in corporate control, and employee stock
ownership can sometimes result from corporate restructuring under financial distress. By
requiring at least five years of labor influence prior to the empirical window we examine, we
hope to mitigate the effects of any temporary financial problems that might have been associated
with labor accumulating stock.5
Thus, our final labor voice sample consists of 226 firms. Of these, 110 are firms in which
labor acquired its stake through an ESOP. In 75 firms, labor acquired its stake through nonESOP means: profit sharing, stock bonuses, stock savings, stock purchases, or combinations of
these and other retirement benefit plans. Labor acquired its equity stake through a combination
of ESOPs and other channels in the remaining 41 firms. Table 1 summarizes the distribution of
labor ownership among the labor voice firms. Mean and median labor ownership are 13.16% and
10.60%, respectively. The minimum stake controlled by labor is five percent, while the
maximum is 68.20%. By way of comparison, mean and median non-affiliated block equity

4

For e.g., Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988) find that entrenchment effects begin to dominate at 5% management
ownership. Also note that the SEC uses a five percent threshold for Schedule 13D filings under the Williams Act
incorporated in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
5
Admittedly, this approach may introduce some survivorship bias into our analysis, since labor voice firms must
survive at least five years after the event year to be part of our sample. However, this should bias results in favor of
the labor voice firms.

holdings among the labor voice firms are 8.79% and 6.00%, respectively, while mean and
median managerial ownership for these firms are 13.60% and 6.83%, respectively. Thus, labor is
the largest blockholder in the typical labor voice firm.
Our control sample consists of the 1,888 firms reporting no labor equity ownership or
ownerships lower than five percent in their proxy statements. We regard these firms as largely
free from labor influences in corporate governance.
III.B Variable Definitions
Our basic strategy is to run regressions explaining corporate performance and strategy
variables with measures of labor voice and a set of control variables. This section first describes
our labor voice measures, and then describes the variables employed in our financial
performance regressions. Finally, we describe variables in the other regressions we also run.
Labor Voice Measures
We measure labor voice in several ways. One set of approach uses indicator variables set
to one if labor votes more than a certain fraction of the shares at the company’s annual general
meeting. We use five, ten, fifteen, and twenty percent thresholds. A second approach uses the
fraction of labor-voted shares as a continuous variable. We also experiment with more
complicated specifications, including quadratic and piecewise linear terms. These add no
significant explanatory power. The relationship between labor voice and our various dependent
variables is always monotonic.
Financial Performance Regressions
Our primary goal is to understand how a labor voice affects corporate governance. A
major aspect of corporate governance is the creation of wealth for shareholders, which we
measure by Tobin’s average q approximated as the market value of common equity plus book

values of preferred equity and long-term debt divided by the book value of assets less short-term
debt. Although it is possible to construct more sophisticated versions of Tobin’s q, Chung and
Pruitt (1994) show that this relatively simple version performs quite as well as more complicated
ones. Besides, more sophisticated measures require additional data, which reduces sample size
and creates another set of econometric problems. Recent studies that employ the simple measure
of Tobin’s q include Callahan et al (2003) and Hartzell and Starks (2003).
We do not include regressions explaining profitability measures such as return on asset
(ROA) or profit margins (ROS) as alternate specifications. This is because these variables
measure short-term performance. Although short-term performance might be depressed by some
governance problems, it might also be elevated by other effects. For example, profits might be
elevated if risk averse labor voice firms sacrificed long-term performance to build up a cash
cushion. In a sufficiently efficient stock market, market-to-book ratios incorporate such tradeoffs and accurately reflect net gains in present value terms. Of course, market irrationality,
among other things, can distort market-to-book ratios. When we rerun the regressions in our
tables with ROA or ROS as the dependent variable, our labor voice measures are insignificant.
We recognize that labor voice is only one of many variables that may affect a firm’s
ability to create wealth. To estimate the marginal effect of labor influence, we must control for
other governance and non-governance factors related to Tobin’s q. These include board size
(Yermack, 1996), board composition (Rosenstein and Wyatt, 1990), leadership structure
(Rechner and Dalton, 1991), managerial equity ownership (Morck et al, 1988),6 block ownership
(Bethel et al., 1998), the availability of investment opportunities (Yermack, 1996), and current

6

Following Morck et al. (1988), the empirical corporate finance literature typically uses breakpoints to control for
managerial ownership. We employ the same breakpoints as in Morck et al. (1988), i.e., ownership levels of less than
5%, between 5% and 25%, and greater than 25%. Our results are invariant to other breakpoints, as well as to a single
continuous measure of managerial ownership.

profitability (Yermack, 1996). We hand-collect governance data (board size, board composition,
leadership structure, managerial equity ownership, and block ownership) from 1995 proxy
statements and use the ratio of capital expenditures to total assets as a proxy for the availability
of investment opportunities. Our measure of current profitability is return on assets, defined as
the ratio of operating income to total assets at the beginning of the year. We obtain data on
capital expenditures, operating income, and total assets from COMPUSTAT.
In addition, we control for debt because leverage may alter a firm’s contracting
environment and significantly enhance or hinder its ability to create shareholder wealth. We
measure leverage as the ratio of long-term debt to total assets using data from COMPUSTAT.
We also control for whether managers’ compensation is tilted toward equity or debt-like, fixed
payoffs because equity compensation may affect managerial incentives. Our measure of the
structure of managerial compensation is the ratio of the CEO’s option compensation to total
compensation, which we compute using data from Execucomp. Finally, we employ two-digit
SIC code dummies to control for industry effects, and use the logarithm of total assets (in 1994
dollars) to control for firm size.
As indicated earlier, we wish to focus on long-run steady state effects. We thus compare
our labor voice firms to control firms over the seven-year period 1995 to 2001. However, it is
possible that labor ownership resulted from past financial problems. For example, labor
ownership can result from a bailout of the company using pension fund money to set up an
ESOP, as at Morrison Knudsen Corp in September 1988. Labor ownership may also arise as a
concession to unions in return for taking pay cuts, as at United Airlines. Establishing a laborowned equity block can also serve as a defensive move against an actual or feared hostile
takeover, as in the well-known Polaroid case. Since Morck et al (1989) and others show that

hostile takeovers in this period were often preceded by poor financial performance, a spurious
correlation problem is again possible, i.e., past performance can result in labor control, as well as
affect the dependent variable. In Section III.A, we required labor voted equity blocks to have
been in place for at least five years before admitting firms to our labor voice sample to
circumvent this problem. Nevertheless, we consider a number of variables to control for possible
remaining aftereffects of past financial circumstances.
The first of these is average ROA calculated for each firm over 1985 to 1989. Including
this variable should thus capture echoes of any financial problems that triggered the formation of
the labor equity block. As a robustness check, we also use average historical Tobin’s q ratio,
calculated also over 1985 to 1989. Our results are not sensitive to the measure of past financial
performance. As a further robustness check, we rerun all our regressions including first ROA
estimated from 1990 through 1994 and then Tobin’s q averaged over the same period.

The

results again remain virtually unchanged.
Other Regressions
In addition to the shareholder value tests, we also compare several other dimensions of
corporate decision making for the labor voice and control firms. These dimensions are long-term
investment, operating risk, growth, and labor and total factor productivity. We discuss our
measures for these variables below.
We consider two sorts of long-term investment as alternate dependent variables. The first,
an investment rate, is denoted dK/K, and is capital expenditure on new property, plant and
equipment, normalized by total net property, plant, and equipment. The second is research and
development spending, also normalized by net property, plant, and equipment and denoted

R&D/K. Where all other main financial variables (sales, assets, and net income) are reported, but
R&D is not, we presume it to be negligible and set it to zero.
Our measure of operating risk is the standard deviation of return on assets. For each year
t, we calculate the standard deviation of return on assets over the current year and the three
preceding years, i.e., years t, t-1, t-2, and t-3. We define return on assets as the ratio of operating
income before depreciation, interest, and taxes to total assets at the beginning of the year.
We define two measures of corporate growth, namely, sales growth and labor force
growth. Sales growth is the three-year average growth rate of real sales calculated as

∆Salest =

α t Salest − α t −3 Salest −3
3 *α t −3 Salest −3

[1]

for each year t, where α is the GDP deflator. Labor force growth rate is constructed analogously,
but without the GDP deflator.
To estimate total factor productivity (TFP), we assume that each firm’s sales are
generated by a Cobb-Douglas production function of the form
Yit = ALβit K itα

[2]

where Yit is net sales for firm i in period t, Lit is the number of employees, Kit is net property,
plant, and equipment, and A,α, and β are parameters. Unlike Bloom (1986) and Beatty (1995),
we do not assume a labor ownership augmentation parameter. Rather, we employ residuals from
our estimation of the logarithmic transformation of [2] as a measure of firm-level TFP, and look
for any effect associated with labor voice in these residuals. We control for industry factors by
estimating a separate equation for each two-digit SIC industry group.
We compare labor productivity as well as total factor productivity. We measure labor
productivity by the simple ratio of real sales to the number of employees.

III.C Statistical Tests and Robustness Checks
We begin our analysis by contrasting the means and medians of the dependent variables
defined in the previous section for labor voice and control firms. We recognize that these variables
are often not entirely within management’s control, and so univariate results may sometimes be
misleading as indicators of managers’ intentions, or corporate policies. We therefore follow
simple comparisons of these variables across the two samples with multiple regression analysis.
This allows us to control for exogenous factors that may affect each aspect of corporate decisionmaking.

IV.

Empirical Results

IV.A Shareholder Value
Panel A of Table 2 shows that average and median Tobin’s q for labor voice firms during
1995-2001 are 1.019 and 0.875, respectively. These are significantly lower, at the 1% level or
better, than the corresponding figures for other firms, 1.433 and 1.026. Similarly, although not
reported in Table 2, average and median Tobin’s q are significantly lower for labor voice firms
in each of the seven years, with p-values of 0.05 or less. These results provide preliminary
evidence of significantly less effective shareholder wealth maximization in firms whose
corporate governance is influenced by a labor voice.
Table 3 presents regressions of Tobin’s q on labor voice and the governance and other
controls described in Section III.B. The first column controls for prior financial circumstances
using historical Tobin’s q, and uses a continuous measure of labor voice, the percentage of
shares voted by employees. Its coefficient is -0.0158, which is significant at the 1% level. This

implies that the difference between no labor voice to a 10% labor voted block, the median in the
labor voice subsample, is a Tobin’s q depressed by 16% in the latter. A similar result obtains if
we measure labor control using an indicator variable equal to one if labor votes at least five
percent (column II). The coefficient of -0.2296 implies that labor voice is associated with a 23%
reduction in Tobin’s q. Columns III and IV control for prior financial circumstances using
historical return on assets. Labor voice variable remains negative and significant at the 1% level.
We also estimate cross-sectional regressions similar to those in Table 3 for each of the
seven years in our data. Labor voice is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level or
less in each year. Furthermore, we estimate regressions (not reported) for which the dependent
variable is the change in average Tobin’s q from 1985-1989 to 1995-2001. We obtain similar
results: Labor voice is significantly negatively related to the change in average Tobin’s q, with pvalues lower than 0.05.
A reasonable concern with the above results is whether a five percent equity ownership
translates into a meaningful governance voice for labor. If not, the regression results may simply
be picking up other unknown factors associated with labor ownership that depress shareholder
value. We address this concern by digging deeper into the ownership structure of each of our
sample firms to identify those cases where labor ownership is most likely to translate into a
significant corporate governance voice.
A natural starting point is to raise the minimum employee ownership level required for a
firm to be considered as subject to labor influence in corporate governance. We therefore repeat
our regressions using the subset of firms with minimum labor-controlled equity stakes of 10%,
15%, and 20%, respectively, in place of the full sample of labor voice firms. Results of these
regressions appear in Table 4. As the table shows, the labor voice dummy is negative and

significant at less than the 5% level in each case. In addition, the coefficient becomes more
negative as we increase the minimum stake, from -0.388 for 10% stakes to -0.530 for 20%
stakes. Note also that there are only 23 firms with labor-voted equity stakes of at least 20%
(column III). The significant negative coefficient for labor control in this regression suggests a
particularly strong underperformance by the labor voice firms.
Labor’s ability to influence corporate governance may depend not only on the absolute
voting stake controlled by employees, but also on the makeup of the firm’s other shareholders.
For example, a labor stake of even 20% may mean nothing if managers own 50% of the
outstanding shares. Similarly, a strong influence may not necessarily accompany labor’s equity
ownership if there are other significant outside blockholders. For these reasons, Table 5 repeats
our analysis using only the subsets of labor voice firms where labor owns 10%, 15%, and 20% of
the shares and this stake is the single largest block in the company’s ownership structure. We
believe labor’s ability to influence corporate policies is probably greatest in these cases. Again,
the labor voice variable is negative and statistically significant in each regression. Overall, our
results are inconsistent with labor voting power entailing a convergence of interest between
outside shareholders and employees. Rather, there is strong indication of a considerable
reduction in corporate value creation as measured by Tobin’s q ratio.

IV.B Long-term Investment
Panel A of Table 2 presents univariate statistics for capital investment rates and research
and development spending for our labor voice and control firms. As the table reveals, both
measures of long-term investment are significantly lower in labor voice firms. The average
capital investment rate of labor voice firms is 8.4% compared to 13.3% for other firms.

Similarly, R&D expenditure for labor voice firms average 1.3% of total assets, compared to
3.1% for control firms. In each instance, the difference is significant at the 1% level. Similar
results hold with respect to medians.7
These univariate results suggest that labor’s voice might deter long-term investment.
Again, prior poor performance in labor voice firms might affect these results. We therefore
control for historical financial performance. We also include controls for firm size and several
dimensions of corporate governance as well as the firm’s investment opportunity set. In addition,
each regression includes two-digit SIC code dummies to control for unobservable industry
factors.
Column I of Table 6 presents summary results from regressions for capital investment
rate. The first row measures labor influence using the percentage of votes controlled by labor,
while rows two through four use five percent, ten percent, and fifteen percent threshold
dummies, respectively, to distinguish labor voice firms. Consistent with the univariate results,
Table 6 reveals a negative significant relationship between labor voice and capital spending. The
estimated coefficients imply that, after controlling for past financial circumstances and other
factors, a ten percentage point increase in labor-controlled equity reduces capital spending by
about two percent, while a labor voice in corporate governance (as measured by the five percent
ownership dummy) is associated with a 2.59% reduction in long-term investment. Since the
mean and median of capital spending are about twelve and seven percent, respectively, of net
property, plant and equipment, these are economically significant effects.8

7

We also compute industry-adjusted R&D expenditures based on 2-digit SICs, and find similar results, i.e., labor
voice firms invest significantly less in R&D than do control firms.
8
Only 25 firms with labor stakes higher than 20% have sufficient data for similar regressions. For this group, the
labor voice dummy is not significant, although it is negative.

The second and third columns of Table 6 present results of regressions for research and
development expenditure. Since we do not have real economic depreciation data for R&D
investments, our dependent variable is left censored. We thus employ Tobit, rather than OLS,
regressions. As column II shows, the labor voice variable is not significant in each regression
estimated over the full sample. However, when we restrict the sample to firms that actually
invest in R&D during the period, the labor voice variable (as measured by the percentage of
labor-controlled equity, as well as the five- and ten-percent ownership dummies) is negative and
statistically significant at the 5% level, as reported in the third column of Table 6. Recall that
more than half of our sample firms report no R&D expenditure during the entire seven-year
empirical window of our study. These results suggest that labor voice firms that invest in R&D
invest less than otherwise similar control firms.
As robustness checks, we rerun all of the above procedures using alternative long-term
investment measures normalized by total assets and total sales. Using these variants does not
change our qualitatively conclusions. Further, if we partition the sample into ESOP firms and
firms with other types of labor ownership, we find no significant differences in the effect of labor
voice, i.e., labor voice firms tend to reduce long-term investment, irrespective of the means
through which labor acquired ownership.
These results are hard to reconcile with the hypothesis that labor equity ownership causes
workers to advocate shareholders’ interests. McConell and Muscarella (1985) show that stock
prices rise when firms announce increases to their capital budgets. Chan et al. (1990) show that
similar positive abnormal returns accompany announcements that firms are increasing their R&D
budgets. Likewise, Eberhart et al. (2004) report significantly positive long-term abnormal
operating performance following R&D increases. These studies and others suggest shareholders

believe most firms underinvest in long-term projects. The depressed shareholder value associated
with labor voice in section IV.A undermines any argument that labor voice firms might be
curtailing value-destroying excess capital spending and R&D.

IV.C Operating Risk
Panel A of Table 2 presents univariate comparisons of operating risk for labor voice and
other firms. Mean and median operating risk for labor voice firms are 3.5% and 2.9%,
respectively. These are significantly lower at 1% level or better than the comparable figures for
other firms, 5.5% and 3.9%, respectively. Results are similar when we measure operating risk
using the standard deviation of operating income scaled by sales.
Column IV of Table 6 presents summary results from regressions for operating risk
analogous to those in the preceding columns for long-term investment and R&D expenditure. In
the first row, labor voice is labor’s percentage voting power. Its coefficient is negative and
significant at the 1% level. In the second through the fourth rows, labor voice is a dummy
variable for 5%, 10%, and 15% labor equity ownership, respectively. In each case, the
coefficient is negative and significant at the 10% level or better.
As a robustness check, we substitute the standard deviation of return on sales, estimated
over the same period, as the measure of operating risk. Qualitatively similar results ensue. Next,
we partition the sample into ESOP firms and firms with other types of labor ownership. We find
some differences in the effect of labor voice based on the sample partition. The labor voice
variable is negative and significant for ESOP firms. On the other hand, it is never significant in
the regressions for firms with other types of labor ownership, although it is also always negative.

Thus, it appears that the operating risk results are driven by ESOP firms, which represent 49% of
our sample of labor voice firms.
Table 6 indicates that a labor voice in corporate governance is associated with a
significant reduction in corporate risk taking. This is consistent with risk-averse employees
biasing their firms’ investment and other decisions to reduce risk. It also provides further
evidence that labor influence in corporate governance need not promote a convergence of
interest between employees and public shareholders. Overall, the evidence on operating risk is
consistent with labor voice firms curtailing risky investments.

IV.D Corporate Growth
Panel A in Table 2 displays univariate statistics for real sales and labor force growth
rates. Over the seven-year comparison period, labor voice firms achieved average and median
sales growth rates of 8.6% and 5.7%, respectively; significantly below comparable figures for
other firms of 13.8% and 8.7% at 1% level or better. Perhaps more importantly, labor voice firms
create only about half as many net new jobs as other firms. Note that to maintain or increase
individual labor’s wages while simultaneously increasing total labor force would require
profitability and/or efficiency improvements. We have argued and presented evidence against
both elsewhere in the paper. Put differently, our evidence suggests that labor dislikes a dilution
of its claims to corporate revenues (including quasi-rents in the form of excess wages or
benefits), just as equity holders dislike a dilution of their claims with new issues.
Columns V and VI of Table 6 regress real sales and labor force growth rates on labor
voice and our standard controls, including historical profitability to control for past financial
circumstances and 2-digit SIC code dummies for industry factors. The first row uses a continuous

labor voice stake, while the second through the fourth rows use labor control thresholds of 5%,
10%, and 15%, respectively.
The coefficients of the labor voice dummy in columns V and VI of Table 6 are negative
and significant for all regressions. The parameter estimates suggest that, after controlling for
other aspects of a firm’s corporate governance and financial circumstances, real sales growth is
lower for labor voice firms by 3% to 5%, while employment growth is lower by 3% to 4.5%.
When labor voice is measured with a continuous variable, the coefficients are -0.22% for sales
growth and -0.19% for staff growth, indicating that a ten-percentage point increase in laborcontrolled votes reduces real sales growth by 2.2% and employment growth by 1.9%. These
results do not depend on the mode of labor ownership. Separating ESOP firms from other firms
with labor voice yields virtually identical results in each subsample.

IV.E Productivity
Univariate results for total factor productivity residuals are shown in Panel A of Table 2.
The average total factor productivity residual for labor voice firms is -0.011, significantly below
the 0.070 average for other firms at the 1% level. Similarly, median productivity residual for
labor voice firms is -0.032, compared to 0.050 for other firms. Again, the difference is significant
at the 1% level. Thus, while the actual output of a typical non-labor-controlled firm represents
105% of what we would expect based on factor inputs, labor voice firms manage to produce only
about 97% of expected output on average. This clearly suggests that labor influence in corporate
governance is associated with noticeably depressed firm-level productivity.
Column VII of Table 6 examines the robustness of this association to controls for other
aspects of firm governance and financial circumstances by regressing total factor productivity

residuals on measures of labor voice and the control variables from Section III.B. The first
regression measures labor influence using the proportion of shares voted by employees, while the
second, third, and fourth regressions use indicators variables corresponding to 5%, 10%, and
15% labor ownership, respectively.
As Table 6 reveals, labor voice is negative and significant in each regression. These
results confirm the univariate findings of a substantial depression in factor productivity at laborcontrolled firms. In particular, the coefficient of the labor voice dummy becomes more negative
at higher employee voting thresholds without losing its statistical significance, despite sharply
reduced numbers of firms satisfying the labor voice definition.
A similar conclusion follows for labor productivity. Although Table 2 shows mean and
median sales per employee to be statistically indistinguishable, column VIII of Table 6 reveals
significantly depressed labor productivity in labor voice firms. Again, the effect is more negative
at higher thresholds of employee ownership. The coefficient estimates imply that, compared to
other firms, real sales per employee is lower by about 17.84% in firms where employees control
15% or more of outstanding voting shares, while labor-voting power ten-percent higher is
associated with a real sales per employee 5.4% lower. These productivity results suggest that the
depressed employee and total factor productivities in labor voice firms are economically, as well
as statistically, significant.
We note that our results are not inconsistent with Beatty (1995), who finds depressed and
enhanced productivity associated with ESOPs depending on whether they replace existing
pension plans or not. First, ESOPs usually replace existing pension plans. Second, Beatty (1995)
studies sales per employee during the first two post-ESOP adoption years. Since troubled firms
often establish ESOPs as they restructure, a productivity rebound effect is possible – especially

in firms that are not in such serious difficulty that they must sacrifice their existing pension
plans. We exclude the first five years of employee ownership precisely to allow effects of such
contingent events to fade, and to allow time for employees to use their governance voice to affect
corporate decision-making.

V.

Conclusions
Our empirical findings reveal that a longstanding labor voice in corporate governance is

associated with significantly depressed shareholder value, sales growth, and job creation. This, in
part at least, appears to reflect a systematic avoidance of certain types of investment – capital
expenditure, R&D spending, and high-risk investments in general. It also probably reflects
depressed labor and total factor productivity in firms whose employees influence corporate
governance.
We argue that current labor rationally uses its voice to maximize the value of its equity
stake plus the present value of its expected future wages and benefits. Since the present value of
future wages and benefits is much larger relative to the present value of labor’s equity stake in
most cases, Jensen and Meckling (1979) argue that labor is primarily concerned with maintaining
current and future cash flows sufficient to prevent wage or benefits cuts. This, combined with
current labor not greatly valuing cash flows that accrue in the distant future, beyond their wage
and benefits horizons, explains a low-risk, low-investment, and low-growth strategy. Depressed
productivity may simply reflect labor using its voice to enhance its labor-leisure tradeoff to attain
greater leisure. However, it might also reflect depressed investment in innovation, which might
erode the value of current labor’s firm-specific human capital. Further work is needed to clarify
these issues.

Our findings cast a serious doubt on the simple premise that labor equity participation
causes a convergence of interests between workers and shareholders. It appears that the increased
governance role acquired by labor following an ownership stake allows employees to influence
corporate policies in ways beneficial to their narrow interests. Labor appears to use its voice in
corporate governance to inject employee horizon and firm-specific human capital concerns into
the firm’s objective function as it maximizes the combined value of its contractual and residual
claims. This often pushes corporate policies away from, rather than towards, shareholder value
maximization.

References
Aoki, Masahiko. 1984. The Cooperative Game Theory of the Firm. Oxford University Press.
Beatty, Anne, 1995, The Cash Flow and Informational Effects of Employee Stock Ownership
Plans, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 211-240.
Bethel, Jennifer, E., Julia P. Liebeskind, and Tim Opler, 1998, Block share purchases and
corporate performance, Journal of Finance 53, 605-634.
Bloom, Steven, 1986, Employee Ownership and Firm Performance, Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard
University, Boston, MA.
Callahan, William T., James A. Millar, and Craig Schulman, 2003, An analysis of the effect of
management participation in director selection on the long-term performance of the firm,
Journal of Corporate Finance 9, 169-181.
Chan, Su Han, John D. Martin, and John W. Kensinger, 1990, Corporate Research and
Development Expenditures and Share Value, Journal of Financial Economics 26, 255276
Chang, Saeyoung, 1990, Employee Stock Ownership Plans and Shareholder Wealth: An
Empirical Investigation, Financial Management 19, 48-58.
Chang, Saeyoung and David Mayers, 1992, Managerial Vote Ownership and Shareholder
Wealth: Evidence from Employee Stock Ownership Plans, Journal of Financial
Economics 32, 103-131.
Chaplinsky, Susan and Greg Niehaus, 1990, The Tax and Distributional Effects of Leveraged
ESOPs, Financial Management 19, 29-38.
Chung, Kee H., and Stephen W. Pruitt, 1994, A simple approximation of Tobin'
s q, Financial
Management 23, 70-74.
Eberhart, Allan C., William F. Maxwell, and Akhtar R. Siddique, 2004, An Examination of
Long-Term Abnormal Stock Returns and Operating Performance Following R&D
Increases, Journal of Finance 59, 623-650.
Fama, Eugene, and Michael C. Jensen, 1983, Separation of ownership and control, Journal of
Law & Economics 26, 327-349.
Garvey, Gerald T. and Peter L. Swan, 1994, The economics of corporate governance: Beyond
the Marshallian firm, Journal of Corporate Finance 1, 139-174.
Gordon, Lilli and John Pound, 1990, ESOPs and Corporate Control, Journal of Financial
Economics 27, 525-555.
Hartzell, Jay C. and Laura T. Starks, 2003, Institutional Investors and Executive Compensation,
Journal of Finance 58, 2351-2374.
Jensen, Michael, 1986. Agency Costs of Free Cash Flows, Corporate Finance and Takeovers.
American Economic Review 76, 323-329.

Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling, 1979, Rights and Production Functions: An
Application to Labor-Managed Firms and Codetermination, Journal of Business 52, 469506.
Lougee, Barbara., 1999, An Empirical Investigation of the Implications of Employee Ownership
for the Agency Problem and the Information Content of Earnings. Ph.D. Dissertation,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.
McConnell, John J. and Chris J. Muscarella, 1985, Corporate Capital Expenditure Decisions and
the Market Value of the Firm, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 399-422.
McElrath, Roger G. and Richard L. Rowan, 1992, The American Labor Movement and
Employee Ownership: Objections to and Uses of Employee Stock Ownership Plans.
Journal of Labor Research 13, 99-120.
McKersie, Robert B., 1999, Union-Nominated Directors: A New Voice in Corporate
Governance, Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1988, Managerial Ownership and Market
Valuation: An Empirical Analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 293-315.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1989, Alternative Mechanisms for
Corporate Control, American Economic Review 89, 842-852.
Park, Sangsoo and Moon H. Song, 1995, Employee Stock Ownership Plans, Firm Performance,
and Monitoring by Outside Blockholders, Financial Management 24, 52-65.
Rechner, Paula L. and Dan R. Dalton, 1991, CEO duality and organizational performance: A
longitudinal analysis, Strategic Management Journal 12, 155-160.
Rosenstein, Stuart, and Jeffrey Wyatt, 1990, Outside directors, board independence, and
shareholder wealth, Journal of Financial Economics 26, 175-192.
Scholes, Myron and Mark Wolfson, 1990, Employee Stock Ownership Plans and Corporate
Restructuring: Myths and Reality, Financial Management 19, 12-28.
Stulz, René, 1988, Managerial control of voting rights, financing policies, and the market for
corporate control, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 25-54.
Yermack, David, 1996, Higher market valuation of companies with a small board of directors,
Journal of Financial Economics 40, 185-213.

Figure 1: Shareholders’ and labor’s claim on the firm’s cash flow.
In periods when the firm’s cash flow is lower than ω (that is, the region to the left of ω in
the graph), labor receives all cash flow in the form of wages. If cash flow is greater than
ω (the region to the righ of ω), then labor receives its fixed payment (ω) while
shareholders receive the excess of cash flow over ω in the form of dividends. The figure
assumes that shareholders are the sole residual claimants in the firm.

Payoff

Shareholders’ claim

Labor’s claim

o

o

45

45

ω

Cash flow

Table 1: Distribution of labor ownership
This table presents information on the distribution of employee equity ownership among our
final sample of 226 labor voice firms. Initially, we identify 277 firms where employees own at
least five percent of outstanding shares, as reported in the beneficial ownership section of the
1995 proxy statement. We drop 22 firms because the labor stake is voted by management. We
drop an additional 29 firms because the labor stake was acquired after 1990. Thus, the final labor
voice sample consists of 226 firms. In the table below, Ownership Range is the percent of
outstanding shares controlled by employees as reported in the firm’s 1995 proxy statement.

Ownership Range

Frequency

Relative
Frequency

Cumulative
Frequency

5.00% - 9.99%

101

44.69%

44.69%

10.00% - 14.99%

65

28.76%

73.45%

15.00% - 19.99%

30

13.27%

86.72%

20.00% - 24.99%

15

6.64%

93.36%

25.00% and above

15

6.64%

100.00%

Full sample

226

100.00%

100.00%

Mean ownership
Median ownership
Minimum ownership
Maximum ownership

13.16%
10.60%
5.00%
68.20%

Table 2: Univariate comparisons of labor control and other firms
Employees at Labor Voice Firms control at least five percent of the firm’s voting shares, while
employees at Non-labor Voice Firms control less than five percent of the voting shares. Tobin’s
q is calculated as the ratio of the sum of market value of common equity, book value of preferred
equity, and book value of long-term debt to the book value of assets. For each year t, Net Capital
Investment is average net investment in property, plant, and equipment over years t, t-1, and t-2
normalized by net property, plant, and equipment. R&D Investment is the ratio of R&D
expenditure to total assets. Operating Risk is calculated as the standard deviation of annual return
on assets over years t, t-1, t-2, and t-3. Sales Growth is calculated as the three-year average
growth rate of real sales over years t, t-1, and t-2. Staff Growth is calculated in a similar manner.
Total Factor Productivity is the residual of annual industry-specific Cobb-Douglas production
functions estimated for each 2-digit SIC industry group. Sales per Employee is the natural
logarithm of the ratio of annual sales to the number of employees. Insider Ownership is the
proportion of outstanding voting shares owned by all officers and directors. Block Ownership is the
percentage of voting shares controlled by unaffiliated holders of five percent or more. Board Size is
the number of directors. Board Composition is the proportion of directors who are non-employee
directors with no business or personal relationship with the firm or any of its employee-directors.
Leadership Structure is a binary variable, which equals one when the CEO also serves as board
chairman, zero otherwise. Managerial Equity Compensation is the ratio of the value of annual
options granted the CEO to the CEO’s total annual compensation. Investment Opportunities is the
ratio of capital expenditures to total assets. Leverage is the ratio of long-term debt to total assets. Firm
Size is the natural logarithm of total assets in 1994 constant dollars. Current Profitability is return on
assets, calculated as the ratio of operating income to total assets at the beginning of the year.
Historical Profitability is average return on assets over 1985-1989. Historical Tobin’s q is
average Tobin’s q ratio over 1985-1989. All non-corporate governance variables (except
Historical Tobin’s q and Historical Profitability) are averages over 1995-2001. Corporate
governance variables are from 1995 proxy statements and/or annual reports. For each variable,
***, **, and * indicate that the value for Labor Voice Firms is significantly different from the
value for Non-labor Voice Firms at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 2 continued: Univariate comparisons of labor control and other firms

Variable

Labor voice firms
Sample Mean
Median

Non-labor voice firms
Sample Mean
Median

Panel A: Dependent variables
Tobin’s q

209

1.019***

0.875***

1,704

1.433

1.026

Net capital investment

209

0.084***

0.048***

1,658

0.133

0.078

R&D Investment

226

0.013***

0.000

1,888

0.031

0.000

Operating risk

210

0.035***

0.029***

1,705

0.055

0.039

Sales growth

211

0.086***

0.057***

1,711

0.138

0.087

Staff growth

202

0.049***

0.031***

1,632

0.098

0.054

Total factor productivity

204

-0.011***

-0.032***

1,650

0.070

0.050

Sales per employee (log)

208

5.279

5.137

1,694

5.241

5.158

Panel B: Control variables
Insider ownership

226

13.595***

6.825***

1,888

22.008

14.650

Block ownership

226

8.790***

6.000**

1,888

10.703

7.515

Board size

226

10.726 ***

10.000***

1,888

8.728

8.000

Board composition

226

0.609***

0.640***

1,888

0.558

0.581

Leadership structure

226

0.726*

1.000*

1,888

0.670

1.000

Managerial equity
compensation

226

0.182**

0.121***

1,888

0.153

0.000

Investment opportunities

211

0.055

0.048

1,714

0.059

0.049

Leverage

211

0.195

0.195*

1,713

0.192

0.164

Firm size

211

6.940***

6.890***

1,714

5.892

5.886

Current profitability

211

0.139**

0.145

1,709

0.125

0.133

Historical profitability

207

0.157

0.154

1,610

0.148

0.143

Historical Tobin’s q

208

0.908***

0.850***

1,647

1.491

1.025

Table 3: Market valuation and labor control
The dependent variable in these regressions is Tobin’s q, calculated as the ratio of the sum of
market value of common equity, book value of preferred equity, and book value of long-term
debt to the book value of assets. Labor Ownership is the proportion of outstanding voting shares
controlled by employees; 5% Labor Dummy is an indicator variable, which equals one if labor
ownership is at least 5%, zero otherwise; Managerial Equity Compensation is the ratio of the
value of annual options granted the CEO to the CEO’s total annual compensation; Insider
Ownership I measures managerial equity ownership up to 5%; Insider Ownership II measures
managerial equity ownership between 5% and 25%; Insider Ownership III measures managerial
equity ownership greater than 25%; Block Ownership is the proportion of outstanding voting shares
controlled by unaffiliated holders of five percent or more; Board Size is the number of directors;
Board Composition is the proportion of directors who are non-employee directors with no business or
personal relationship with the firm or any of its employee-directors; Leadership Structure is a binary
variable, which equals one when the CEO also serves as board chairman, zero otherwise;
Investment Opportunities is the ratio of capital expenditures to total assets; Leverage is the ratio of
long-term debt to total assets; Firm Size is the natural logarithm of total assets in 1994 constant dollars;
Current Profitability is the ratio of operating income to total assets at the beginning of the year;
Historical Profitability is the average of return on assets over 1985-1989; Historical Market
Valuation is the average of Tobin’s q ratio over 1985-1989. All non-corporate governance
variables (except Historical Market Valuation and Historical Profitability) are averages over
1995-2001. Corporate governance variables are from 1995 proxy statements and/or annual
reports. Each regression includes 2-digit SIC industry dummies to control for unobservable
industry factors. Statistically significant variables are shown in bold typeface. The number in
parentheses under sample size is the number of firms satisfying the definition of labor firms in
each regression.

Table 3 continued: Market valuation and labor control

Labor ownership

I

II

III

IV

-0.0158
(0.01)
---

---

-0.0209
(0.01)
---

---

1.2573
(0.01)
0.0292
(0.23)
-0.0108
(0.02)
-0.0004
(0.86)
-0.0077
(0.01)
-0.0213
(0.05)
0.1006
(0.47)
-0.0316
(0.57)
1.6149
(0.02)
0.0440
(0.76)
-0.0317
(0.14)
0.8594
(0.01)
---

-0.2296
(0.01)
1.2676
(0.01)
0.0289
(0.24)
-0.0105
(0.03)
-0.0004
(0.87)
-0.0075
(0.01)
-0.0201
(0.06)
0.1090
(0.44)
-0.0272
(0.62)
1.6498
(0.01)
0.0492
(0.73)
-0.0322
(0.14)
0.8599
(0.01)
---

1.4702
(0.01)
0.0343
(0.19)
-0.0088
(0.08)
-0.0029
(0.25)
-0.0112
(0.01)
-0.0270
(0.03)
0.0332
(0.83)
-0.0511
(0.39)
2.0984
(0.01)
-0.0726
(0.65)
-0.0336
(0.16)
0.6527
(0.01)
-1.3456
(0.01)

-0.2798
(0.01)
1.4836
(0.01)
0.0336
(0.20)
-0.0085
(0.10)
-0.0028
(0.27)
-0.0110
(0.01)
-0.0258
(0.03)
0.0373
(0.81)
-0.0448
(0.45)
2.1494
(0.01)
-0.0676
(0.67)
-0.0344
(0.15)
0.6527
(0.01)
-1.3465
(0.01)

0.2101
(0.01)

0.2104
(0.01)

---

---

Sample size
(Labor voice firms)

1,704
(196)

1,704
(196)

1,667
(193)

1,667
(193)

R-square

0.3862

0.3857

0.2784

0.2770

Model F

13.29
(0.01)

13.26
(0.01)

7.86
(0.01)

7.80
(0.01)

5% labor dummy
Managerial equity
compensation
Insider ownership I
Insider ownership II
Insider ownership III
Block ownership
Board size
Board composition
Leadership structure
Investment
opportunities
Leverage
Firm size
Current profitability
Historical
profitability
Historical market
valuation

Table 4: Market valuation and labor control robustness check
(higher levels of labor ownership)
The dependent variable in these regressions is Tobin’s q, calculated as the ratio of the sum of
market value of common equity, book value of preferred equity, and book value of long-term
debt to the book value of assets. 10% Labor Dummy, 15% Labor Dummy, and 20% Labor
Dummy are indicator variables which equal one if labor ownership is at least 10%, 15%, and
20%, respectively, zero otherwise; Managerial Equity Compensation is the ratio of the value of
annual options granted the CEO to the CEO’s total annual compensation; Insider Ownership I
measures managerial equity ownership up to 5%; Insider Ownership II measures managerial
equity ownership between 5% and 25%; Insider Ownership III measures managerial equity
ownership greater than 25%; Block Ownership is the proportion of outstanding voting shares
controlled by unaffiliated holders of five percent or more; Board Size is the number of directors;
Board Composition is the proportion of directors who are non-employee directors with no business or
personal relationship with the firm or any of its employee-directors; Leadership Structure is a binary
variable, which equals one when the CEO also serves as board chairman, zero otherwise;
Investment Opportunities is the ratio of capital expenditures to total assets; Leverage is the ratio of
long-term debt to total assets; Firm Size is the natural logarithm of total assets in 1994 constant dollars;
Current Profitability is the ratio of operating income to total assets at the beginning of the year;
Historical Profitability is the average of return on assets over 1985-1989. All non-corporate
governance variables (except Historical Profitability) are averages over 1995-2001. Corporate
governance variables are from 1995 proxy statements and/or annual reports. Each regression
includes 2-digit SIC industry dummies to control for unobservable industry factors. Statistically
significant variables are shown in bold typeface. The number in parentheses under sample size is
the number of firms satisfying the definition of labor firms in each regression.

Table 4 continued: Market valuation and labor control robustness check
(higher levels of labor ownership)
I

II

III

---

---

15% labor dummy

-0.3884
(0.01)
---

---

20% labor dummy

---

-0.4909
(0.01)
---

Managerial equity
compensation
Insider ownership I

1.4781
(0.01)
0.0415
(0.13)
-0.0090
(0.09)
-0.0029
(0.28)
-0.0108
(0.01)
-0.0308
(0.02)
0.0685
(0.66)
-0.0593
(0.34)
2.0923
(0.01)
-0.0752
(0.64)
-0.0281
(0.25)
0.5875
(0.03)
-1.3803
(0.01)

1.5127
(0.01)
0.0397
(0.17)
-0.0091
(0.10)
-0.0028
(0.30)
-0.0111
(0.01)
-0.0345
(0.01)
0.0879
(0.59)
-0.0656
(0.30)
2.0992
(0.01)
-0.0599
(0.72)
-0.0269
(0.29)
0.5620
(0.05)
-1.3908
(0.01)

-0.5301
(0.03)
1.5497
(0.01)
0.0383
(0.19)
-0.0095
(0.09)
-0.0024
(0.39)
-0.0114
(0.01)
-0.0352
(0.01)
0.0864
(0.60)
-0.0721
(0.27)
2.1077
(0.01)
-0.0566
(0.74)
-0.0266
(0.31)
0.5431
(0.06)
-1.4000
(0.01)

Sample size
(Labor voice firms)

1,579
(106)

1,525
(52)

1,496
(23)

R-square

0.2712

0.2716

0.2720

Model F

7.16
(0.01)

6.91
(0.01)

6.79
(0.01)

10% labor dummy

Insider ownership II
Insider ownership III
Block ownership
Board size
Board composition
Leadership structure
Investment
opportunities
Leverage
Firm size
Current profitability
Historical
profitability

Table 5: Market valuation and labor control robustness check
(labor owns the largest single block)
The dependent variable in these regressions is Tobin’s q, calculated as the ratio of the sum of
market value of common equity, book value of preferred equity, and book value of long-term
debt to the book value of assets. 10% Labor Dummy, 15% Labor Dummy, and 20% Labor
Dummy are indicator variables which equal one if labor ownership is at least 10%, 15%, and
20%, respectively, zero otherwise. In each labor firm, employees own the largest single equity
block. Managerial Equity Compensation is the ratio of the value of annual options granted the
CEO to the CEO’s total annual compensation; Insider Ownership I measures managerial equity
ownership up to 5%; Insider Ownership II measures managerial equity ownership between 5%
and 25%; Insider Ownership III measures managerial equity ownership greater than 25%; Block
Ownership is the proportion of outstanding voting shares controlled by unaffiliated holders of five
percent or more; Board Size is the number of directors; Board Composition is the proportion of
directors who are non-employee directors with no business or personal relationship with the firm or any
of its employee-directors; Leadership Structure is a binary variable, which equals one when the
CEO also serves as board chairman, zero otherwise; Investment Opportunities is the ratio of capital
expenditures to total assets; Leverage is the ratio of long-term debt to total assets; Firm Size is the
natural logarithm of total assets in 1994 constant dollars; Current Profitability is the ratio of operating
income to total assets at the beginning of the year; Historical Profitability is the average of return
on assets over 1985-1989. All non-corporate governance variables (except Historical
Profitability) are averages over 1995-2001. Corporate governance variables are from 1995 proxy
statements and/or annual reports. Each regression includes 2-digit SIC industry dummies to
control for unobservable industry factors. Statistically significant variables are shown in bold
typeface. The number in parentheses under sample size is the number of firms satisfying the
definition of labor firms in each regression.

Table 5 continued: Market valuation and labor control robustness check
(labor owns the largest single block)
I

II

III

---

---

15% labor dummy

-0.4150
(0.01)
---

---

20% labor dummy

---

-0.5381
(0.01)
---

Managerial equity
compensation
Insider ownership I

1.5067
(0.01)
0.0388
(0.18)
-0.0094
(0.09)
-0.0025
(0.36)
-0.0112
(0.01)
-0.0317
(0.02)
0.0784
(0.63)
-0.0641
(0.32)
2.2271
(0.01)
-0.0551
(0.74)
-0.0290
(0.25)
0.5706
(0.04)
-1.3950
(0.01)

1.5203
(0.01)
0.0405
(0.16)
-0.0096
(0.09)
-0.0025
(0.37)
-0.0113
(0.01)
-0.0347
(0.01)
0.0839
(0.61)
-0.0722
(0.26)
2.1609
(0.01)
-0.0569
(0.73)
-0.0258
(0.32)
0.5517
(0.05)
-1.4006
(0.01)

-0.5301
(0.06)
1.5446
(0.01)
0.0390
(0.19)
-0.0094
(0.10)
-0.0024
(0.38)
-0.0114
(0.01)
-0.0355
(0.01)
0.0857
(0.61)
-0.0727
(0.27)
2.1139
(0.01)
-0.0536
(0.75)
-0.0256
(0.33)
0.5410
(0.06)
-1.4029
(0.01)

Sample size
(Labor voice firms)

1,531
(58)

1,508
(35)

1,490
(17)

R-square

0.2715

0.2717

0.2719

Model F

6.94
(0.01)

6.84
(0.01)

6.76
(0.01)

10% labor dummy

Insider ownership II
Insider ownership III
Block ownership
Board size
Board composition
Leadership structure
Investment
opportunities
Leverage
Firm size
Current profitability
Historical
profitability

Table 6: Corporate operations and labor control
This table summarizes results from 32 regressions relating several aspects of corporate
operations to measures of labor control. DK/K is net investment in property, plant, and
equipment normalized by net property, plant, and equipment. R&D is the ratio of research and
development expenditure to total assets. For each year t, VROA is calculated as the standard
deviation of annual return on assets over years t, t-1, t-2, and t-3. DSLE is three-year average
growth rate of real sales. DSTF is three-year average growth rate of employees. TFP is the
residual of annual industry-specific Cobb-Douglas production functions estimated for each 2digit SIC industry group. SPE is the natural logarithm of the ratio of annual sales to the number
of employees. Labor Ownership is the proportion of outstanding shares voted by employees. The
variables 5% Labor Dummy, 10% Labor Dummy, and 15% Labor Dummy are indicator variables
which equal one if labor ownership is at least 5%, 10%, and 15%%, respectively, zero otherwise.
Each regression includes controls for managerial equity compensation as measured by the ratio
of the value of annual options granted the CEO to the CEO’s total annual compensation, insider
ownership, block ownership, board size, board composition, leadership structure, investment
opportunities as measured by the ratio of capital expenditures to total assets, leverage as measured
by the ratio of long-term debt to total assets, firm size as measured by the natural logarithm of total
assets in 1994 constant dollars, and historical profitability as measured by average annual return on
assets over 1985-1989, as well as 2-digit SIC industry dummies to control for unobservable
industry factors. All non-corporate governance variables (except historical profitability) are
averages over 1995-2001. Corporate governance variables are from 1995 proxy statements
and/or annual reports. The first entry in each cell is the coefficient of the labor voice variable
from each regression. P-values are shown in parentheses under each regression coefficient. The
first number in the square brackets in each cell is the sample size; it is followed by the number of
firms satisfying the definition of labor-influenced firms in each regression. Regressions in the
column labeled R&D I are Tobit regressions estimated over all sample firms, while those in the
column labeled R&D II are regressions estimated over firms with non-zero R&D expenditures.

Table 6 continued: Corporate operations and labor control

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

VII

VIII

DK/K

R&D I

R&D II

VROA

DSLE

DSTF

TFP

SPE

Labor ownership

-0.0020
(0.04)
[1637/194]

-0.0004
(0.61)
[1676/195]

-0.0118
(0.05)
[738/89]

-0.0005
(0.01)
[1726/199]

-0.0022
(0.02)
[1671/195]

-0.0019
(0.02)
[1676/195]

-0.0043
(0.05)
[1850/204]

-0.0054
(0.06)
[1886/206]

5% labor dummy

-0.0259
(0.07)
[1637/194]

-0.0097
(0.35)
[1676/195]

-0.2007
(0.03)
[738/89]

-0.0081
(0.01)
[1726/199]

-0.0335
(0.02)
[1671/195]

-0.0316
(0.02)
[1676/195]

-0.0681
(0.05)
[1850/204]

-0.0731
(0.10)
[1886/206]

10% labor dummy

-0.0272
(0.15)
[1550/107]

-0.0140
(0.31)
[1589/108]

-0.2400
(0.05)
[697/48]

-0.0076
(0.08)
[1637/110]

-0.0367
(0.05)
[1584/108]

-0.0350
(0.04)
[1589/108]

-0.0803
(0.09)
[1759/113]

-0.0943
(0.12)
[1795/115]

15% labor dummy

-0.0461
(0.08)
[1497/54]

0.0026
(0.89)
[1535/54]

-0.0531
(0.74)
[674/25]

-0.0113
(0.06)
[1582/55]

-0.0522
(0.05)
[1530/54]

-0.0448
(0.07)
[1535/54]

-0.1497
(0.02)
[1700/54]

-0.1784
(0.04)
[1735/55]

