                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              PROTECTION FOR SALE WITH IMPERFECT RENT CAPTURING

                                            Giovanni Facchini
                                        Johannes Van Biesebroeck
                                            Gerald Willmann

                                          Working Paper 11269
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11269


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        April 2005




We are grateful to Rob Feenstra whose questions prompted this research, to Kishore Gawande for providing
us with the data, and to Geert Dhaene for help with the estimation. The usual caveat applies: All remaining
errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Giovanni Facchini, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Gerald Willmann. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Protection for Sale with Imperfect Rent Capturing
Giovanni Facchini, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Gerald Willmann
NBER Working Paper No. 11269
April 2005, Revised November 2005
JEL No. F13

                                             ABSTRACT

Structurally estimating the Grossman and Helpman (1994) model using coverage ratios that include
non-tariff barriers leads to biased parameter estimates. We develop a ``protection for sale'' theoretical

framework consistent with the data, by explicitly allowing for non-tariff barriers. Introducing partial
rent capturing we obtain a testable specification which finds support in the data. Our results suggest

that average rent capturing is in the order of 72-75 percent.

Giovanni Facchini
University of Illinois
facchini@uiuc.edu

Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
vanbiesebroeck@utoronto.ca

Gerald Willmann
University of Kiel
gerald@email.uni-kiel.de
1     Introduction
Successive rounds of international trade negotiations have successfully reduced the use of
tariffs. With a few exceptions, developed countries now face strict limitations, imposed by
the GATT–WTO, on the magnitude of taxes that they can levy on imports. This does not
imply that protectionist interests are no longer able to influence policy–makers, but rather
that protectionist policies now often take the form of non-tariff barriers (NTB) which, as
shown by Bradford (2003b), are quantitatively very important. In light of this development,
it is not surprising that the leading framework for the analysis of endogenous trade policy
formation — Grossman and Helpman (1994)’s protection for sale model — has been tested
using NTB’s coverage ratios as the dependent variable.1 While their use seems justified
by the institutional setting and the increased importance of non-tariff barriers, Grossman
and Helpman (1994)’s original theory was meant to analyze the tariff formation process.
Importantly, while tariffs allow the government to fully capture the rents from protection,
NTB do not. Thus, using NTB’s coverage ratios as the dependent variable to test this model
is likely to lead to biased parameter estimates.2
    To overcome the discrepancy between the theory and the data, we modify the protection
for sale model to allow for non-tariff barriers that do not necessarily generate revenue for the
government. In our model, lobbies representing politically active industries try to influence
an incumbent government’s choice of trade policies which will be a combination of tariffs and
quantitative restrictions. As in Grossman and Helpman (1994) the interaction is modelled
as a menu auction, i.e. as a two stage game. In the first stage, organized lobbies offer
political contributions that are conditional on the entire vector of trade policies available to
the government, i.e. they also depend on the protection awarded to other industries. In the
second stage, the government chooses a policy vector that maximizes the weighted sum of
political contributions and aggregate welfare, and collects the contributions. Importantly,
if an import tariff is implemented for a particular product, the government fully captures
the associated revenue. If a quantitative restriction is chosen, the degree of rent capturing—
where the rent results from the difference between the domestic and the international price
of the product—depends on the particular NTB: With a voluntary export restraint, the
foreign exporter captures the associated rent and the domestic government receives nothing.
If import licenses are allocated through a competitive auction, the government fully captures
the associated rent. If the auction is less than competitive, rent capturing will only be partial.


                                                2
In order to capture all these possibilities, our model allows for any degree of rent capturing.
    Solving the game, we obtain an augmented trade policy equation that allows us to identify
the degree of rent capturing. Using a three-digit cross-section of US manufacturing industries
for 1983, which has been exploited also by Goldberg and Maggi (1999), Eicher and Osang
(2002), and Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000), we estimate our augmented specification
employing both a maximum likelihood and a minimum distance estimator. We find that only
part of the rents associated with trade barriers are captured. Irrespective of the econometric
methodology, our results show that the U.S. government appropriates only between 72 and 75
percent of the rents associated with trade policy. In addition, we can reject the assumption
of perfect rent capturing that is implicit in the existing literature.
    Allowing for partial rent capturing also affects the other structural parameters of the
model. In particular, our estimates of the implied share of the population involved in lobbying
activities are lower and more realistic than in Goldberg and Maggi (1999),3 even though the
government’s weight on social welfare continues to be large.4 Interestingly, while in Goldberg
and Maggi (1999) the low level of average protection granted by the US government could
be rationalized by either the high weight attached to aggregate welfare or by the extremely
large share of the population that is organized, our analysis allows to dismiss the latter
as a possible explanation. Thus, while our results emphasize the importance of taking the
structural approach seriously, i.e. of having a theoretical model consistent with the data,
they offer additional support for the protection for sale framework.


2     Non-tariff Barriers
International trade negotiations have been quite successful in reducing tariffs. Yet protec-
tionism is far from dead as is illustrated by the pervasive use of non-tariff barriers (NTBs)
even by countries that profess a free–trade orientation. NTBs comprise a long list of mea-
sures that alter, however indirectly, the prices and quantities of trade flows. Examples
include import quotas, health and safety standards, biased government procurement, lax
antitrust enforcement, burdensome customs procedures, and the list could go on.5 While
the importance of NTBs has been widely recognized, measuring their quantitative effects
presents considerable conceptual and practical difficulties (see Deardorff and Stern (1997)).
    At a theoretical level, the most satisfactory approach involves the computation of price
gaps. The basic idea behind this methodology is that barriers to arbitrage across national


                                               3
borders should be considered barriers to trade. In other words, once the unavoidable costs
involved in shipping goods between countries are taken into account, if a price gap still exists
between equivalent commodities in both economies, we can conclude that the higher-priced
market is protected. This price gap can then be used as a direct measure of the extent of
protection, resulting in a tariff equivalent that represents the total effect of all trade barriers.
Clearly, this approach poses demanding requirements on the availability of detailed price data
for the goods considered. The data needs to be comparable across countries, that is, the
goods must share similar qualitative characteristics etc. This approach has been pursued by
Bradford (2003b) who uses the 1999 survey of highly disaggregate price data compiled by the
OECD to compute purchasing power parity adjusted exchange rates. These data are likely
to represent the best available measures for international comparisons, as OECD researchers
made every effort to compare equivalent products from every country. The results obtained
are striking and we report the numbers for the U.S. aggregated up to 26 GTAP sectors, in
Table 1.6

                              ⇒ [Table 1 approximately here] ⇐

   The first column lists the nominal tariff rate and the second the NTB’s tariff equivalent
as estimated by Bradford (2003a). Note that the world price has been normalized to one, so
that a value of, for example, 1.064 for the tariff rate on “Vegetables, fruit, nuts” indicates
a 6.4 percent tariff. In the third column, we have calculated the share of NTB in total
protection.7 As we can see, the extent of protection granted through NTB is on average
substantially higher than the tariff. On average, 60 percent of the tariff equivalent of total
protection takes the form of NTB. Among the highly protected sectors, crops as well as
vegetable oils appear to be subject to extensive NTB, with tariff equivalents in the order
of 52 and 45 percent respectively, representing 96 and 87 percent respectively of the total
protection. In sectors such as live animals and petroleum, on the other hand, protection
mostly takes the form of import tariffs. The main message that emerges from Table 1 is
that NTB are quantitatively very important and any analysis that wants to explain the
endogenous formation of trade policies should take this into account.
   It is important to remember though that NTB often do not allow the government to
completely capture the rents associated with the distortion. For this reasons, using NTB’s
coverage ratios8 as the dependent variable in estimating the protection for sale model is
likely to lead to a bias in the parameter estimates. To remedy this problem, we now turn to
extending the basic model to accommodate partial rent capturing.

                                                 4
3     The Model
The specific factors model of trade forms the economic foundation of Grossman and Helpman
(1994)’s ‘protection for sale’ approach. A small, open economy consists of 1 + n sectors,
indexed by i = 0, ..., n, that produce under constant returns to scale. Sectors {1, ..., n} each
use a sector specific factor plus a common mobile factor. The exogenously given world market
price for the output of each of these sectors is denoted by p∗i , while the corresponding domestic
price is p∗i + ti , where ti is the import tariff imposed on this commodity.9 Alternatively, since
our framework allows for other trade policy instruments, ti can equally represent the shadow
value of a quantity restriction.
    Good zero is manufactured using only the mobile factor, which can be thought of as
unskilled labor, with an input output coefficient of one, and will be used as the numéraire,
i.e. p0 = 1. Strictly positive production in this sector implies that the wage of the mobile
factor will also equal one, and the same holds for the world market price p∗0 , if we allow for free
trade in this commodity. The production possibilities of the other n sectors are summarized
by profit functions πi (pi ) that can be interpreted as rewards to the specific factors.
    The economy is populated by N agents who might differ in their factor endowment. All of
them supply one unit of labor, and at most one sector specific factor. Let αi be the fraction
of the population that owns the specific factor i. All agents share the same preferences
                                                                             P
represented by a quasi-linear, additively separable utility function u = x0 + ni=1 ui (xi ),
where xi is the individual’s consumption of good i and the subutility functions ui (.) are
differentiable and strictly concave. Optimizing subject to a given income level E, individual
                                                                                       P
demands are given by xi = di (pi ) ≡ (u0i )−1 (pi ) of goods i = 1, ..., n and x0 = E − ni=1 pi di (pi )
for the numéraire. Domestic demand for good i can be satisfied through domestic production
and/or imports. The latter are defined as follows:

                             mi = φi (ti ) ≡ N di (p∗i + ti ) − yi (p∗i + ti ),

where yi is the domestic supply of commodity i derived from πi (pi ) via Hotelling’s lemma.
Note that since mi (ti ) is strictly decreasing, it can be inverted. This is convenient for our
purposes, since it allows us to express the tariff equivalent of a quota qi as:

                                              ti = φ−1
                                                    i (qi ).


    Since our generalization of the model allows trade policy to take the form of tariffs as
well as quotas, let Q denote the subset of sectors that face quantity restrictions and T the

                                                     5
remaining sectors that are subject to tariffs. Note that Q or T could well be empty. If the
former is empty, we are back in the traditional protection for sale model that only allows
for tariffs. If the latter is empty, all sectors are subject to a quantity restriction. In what
follows, we consider the general mixed case in which some sectors are protected by a tariff,
while others are protected by a quantity restriction and instead of endogenizing the choice
of policy instruments, as in Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (2000), we will rely on the data to
inform us about the actual degree of rent capturing and the implied policy mix.10 In line
with this objective, we assume that in each sector i ∈ Q a percentage γi ∈ [0, 1] of the rent
associated with trade policy is captured by the domestic government.
   We can now introduce the trade policy game. As in Grossman and Helpman (1994), we
assume that only the specific factor owners in an exogenously given subset L of the non-
numéraire sectors11 have become organized and submit contribution schedules Ci (t, q) to the
government, which depend on the entire policy vector chosen, where t is a vector of tariffs
applied to all sectors i ∈ T and, similarly, q is a vector of quantity restrictions applied to all
sectors i ∈ Q. In other words, the lobbies specify their monetary payment contingent on the
policy vector chosen, where the policy vector is a mix of tariffs for one subset of sectors and
quantity restrictions for the other. Depending on the institutional setting, such payments
might involve illicit bribes or take the form of legal campaign support. The government
subsequently grants or denies protection by choosing the domestic policy vector (t, q), and
collects the contributions from the lobbying sectors.
   Having described the strategy choice of the actors, let us turn to their respective payoffs.
Each sector, lobbying or not, receives a gross payment Wi (t, q) given by

                    Wi (t, q) = li + πi (p∗i + ti ) + αi N (r + s)    ∀i ∈ T                  (1)
                    Wi (t, q) = li + πi (p∗i + φ−1
                                                i (qi )) + αi N (r + s) ∀i ∈ Q                (2)

where equations (1) and (2) respectively describe the gross welfare of a sector protected by a
tariff and a quota.12 More specifically, li is the total unskilled labor supply of the owners of
specific factor i and thus the first term on the right hand side represents labor income. The
second term is the reward to the specific factor. Remembering that αi is the fraction of the
population that owns specific factor i, we follow Grossman and Helpman (1994) and assume
that the fiscal revenues associated with trade policy are rebated uniformly as lump-sum
payments.13 The last term is then the share of sector i in total fiscal revenue (N r(t, q; γ))



                                                  6
and total consumer surplus (N s(t, q)). Per capita fiscal revenues are defined as
                           X
              r(t, q; γ) =   ti (di (p∗i + ti ) − yi (p∗i + ti )/N )+
                                  i∈T
                                  X
                                        γi φ−1           ∗    −1              ∗    −1
                                            i (qi )(di (pi + φi (qi )) − yi (pi + φi (qi ))/N )
                                  i∈Q


The first term on the right hand side describes the revenues accruing to the government from
those sectors in which a tariff is implemented, while the second represents the revenues raised
by the government from those sectors where quantitative restrictions are used instead. Re-
membering that φ−1
                i (qi ) is the tariff equivalent of a quota qi , the second term then represents
the sum of the fractions γi < 1 of the (tariff equivalent) fiscal revenues actually captured by
the government from sectors covered by quantity restrictions. Per capita consumer surplus
is defined as
                            X
                s(t, q) =         [ui (di (p∗i + ti )) − (p∗i + ti )di (p∗i + ti )] +
                            i∈T
                            X£                                                                 ¤
                                   ui (di (p∗i + φ−1            ∗    −1           ∗    −1
                                                  i (qi ))) − (pi + φi (qi ))di (pi + φi (qi ))
                            i∈Q


where again we distinguish between those sectors that receive protection in the form of a
tariff and those that are protected by means of a quantitative restriction.14
    In determining the policy vector (t, q) to be granted to each sector—in the form of tariffs
for one subset of sectors and quantity restrictions for the others—the government weighs
the sum of aggregate welfare against the monetary contributions paid by the lobbies, i.e. it
maximizes the following objective function:

                                           n
                                           X                            X
                                  G=β             Wi (t, q) + (1 − β)          Ci (t, q).
                                            i=1                          i∈L

    As is well known, this objective function implies that the incumbent politician values one
dollar of campaign contributions in her coffers more than one dollar going to the public.


4     Equilibrium Protection Structure
In solving the game between organized sectors and lobbies we look for the subgame perfect
Nash equilibrium, which is defined as follows



                                                            7
Definition 1 The collection ({Ci0 (t, q)}i∈L , (t0 , q 0 )) is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
                                                                        P
of the tariff and quota game if Ci0 is feasible for all i ∈ L, β ni=1 Wi (t, q), and, given
{Cj0 (t, q)}j∈L\i , no lobby i has an alternative feasible strategy Ci (t, q) that would yield a
higher (net) payoff.

   Bernheim and Whinston (1986) derive a useful characterization of subgame perfect Nash
equilibria in menu auctions. We restate their proposition here using our notation:

Proposition 1 ({Ci0 (t, q)}i∈L , (t0 , q 0 )) is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for the tariff
and quota game if and only if:

 i) Ci0 (t, q) is feasible ∀i ∈ L,
                                       P                          Pn
 ii) (t0 , q 0 ) ∈ arg max (1 − β)          i∈L   Ci (t, q) + β     i=1   Wi (t, q),
                                       P                          Pn
iii) (t0 , q 0 ) ∈ arg max (1 − β)          i∈L   Ci (t, q) + β     i=1   Wi (t, q) + Wi (t, q) − Ci (t, q) ∀i ∈ L,
                                                                    P                           Pn
iv) ∀i ∈ L, ∃(ti , q i ) ∈ Rn that maximizes (1 − β)                      i∈L   Ci (t, q) + β    i=1   Wi (t, q) such that
    Ci0 (ti , q i )   = 0.

   Assuming differentiability of the contribution schedules and combining conditions ii) and
iii) the optimal policy vector satisfies:

                                         X                          n
                                                                    X
                               (1 − β)         ∇Wi (t, q) + β             ∇Wi (t, q) = 0                              (3)
                                         i∈L                        i=1

   Calculating the gradient of the sectors’ gross pay-off function, we obtain:
                 ∂Wi
                     = (δi,j − αi ) yj (p∗j + tj ) + αi tj φ0j (p∗j + tj )                           ∀j ∈ T
                 ∂tj
                 ∂Wi                   yj (p∗j + φ−1
                                                   j (qj ))
                     = (δi,j − αi γj ) 0 ∗         −1        + αi γj φ−1 j (qj ) −
                 ∂qj                   φj (pj + φj (qj ))
                                            N dj (p∗j + φ−1
                                                         j (qj ))
                             αi (1 − γj )                                                            ∀j ∈ Q
                                             φ0j (p∗j + φ−1
                                                         j (qj ))


where δi,j = 1 if i = j and zero otherwise.15 Substituting these partial derivatives back into
equation (3) and rearranging we obtain the following result:




                                                            8
Proposition 2 The government chooses a policy vector that satisfies
                       ti        Ii − αL   zi
                            =    β
                                         ×                                      ∀i ∈ T              (4)
                     1 + ti     1−β
                                     + αL ei
                 φ−1
                  i (qi )     1    Ii − αL   zi   1 − γi z i
                    −1      =    × β       ×    +       ×                       ∀i ∈ Q              (5)
               1 + φi (qi )   γi  1−β
                                       + αL ei      γi    ei

where Ii is an indicator that takes a value of one if the sector is organized and zero otherwise,
     P
αL = i∈L αi describes the fraction of the population that is organized, zi = myii is the inverse
                                              m0i pi
of the import penetration ratio, and ei = −   mi
                                                       is the absolute value of the elasticity of import
demand.

   The equilibrium tariffs correspond exactly to the modified Ramsey rule derived by Gross-
man and Helpman (1994). Organized sectors obtain positive protection (since Ii − αL > 0)
whereas unorganized sectors face negative protection, be it in the form of import subsidies
or export taxes. To understand this result, consider the case where lobby membership com-
prises almost the entire population (αL → 1). In this case organized sectors, that are given
special consideration by the government, internalize the negative effect of protection on con-
sumer surplus (net of tariff revenue) and the government policy chosen for those sectors
converges towards free trade. At the same time, unorganized sectors, owned by a small part
of the population which is accorded less weight in the government’s objective function, suffer
negative protection because this suits the (consumer) interests of the organized majority. If
lobbies represent a smaller share of the population, both effects become less pronounced and
organized sectors ask for, and obtain, positive protection while unorganized sectors suffer less
negative protection. In addition, we have the familiar Ramsey pricing effect that protection
(in either direction) is smaller (in absolute value) the higher is the import demand elasticity,
because a higher elasticity renders the policy intervention more distortive. Similarly, pro-
tection decreases in import penetration (increases in its inverse) because import penetration
also increases the inefficiency when holding the elasticity constant. Finally, protection de-
creases with the weight attached by the government to aggregate welfare (β), because this
implies that the government cares more about efficiency.
   Whereas the outcome for tariffs is standard, the result for quotas and in particular the
additional term in equation (5) requires further explanation. Consider the case where the
quota rent is fully captured (γi = 1). The tariff equivalent of the quota then equals the
solution for the tariff. The above proposition thus implies:


                                                   9
Corollary 1 Enacting a quantity restriction in a particular market is equivalent to setting
the corresponding tariff as long as the quota rent is fully captured (γi = 1).

    That is, choosing a (binding) quota or a tariffs allows the government to determine the
outcome in the market for a traded good, i.e. the combination of quantity demanded and
domestic price. The lobbies’ contributions then depend only on the market outcome, and
not on the policy instrument used to achieve it.
    Consider now the more general case in which rent is only partially captured. How does
partial capturing affect the level of protection resulting from the policy game? Consider the
derivative
                                           "Ã               !        #
                            ∂φi      1           Ii − αL        yi
                                =− 2             β
                                                                   −1 .                    (6)
                            ∂γi   e i γi        1−β
                                                     + αL       mi
The sign of this derivative, and thus the effect of partial capturing on the protection level,
depends on the term in square brackets. Assuming that sector i is organized, lower rent cap-
turing will tend to increase the equilibrium protection level the lower the import penetration
ratio, the smaller the government’s weight on aggregate welfare, and the more concentrated
the ownership of the organized sectors.


5     Empirical Test
We now proceed to empirically test the predictions of our model that explicitly allows for
non-tariff barriers. A number of studies have estimated the original Grossman and Helpman
(1994) model for a cross section of U.S. manufacturing industries using coverage ratios as
the measure of protection. Even though the theory was originally developed for tariffs,
Goldberg and Maggi (1999) in their well known paper find that “the theoretical model is
not inconsistent with our data.” Similar conclusions have been reached by Gawande and
Bandyopadhyay (2000) and Eicher and Osang (2002). The data we use is the same as in
Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000), Eicher and Osang (2002) and Mitra, Thomakos and
Ulubasoglu (2005). It covers the U.S. manufacturing sector in 1983 at the 3-digit level, and
contains 107 observations. Appendix A contains details on the construction of the variables
and the different sources from which the data were obtained.
    To evaluate the augmented model that allows for quotas or other instruments that im-
perfectly capture rents, we need to transform the equilibrium tariff and quota equations (4)

                                                10
and (5) to obtain an empirically testable specification. Following Goldberg and Maggi (1999)
and Eicher and Osang (2002) we bring the elasticity on the left hand side of the regression to
counter measurements errors, and we add an additive error term.16 The estimating equations
for our model thus take the form
                           ti              yi      yi
                                ei = θ Ii     +ψ      + ²1i                 ∀i ∈ T                  (7)
                         1 + ti            mi     mi
                     φ−1
                      i (qi )              yi      yi
                        −1      ei = θ0 Ii    + ψ0    + λ + ²2i ,          ∀i ∈ Q                   (8)
                   1 + φi (qi )            mi      mi
                   1−β                  αL (1−β)                                1             1
where θ =       β+αL (1−β)
                             and ψ = − β+α L (1−β)
                                                   and correspondingly θ0 =     γ
                                                                                  θ,   ψ0 =   γ
                                                                                                ψ   and
λ=   − 1−γ
        γ
           .   Notice the non-additive structure of the relationship predicted by the model: the
inverse of the import penetration ratio ( myii ) enters interactived with the political organization
dummy. The model predicts that the direction of the relationship between trade protection
and import penetration depends crucially on whether a sector is organized or not. At the
same time, the extent of protection that an organized sector receives (likewise the extent of
negative protection for unorganized sectors), will depend on its import penetration.
   If product i is protected by a policy instrument which allows for complete rent capturing,
protection will be set according to equation (7). This is the implicit assumption underlying
previous empirical work. On the other hand, if only a share γi < 1 of the rents is captured
domestically, the optimal level of protection is determined by equation (8). In the empirical
implementation, the lack of time series data forces us to impose a uniform degree of rent
capturing across industries.17 The sign restrictions implied by the model are that θ > 0,
ψ < 0, λ ≤ 0 and (θ + ψ) > 0.
   Comparing the two equations, the presence of a negative constant term in equation (8)
indicates that by making protection more expensive from the point of view of the domestic
government, imperfect rent capturing uniformly lowers its level compared to the situation
when a tariff is deployed. In addition, the slopes of the inverse of the import penetration
ratio and of the interaction term are larger than under the tariff (i.e. θ0 > θ and ψ 0 > ψ).
Empirically, if the observed rate of protection for organized sectors is very responsive to low
rates of import penetration18 and the sectors are protected by tariffs, i.e. we are in the case
described by equation (7), this will mean that the weight attached by the government to
aggregate welfare (β) is low and/or that a small fraction of the population (αL ) is lobbying.
In contrast, if sectors are protected by NTB and equation (8) applies, a similar empirical
relationship could be rationalized by a low degree of rent capturing.

                                                 11
   Two econometric issues have to be addressed when estimating the model. First, because
coverage ratios lie between zero and one, the dependent variable is potentially censored
on both sides.19 The maximum likelihood estimator in Goldberg and Maggi (1999) jointly
estimates the equation of interest—(7) or (8)—together with two reduced form equations
(see below). The censoring of the dependent variable leads to a Tobit model, if we are
willing to assume that the error terms ²1i and ²2i are normally distributed. The dependent
variable in equation (8) becomes

                                                  N T Bi∗
                                     ntb∗i =                ei                                 (9)
                                                1 + N T Bi∗

with
                                   
                                    1
                                           ∗
                                                     if 0 < N T Bi∗ < µ
                                    µ N T Bi
                                   
                        N T Bi   =   0               if N T Bi∗ ≤ 0
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                    1               if N T Bi∗ ≥ µ.

The variable N T Bi∗ is a latent variable that can be thought of as the ‘true’ level of protection,
proportional to the coverage ratio by a factor µ.20
   Second, there are good reasons to believe that the two explanatory variables in the model,
import penetration and the binary political organization variable, might be endogenous. This
is certainly the case for import penetration, because sectors that receive low protection rates
will, ceteris paribus, have larger import penetration (lower y/m) in the data. We need to
instrument to control for this reverse causality. In our theoretical model, the organization
dummy is exogenous. However, since we follow the existing literature and use contribution
data to assign the political organization dummies and contributions are endogenous in our
model, in the empirical implementation it might be desirable to treat Ii as econometrically
endogenous.21 As it turns out, in their implementation of Grossman and Helpman’s model,
Goldberg and Maggi (1999) report that their results are virtually identical if Ii is instead
treated as exogenous. For this reason, we carry out our estimation using both approaches,
obtaining comparable results.22 In the estimation of Goldberg and Maggi (1999), both
endogenous explanatory variables are modelled as linear functions of a set of instruments,
and the tendency to organize is treated as a latent variable, which is observed only when it
crosses a threshold, defined as in Goldberg and Maggi (1999) as a political action committee
contribution for a three digit industry equal to 100 million dollars.23 . Formally, to take into


                                                12
account the endogeneity of the explanatory variables, we will use the following equations:
                                    yi
                                        = ζ10 Zi + u1i                                     (10)
                                    mi
                                    Ii∗ = ζ20 Zi + u2i                                     (11)
                                          (
                                               1 if Ii∗ > 0
                                with Ii =
                                               0 if Ii∗ ≤ 0.

The variables in Z are the instruments introduced by Trefler (1993).24 Input shares for 12
production factors are used to proxy for comparative advantage, and hence we expect them
to be good predictors for the level of import penetration. Given that factor endowments de-
termine these variables, they are plausibly uncorrelated with the error term of the protection
equation. To these instruments, we add the variables commonly used in the literature to
explain political organization. These include proxies for the concentration in the upstream
and downstream industries, for the geographic and ownership concentration in each industry,
and for the organization of the workforce. While these factors are likely to predict the ability
of an industry to become politically organized and generate contributions to influence trade
policy, they have wider importance in the industries, and as a result they can plausibly be
considered uncorrelated with the error term. For the vast majority of sectors, trade openness
is sufficiently low as to enable us to treat the organization of the industry as exogenous to
the shock in the protection equation. A more complete justification of the approach is given
in Goldberg and Maggi (1999).
   In implementing the maximum likelihood estimation, we will assume the error terms
in equations 9, 10 and 11 to be jointly normally distributed and potentially correlated.
The maximum likelihood estimates are reported in Table 2, where for comparison we have
included the baseline estimates of Goldberg and Maggi (1999) in the first column. The second
column presents our results for the special case in which rent capturing is complete. Our
estimates are similar, except for small differences in the reduced form coefficients, which lead
to a lower implied share of the population involved in lobbying. These are due to residual
differences in the data set.25 Appendix B provide details on the exact implementation of our
methodology and the derivation of our likelihood function.

                             ⇒ [Table 2 approximately here] ⇐

   In the more general case where not all the rents from protection are captured domestically,
equation (8) applies. The results for this case are reported in column (3). Most importantly,

                                              13
the negative constant term indicates that the U.S. government, realizing that the use of
NTBs leads to an additional welfare loss, chooses—ceteris paribus—a uniformly lower level
of protection. This interpretation is confirmed by the implied value for γ, the degree of rent
capturing, which is estimated significantly less than one. In particular, our estimates imply
that only 72 percent of the potential rents are actually appropriated by the U.S. government.
   Note that the estimated degree of rent capturing γ can be given a more general interpre-
tation. In practice, protection is set at a much more disaggregate level than the three digit
SIC industries in our data set. Tariffs as well as other trade policy tools will be employed
for different products in every industry, so both equations are relevant. Equation (8) can
be understood as a weighted average of both original formulations. Suppose that a fraction
δ of the products in industry i are protected by a tariff (rents are fully captured) and the
remainder by a quota (a fraction γ 0 of the rents are captured, depending on how it is allo-
cated). The linear combination of the two equations with the appropriate weights leads to
a new relationship, where the right hand side takes the same form as in equation (8) only
that now
                                                 γ0
                                      γ=                  .
                                           δγ 0 + (1 − δ)
γ is a function of the structural coefficients δ and γ 0 that cannot be identified separately. An
estimated γ of 0.72 is consistent with an industry protected by a quota of which 72 percent
is captured, as well as with an industry where half of the products are protected by tariffs
and the other half by a quota, of which 56 percent is captured, etc.
   Compared to the baseline case in columns (1) and (2), the difference between organized
and unorganized sectors remains, as can be readily seen from the highly significant coefficient
on the interaction term. Organized sectors receive significantly higher protection than their
unorganized counterparts. It might seem surprising at first that import penetration alone
does not play a significant role. Notice, however, that we are essentially estimating two
different coefficients for each subset of the sample, organized and unorganized sectors. The
coefficient for the organized subsample is the sum of the two coefficients reported above. It
is only information from the unorganized sectors that would allow us to separately identify
the role of import penetration. The theoretical model, of course, predicts that unorganized
sectors should receive negative protection. Since the coverage ratios are censored at zero,
this implies that if the model were deterministic, we should not have any information on this
effect coming from the unorganized subsample. In the stochastic context at hand, obtaining
the predicted negative coefficient must be due to large errors, which in turn explain the

                                               14
insignificance of this coefficient.
   The third sign prediction of the model, namely that the sum of the two reduced form
coefficients is larger than zero finds strong support in the data.26 This is reflected in the
lower implied share of the population that is organized (αL ). While Goldberg and Maggi
(1999) estimate that over 80 percent of the population is involved in trade-related lobbying,
we find a more reasonable estimate of 34 percent, which is closer to the share of the workforce
employed in organized sectors (slightly below 50 percent).
   Similar to the previous literature, the weight on aggregate welfare in the government’s
objective function (β) is estimated to be very high. Combined with the low estimated
share of the population involved in lobbying, it invalidates the inefficiency of lobbying as
an explanation for the low average amount of protection granted by the U.S. government.
The government values aggregate welfare and implements little or no protection for the
majority of industries, while selectively granting some protection to a few industries which
are organized. Average protection will be low, but sectors that lobby will still benefit.27
   Partial rent capturing could provide yet another way to rationalize the low observed rates
of protection. The fraction of rents that are not captured domestically, i.e. the inefficiency
inherent in the trade policy, is taken into account as an additional cost in the trade-off
between welfare and contributions. If γ were estimated close to zero, a small weight on
aggregate welfare would be sufficient to deter protection. While we do estimate the fraction
of rents that are captured to be significantly below one, rent leakage of 25 to 28 percent is
unlikely to be a significant deterrent to protectionism.
   We also perform a specification test of the augmented model (column 3) versus the
standard specification (column 2). This corresponds to testing whether γ is equal to one,
versus the alternative that γ is less than one. The p-value associated with the test statistic
is 0.019, that is, the one-sided test rejects that γ is equal to one at a significance level of 2
percent.28 Given the small number of observations, only 107 sectors, this is relatively strong
evidence against perfect rent capturing. The same test using results from the minimum
distance estimator (see below) also rejects equality of γ to one, albeit only at a 10 percent
significance level. This confirms the importance of explicitly accounting for partial rent
capturing when estimating the Grossman and Helpman (1994) model.




                                               15
6     Robustness checks
To further strengthen the validity of our results, we consider a number of robustness checks.
First, we re-estimate the model with the organization dummy included uninteracted, in
addition to the interaction term with inverse import penetration. Second, we vary the
threshold on Political Action Committee contributions that is used in the definition of the
organization dummy. Third, we estimate the model using a variety of alternative econometric
strategies: (i) the minimum distance estimator from Eicher and Osang (2002), (ii) without
instrumenting for any of the explanatory variables, (iii) with a limited set of instruments for
import penetration, and (iv) with a two-step maximum likelihood estimator, as in Gawande
and Bandyopadhyay (2000). Finally, we run a set of separate regressions for sectors protected
mainly by tariffs and sectors that are protected mainly by non–tariff barriers.


6.1    Including organization dummy uninteracted
Adding the direct effect for the organization status dummy to the estimating equation repre-
sents a uniform level of protection applied to all organized industries. According to the model
developed by Grossman and Helpman (1994), this variable should not enter in the estimating
equation, as the government can always improve welfare, at the margin, by discriminating
between sectors, i.e. protection should always be a function of import penetration. Including
the dummy uninteracted changes the results considerably. Estimates are reported in column
(4) of Table 2.
    The constant term is still estimated to be negative, although its significance drops. As
expected, the coefficient on the organization dummy is estimated to be positive, but not sig-
nificantly different from zero. While the coefficients on the inverse import penetration and on
the interaction term between organization status and the inverse import penetration change
signs, on average organized industries continue to receive positive protection. Evaluated
at the mean import penetration, the predicted depended variable, N T B/(1 + N T B) × e,
is 0.094 for organized sectors. Because of the negative constant term, average protection
remains negative for unorganized sectors. The negative coefficient on the interaction term
would suggest that the government chooses to distort most where the import penetration is
the largest, which cannot be optimal.
    While it is somewhat arbitrary to calculate the structural coefficients without a model
that explains why the organization dummy should enter uninteracted, the rent capturing


                                              16
coefficient only depends on the constant term in the reduced form. The point estimate
corresponds to a rent capturing of 82 percent, slightly higher than in the benchmark case.
It is reassuring that the sign of the constant term and the magnitude of the rent capturing
are similar to the benchmark results.


6.2    Different thresholds for organization dummy
As a second robustness check, we re-estimate the protection equation using different threshold
levels for PAC contributions to classify industries as organized or not. The benchmark cutoff,
taken from Goldberg and Maggi (1999), was $100 million. Alternative thresholds of $200
million or $75 million result in very similar coefficient estimates, see columns (5) and (6) in
Table 2. With the different threshold levels, the fraction of industries classified as organized
drops to 44% or increases to 72%, respectively. As expected, the estimate for αL varies
in the same direction as these changes. The estimate for β, the weight of welfare in the
government’s objective function, is virtually unaffected and the same is true for the rent
capturing parameter γ. With the high (low) threshold the latter drops (rises) to 70 (74)
percent and continues to be significantly below one at the 3 percent level.


6.3    Other estimation methods
The model is also estimated using a variety of alternative econometric strategies. First, we
implement the minimum distance estimator previously used by Eicher and Osang (2002),
where the organization dummy is treated as endogenous. In a first stage, the reduced form
equations for each of the three endogenous variables are estimated separately as a function of
the same set of instruments as before. The (inverse) import penetration equation is estimated
by ordinary least squares and the interaction between the organization status and the import
penetration is estimated using a Tobit regression.29 After substituting the two reduced form
equations into the estimation equation of interest, the latter is also estimated using a Tobit
regression. In a second stage, the structural coefficients of the model are obtained from the
reduced form coefficients by GMM. The method is described in more detail in Appendix B
and the exact formula for the weighting matrix and standard errors are in Lee (1995).
   Results are reported in Table 3 using the same format as in Table 2, where the first
column now reproduces the original results of Eicher and Osang.30 As can be seen from the
table, the results are very similar to those obtained by maximum likelihood. We take this to


                                              17
be a sign of robustness. Importantly, the degree of rent capturing (γ), which is estimated to
be 75 percent, is hardly different from the 72 percent we found using maximum likelihood.

                             ⇒ [Table 3 approximately here] ⇐

   Next, in column (4) of Table 3, we present results where we did not instrument for any
of the explanatory variables. We would expect the uninstrumented results to underestimate
the coefficient on inverse import penetration for organized sectors (the interaction term) and
vice versa for unorganized sectors (coefficient on y/m). Sectors that receive high rates of
protection will see their import penetration reduced (y/m increased) and move to the right in
the y/m–protection space. The regression line will become flatter. Moreover, the organiza-
tion status is assumed to be exogenous in the theoretical model, but in practice firms choose
endogenously to become organized. Sectors that receive a priori low protection, for example
because they are not considered to be strategically important, have a greater incentive to
become organized, leading again to a reverse causality. Overlooking the endogeneity of or-
ganization will underestimate the effect on protection that organization brings, exacerbating
the underestimate of the interaction coefficient.
   The results in column (4) of Table 3 confirm that ignoring the endogeneity of I and y/m
will lead to underestimate the effect of import penetration (the sum of the two coefficients)
and of the organization status (the coefficient on the interaction term). The sum of the
two coefficients, which measures the responsiveness of protection to import penetration, is
estimated at 0.0013, down from 0.0104 (column (3) in Table 2) or 0.0168 (column (3) in Table
3). The effect comes largely from the coefficient on the interaction term, which measures
the difference in protection between organized and unorganized sectors. This coefficient is
now estimated at -0.0016, down from 0.0157 (Table 2) or 0.0190 (Table 3). As a result,
controlling for import penetration the organized sectors now seem to receive less protection
than the average sector in the economy , a result that seems highly counterintuitive. The
structural coefficients indicate that governments place 100% of their weight on welfare and
none on contributions. The parameter measuring the share of the population involved in
lobbying (αL ) exceeds one, a result that is again inconsistent with the model. Finally, rent
capturing is nearly perfect, and for all this reasons taking the endogeneity of the explanatory
variables into account is very important.
   Next, we limit the number of instruments used to estimate the model. In fact, while as
a group the original instruments used by Goldberg and Maggi (1999) and Eicher and Osang

                                              18
(2002) are significant at predicting import penetration,31 many individual coefficients in the
first stage regressions are insignificantly different from zero. To check the robustness of our
results, for the results in column (5) of Table 3 we only include the capital stock and the
four categories of workers (engineers, white collar, skilled, and semiskilled) as instruments for
the inverse import penetration. These were among the most precisely estimated coefficients
in the first stage and, as measures of factor abundance, they should be good predictors of
import penetration. The F-statistic for the reduced set of instruments is slightly smaller at
3.042 but still exceeds the threshold for joint-significance, which is now 2.31. The structural
coefficient estimates are virtually unchanged from the results with the full set of instruments.
   Finally, we also report the results if we use the two-step MLE estimator discussed in
Appendix B. The estimator is consistent, but not efficient, which is borne out by the results
in column (6) of Table 3. None of the reduced form coefficients is estimated significantly
different from zero, even though the signs and magnitudes are relatively similar to the bench-
mark results. The point estimate for rent capturing (γ) is slightly higher, estimated at 85
percent, but still significantly below one. Estimates for β and αL are also higher than before,
but all the qualitative conclusions go through unchanged.


6.4    Protection by tariffs
As mentioned earlier, previous studies have used NTB coverage ratios to measure protection
even though the original protection for sale model was designed to explain tariff levels. The
commonly offered rationale is that successive GATT/WTO rounds have limited countries’
ability to set tariffs. If we use tariff rates to construct the dependent variable, t/(1 + t) × e,
we obtain similar results, as can be seen in columns (1) and (2) of Table 4. The first
column reports the benchmark results, assuming perfect rent capturing, and the second
column contains the results if rent capturing can be imperfect. While the magnitude of the
coefficient estimates are much smaller (tariff rates are much lower than coverage ratios), the
implied structural coefficients are similar. The estimated degree of rent capturing is 1.088
and is not significantly different from one, as we would expect in the case of tariffs.

                              ⇒ [Table 4 approximately here] ⇐

   Our model presupposes that sectors are either protected by tariffs or NTB. Estimating
equations (7) and (8) jointly on the full sample of industries is impossible because the
dependent variables differ. Protection by NTB is proxied by coverage ratios which are not

                                               19
comparable to percentage tariff rates.32 Even splitting the sample is nontrivial. Consider an
industry with no NTB or tariff protection. Without additional information it is impossible
to know which of equation (7) or (8) applies.
    To overcome these difficulties we pursue an alternative approach. In column (3) we use
tariffs as the dependent variable and exclude those sectors for which NTB protection is
very high. All sectors with coverage ratios exceeding 0.50 are dropped, which amounts to
approximately 20% of the sample, as tariffs do not seem to be the primary instrument to
protect these industries. In column (4) we use NTB protection as the dependent variable and
drop sectors with tariff rates exceeding 5 per cent33 —as these are arguably well-protected
by tariffs. For example, SIC industry 333 ‘primary metals’ only receives very low tariff
protection—the ad valorem rate is on average 0.4%—but it is one of the industries most
heavily protected by NTB, with a coverage ratio of 75 percent. We now drop this industry
from the sample when trying to explain tariff rates. For the results in columns (1) and (2),
this industry would misleadingly be assigned a very low rate of protection (based on the
tariff), even though it is organized and has a high coverage ratio. The estimated degree of
rent capturing (γ) is now even closer to one in column (3), as expected for tariffs, and it is
reduced to 0.674 in column (4) for NTB’s protection.


7     Conclusion
In this paper we have addressed the existing discrepancy between the Grossman and Helpman
(1994) theoretical model explaining tariff protection, and its empirical implementations that
have for the most part used NTB’s coverage ratios as the measure of protection. Extending
the model by allowing for partial rent capturing, a salient feature of NTBs, we have derived an
augmented specification which we have empirically implemented employing both a maximum
likelihood as well as a minimum distance estimator. Our augmented specification finds
support in the data, and the average degree of rent capturing for our preferred estimators
turns out to be 72-75 percent.
    Furthermore, we obtain lower and more reasonable estimates than the previous literature
for the share of the population involved in lobbying activity, while the weight on aggregate
welfare in the government’s objective function continues to be very high, as in previous
implementations. When we allow for partial rent capturing, the low average amount of
protection granted by the U.S. government should be interpreted as the result of the high


                                              20
weight associated to aggregate welfare, rather than to the strategic interaction between
competing lobbies. Imperfect rent capturing reduces equilibrium rates of protection, but it
is not the primary reason for the low observed rates of protection. While our results show
the importance of taking the structural approach seriously, i.e. of having a theoretical model
that is consistent with the data, they offer additional support for the protection for sale
framework.




                                             21
References
Amemiya, Takeshi (1979) ‘The estimation of a simultaneous-equation tobit model.’
  International Economic Review 20, 169–81
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Michael D. Whinston (1986) ‘Menu auctions, resource
  allocation, and economic influence.’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, 1–31
Bradford, Scott C. (2003a) ‘Non tariff barriers in rich economies: Quantifying them,
  identifying them and assessing their impacts.’ mimeo, Brigham Young University
  (2003b) ‘Paying the price: Final good protection in OECD countries.’ Review of
  Economics and Statistics 85, 24–37
Caves, Richard E. (1976) ‘Economic models of political choice: Canada’s tariff structure.’
  Canadian Journal of Economics 9, 278–300
Deardorff, Alan V., and Robert M. Stern (1997) ‘Measurement of non tariff barriers.’
  Working Paper 179, OECD
Eicher, Theo, and Thomas Osang (2002) ‘Protection for sale: An empirical investigation:
  Comment.’ American Economic Review 92, 1702–1710
Gawande, Kishore, and Usree Bandyopadhyay (2000) ‘Is protection for sale? Evidence on
  the Grossman-Helpman theory of endogenous protection.’ Review of Economics and
  Statistics 82, 139–152
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, and Giovanni Maggi (1999) ‘Protection for sale: An
  empirical investigation.’ American Economic Review 89, 1135–55
Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (1994) ‘Protection for sale.’ American
  Economic Review 84, 833–850
Lee, M.-J. (1995) ‘Semiparametric estimation of simultaneous equations with limited
  dependent variables: A case study of female labor supply.’ Journal of Applied
  Econometrics 15, 187–200
Levy, Philip (1999) ‘Lobbying and international cooperation in tariff setting.’ Journal of
  International Economics 47, 345–370
Maggi, Giovanni, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (2000) ‘Import penetration and the politics
  of trade protection.’ Journal of International Economics 51, 287–304
McCalman, Phillip (2004) ‘Protection for sale and trade liberalization: An empirical
  investigation.’ Review of International Economics 12, 81–94
Mitra, Devashish, Dimitrios D. Thomakos, and Mehmet A. Ulubasoglu (2002) ‘Protection


                                             22
  for sale in a developing country: Democracy versus dictatorship.’ Review of Economics
  and Statistics 84, 497–508
Mitra, Devashish, Dimitrios D. Thomakos, and Mehmet Ulubasoglu (2005) ‘Can we obtain
  realistic parameter estimates for the ‘protection for sale model’ ?’ Canadian Journal of
  Economics. forthcoming
Nelson, Forrest, and Lawrence Olson (1978) ‘Specification and estimation of a
  simultaneous-equation model with limited dependent variables.’ International Economic
  Review 19, 695–709
Shiells, Clinton R., Robert M. Stern, and Alan V. Deardorff (1986) ‘Estimates of the
  elasticities of substitution between imports and home goods for the United States.’
  Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 122, 497–519
Smith, Richard J., and Richard W. Blundell (1986) ‘An exogeneity test for a simultaneous
  equation tobit model with an application to labor supply.’ Econometrica 54, 679–86
Trefler, Daniel (1993) ‘Trade liberalization and the theory of endogenous protection: an
  econometric study of U.S. import policy.’ Journal of Political Economy 101, 138–160




                                             23
                            Table 1: Tariffs and NTBs
 GTAP sector                                           Tariff    NTB      NTB share
Vegetables, fruit, nuts                                1.064     1.203      0.760
Crops: Garden products                                 1.020     1.524      0.963
Live Animals: Pets                                     1.043     1.000        0
Other Ag. Products: Eggs                               1.092     1.000        0
Fishing                                                1.005     1.301      0.984
Bovine cattle, sheep and goat, horse meat products     1.108     1.001      0.001
Meat product n.e.c.: Poultry, pork                     1.060     1.004      0.063
Vegetable oils and fats                                1.065     1.447      0.873
Dairy products                                         1.082     1.145      0.639
Processed rice                                         1.054     1.119      0.688
Sugar                                                  1.278     1.000        0
Food products n.e.c.                                   1.040     1.071      0.640
Beverages and tobacco products                         1.126     1.063      0.333
Textiles                                               1.072     1.271      0.790
Wearing apparel                                        1.142     1.000        0
Leather products: Footwear                             1.143     1.000        0
Wood products                                          1.045     1.000        0
Paper products, publishing                             1.008     1.066      0.892
Petroleum, coal products                               1.008     1.000        0
Chemical, rubber, plastic products                     1.049     1.287      0.854
Mineral products n.e.c.: Glassware and Tableware       1.087     1.096      0.525
Metal products                                         1.047     1.192      0.803
Motor vehicles and parts                               1.034     1.157      0.822
Electronic equipment                                   1.042     1.061      0.592
Machinery and equipment n.e.c.                         1.040     1.085      0.680
Manufactures n.e.c.                                    1.065     1.016      0.198
Weighted geometric means                               1.058     1.087       0.602

  Source: Bradford (2003a, 2003b) and own calculations
  Notes: The international price is normalized to one for all goods. A tariff inclusive
  price of 1.064 thus implies a 6.4 % import tariff. A similar argument applies for
  non-tariff barriers. Following Bradford (2003a), total protection is defined as the
  sum of tariff protection and the tariff equivalent of the existing NTB.




                                               24
     Table 2: Estimation of the augmented Grossman-Helpman model by MLE
                                                    NT B
                             Dependent variable:   1+N T B   × e, sample of 107 sectors
Threshold for I $100m           $100m        $100m           $100m       $200m        $75m
                   (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)          (6)
(y/m)              -0.0093∗∗    -0.0081∗∗    -0.0053          0.0083∗∗   -0.0039      -0.0059
                   (0.0040)     (0.0043)     (0.0055)        (0.0036)    (0.0066)     (0.0052)
(y/m) × I           0.0106∗∗     0.0166∗∗∗    0.0157∗∗∗      -0.0098∗     0.0151∗∗∗    0.0160∗∗∗
                   (0.0053)     (0.0045)     (0.0054)        (0.0061)    (0.0065)     (0.0051)
I                                                             0.3381
                                                             (0.3896)
constant                                     -0.3937∗        -0.2187     -0.4336∗     -0.3523
                                             (0.2626)        (0.2398)    (0.2978)     (0.2563)
β                   0.986        0.983        0.988           1.008       0.989        0.988
                   (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.004)         (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.004)
αL                  0.883        0.489        0.338           0.847       0.261        0.370
                   (0.223)      (0.134)      (0.244)         (0.541)     (0.233)      (0.284)
γ                  1.000         1.000        0.718           0.820       0.697        0.739
                                             (0.135)         (0.161)     (0.145)      (0.140)
Log-likelihood                  -308.2       -305.4          -305.4      -315.8       -295.5
    Notes: Variables definitions: (y/m) is the inverse import penetration ratio and I is the
    organization dummy, equal to one if the sector is organized. β is the weight on welfare
    in the government’s objective function, αL is fraction of the population that lobbies, γ
    is the fraction of rents captured by the government. For the $100m threshold, 63% of
    sectors have I=1, 44% for $200m and 72% for $75m. (1) Goldberg and Maggi (1999),
    Table 1; (2)-(6) are estimated with maximum likelihood, details and likelihood function
    are in Section 5 and Appendix B. We instrument for the inverse import penetration ratio
    using the full set of instruments listed in Table A.1. These include measures of com-
    petition in upstream and downstream industries, indicators of production technology
    and characteristics of the workforce, and factor inputs. Standard errors in parentheses.
    Standard errors on the structural parameters are obtained using the ∆-method. ∗
    indicates significant at the 10% level, ∗∗ at the 5% level, and ∗∗∗ at the 1% level. In
    Columns (2)-(6), the test statistic for joint significance of the explanatory variables in
    the y/m–equation is 4.1083 (for Column (1) it is 4.131). The statistic is distributed
    according to the F(20,86) distribution, with a threshold of 1.70 for significance at the
    5% level.




                                                   25
                                Table 3: Other estimation methods
                                                          NT B
                                   Dependent variable:   1+N T B   × e, sample of 107 sectors
                      MDE            MDE          MDE              Tobit        MLE         MLE
                       (1)            (2)          (3)              (4)          (5)         (6)
(y/m)                 -0.0098∗∗∗     -0.0026∗∗    -0.0022           0.0029      -0.0054     -0.0030
                      (0.0023)       (0.0013)     (0.0027)         (0.0027)     (0.0077)    (0.0033)
(y/m) × I              0.0374∗∗∗      0.0173∗∗∗    0.0190∗∗∗       -0.0016       0.0140∗     0.0055
                      (0.0051)       (0.0018)     (0.0017)         (0.0029)     (0.0075)    (0.0038
constant                                          -0.3255∗         -0.0051      -0.3046     -0.1684
                                                  (0.2330)         (0.0967)     (0.215)     (0.1131)
F-test for y/m equation              4.108        4.108                         3.042       4.108
χ2 -test for y/m × I equation        45.252       45.252                                    44.970

β                      0.96           0.982        0.985            1.001        0.989       0.995
                                     (0.002)      (0.003)          (0.003)      (0.006)     (0.003)
αL                     0.26           0.149        0.117            1.808        0.384       0.545
                                     (0.086)      (0.152)          (2.171)      (0.298)     (1.394)
γ                      1.000          1.000        0.754            0.995        0.766       0.855
                                                  (0.189)          (0.096)      (0.126)     (0.082)
    Notes: Variables definitions: (y/m) is the inverse import penetration ratio and I is the or-
    ganization dummy, equal to one if the sector is organized. β is the weight on welfare in the
    government’s objective function, αL is fraction of the population that lobbies, γ is the fraction
    of rents captured by the government. (1) Eicher and Osang (2002), Table 1 (standard errors
    for the structural coefficients and test statistics are not reported). (2)-(3) Estimated with the
    same minimum distance estimator, details are in Section 6.3 and Appendix B. The full set of
    instruments is used in the first stage for each variable. These include measures of competition
    in upstream and downstream industries, indicators of production technology and characteris-
    tics of the workforce, and factor inputs. Standard errors (in parentheses) are calculated as in
    Lee (1995), controlling for the two-step nature of the estimator. (4) Tobit estimates, treating
    both (y/m) and I as exogenous. Structural coefficients are calculated ignoring the uninteracted
    organization dummy. (5) Maximum likelihood estimation using a reduced set of instruments
    (only the type of workers and capital stock are included). (6) Two-step maximum likelihood
    estimation as in Nelson and Olson (1978) using all instruments, first stage for (y/m) estimated
    by OLS and for y/m × I by Tobit. Standard errors on the structural parameters are obtained
    using the ∆-method. ∗ significant at the 10% level, ∗∗ at the 5% level, and ∗∗∗ at the 1% level.
    The F-test statistic is distributed according to the F(20,86) distribution in (2), (3), and (6), and
    F(5,101) in (5). The thresholds for significance at the 5% level are 1.70 and 2.31, respectively.
    The χ2 -statistics follows the χ2 (20) distribution and the corresponding threshold is 31.41.




                                                     26
                 Table 4: Results with tariff rates and reduced samples
                                                                         N T B/t
                                                  Dependent variable:   1+N T B/t   ×e
Protection by                          Tariff            Tariff       Tariff         NTB
Sectors excluded                       none              none         NTB>0.50       Tariff>0.10
                                       (1)               (2)          (3)            (4)
inverse import penetration (y/m)       -0.0007∗∗∗        -0.0012∗∗∗   -0.0019∗∗∗     -0.0019
                                       (0.0002)          (0.0004)     (0.0003)       (0.0040)
(y/m) × organization dummy              0.0019∗∗∗         0.0016∗∗∗    0.0023∗∗∗      0.0198∗∗∗
                                       (0.0002)          (0.0003)     (0.0005)       (0.0016)
constant term                                             0.0810       0.0290         -0.4824
                                                         (0.0572)     (0.0594)       (0.3242)
Number of sectors                      107               107          79             86
F-test for y/m equation                4.108             4.108        3.429          3.661
χ2 -test for y/m × I equation          45.252            45.252       35.290         41.477
β                                       0.998             0.998        0.997          0.987
                                       (0.0003)          (0.0003)     (0.0004)       (0.003)
αL                                      0.370             0.761        0.809          0.084
                                       (0.139)           (0.385)      (0.300)        (0.020)
γ                                       1.000             1.088        1.030          0.674
                                                         (0.068)      (0.063)        (0.193)
    Notes: β is the weight on welfare in the government’s objective function, αL is fraction
    of the population that lobbies, γ is the fraction of rents captured by the government.
    Estimation with the minimum distance estimator as in Eicher and Osang (2002), using
    the full set of instruments: measures of competition in upstream and downstream indus-
    tries, indicators of production technology and characteristics of the workforce, and factor
    inputs. Standard errors (in parentheses) are calculated as in Lee (1995), controlling for
    the two-step nature of the estimator. Columns (1)–(3) use tariffs in the construction of
    the dependent variable, while in column (4) NTB are used, as before. In column (3) sec-
    tors with high NTB protection are excluded; column (4) excludes sectors with high tariff
    rates. Standard errors on the structural parameters are obtained using the ∆-method. ∗
    significant at the 10% level, ∗∗ at the 5% level, and ∗∗∗ at the 1% level. The F-statistic
    is distributed according to the F(20,86) distribution in (1)-(2), according to F(20,58) in
    (3), and F(20,65) in (4). The thresholds for significance at the 5% level are 1.70, 1.76,
    and 1.74, respectively. The χ2 test statistics follow the χ2 (20) distribution throughout
    and the corresponding threshold is 31.41.




                                                    27
Appendix A               Data
We use the same data set that was previously employed by Gawande and Bandyopadhyay
(2000).34 It covers the U.S. manufacturing sector in 1983 at the 3-digit level, giving a total
of 107 observations. Below we describe the different pieces of information and indicate the
original sources. Summary statistics on all variables are in Table A.1.
   Import demand elasticities (ei ) are taken from Shiells, Stern and Deardorff (1986).
Following Goldberg and Maggi (1999), the small number of industries with positive import
demand elasticities are set to zero.
   Non-tariff barriers (N T Bi proxy for φ−1
                                          i (qi )), which enter the dependent variable
in the model, are taken from Trefler (1993), and aggregated to the 3-digit level using as
weights the value of shipment (from the 1996 NBER productivity database). The extent
of protection is measured by the NTB’s coverage ratio (that is, the fraction of an industrys
imports covered by one or more of such non-tariff measures). Non-tariff barriers includes
price-oriented measures such as antidumping duties and countervailing duties, quantity-
oriented measures such as quotas and voluntary export restraints, and threats of quality and
quantity monitoring etc. Following the transformation of variables in Goldberg and Maggi
(1999), as described in Section 5, we multiply N T Bi /(1 + N T Bi ) by the import elasticity
for the sector (ei ) to obtain the actual dependent variable used in the analysis.
   Tariff rates (ti ) (Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000)), U.S. post-Tokyo round ad
valorem tariff rate.
   Import penetration ratio (mi /yi ) (Trefler (1993)), the ratio of imports (from the rest
of the world) relative to domestic (U.S.) output; aggregated to the 3-digit level using the
value of shipments as weights.
   Organization dummy (Ii ), (Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000)), if total contribu-
tions in a sector exceed a threshold, the dummy takes on the value of one and zero otherwise.
The threshold we use ($100,000,000) is the same as in Goldberg and Maggi (1999). Informa-
tion on Political Action Committee contributions is also taken from Gawande and Bandy-
opadhyay (2000); it sums total firm and union contributions by sector for the 1983-1984
congressional elections. In Table 2 we use alternative thresholds to define the organization
dummy as a robustness check.
   Instrumental variables, (Trefler (1993)), aggregated to the 3-digit level using as weights
the value of shipments. A first set of variables is commonly used to predict political organi-


                                              28
zation. Four variables measure concentration in upstream and downstream industries. Two
variables capture other aspects of concentration: geographic and a high minimum efficient
scale concentrates capital in fewer plants. Finally, unionization and tenure are positively
related to the organization of the workforce, making lobbying more likely. A second set of
variables capture factor endowments and, hence, comparative advantage and are included
mainly to predict import penetration. It measures labor, land, capital, and other inputs,
broken down in several categories. For details on how they are calculated, see Trefler (1993).
   Buyer concentration: Weighted average of four firm concentration ratios among buyers
of an industry output (consumers and downstream industries). The four firm concentration
ratios and the number of firms are taken from the 1982 Census of Manufactures. Weights
are taken from the 1977 US input output total (direct plus indirect) table with diagonal
elements set to zero.
   Seller concentration: Weighted average of four firm concentration ratios in supplier (up-
stream) industries. The four firm concentration ratios and the number of firms are taken
from the 1982 Census of Manufactures. Weights are taken from the 1977 US input output
total (direct plus indirect) table with diagonal elements set to zero.
   Buyer (seller) number of firms: Number of companies scaled by industry sales.
   Geographic concentration: Measure of the difference between population and industry
production patterns across the 50 states.
   Minimum efficient scale: Caves (1976) minimum efficient plant size, defined as the per-
centage of industry sales supplied by the median plant. Our data comes from the 1982
Census of Manufactures.
   Unionization: Percentage of workers unionized.
   Tenure: Average years of tenure by workers in the industry.
   Engineers, white collars, Skilled, Semi-skilled; Cropland, Pasture, Forest; Physical capi-
tal, Inventories; Coal, Mineral and petroleum services: All these are factor shares and have
been calculated using the 1977 input–output table for the United States. For each indus-
try and each factor, factor shares are the total (in an input-output sense) factor earnings
generated by producing one dollar of final industry output.




                                              29
                Table A.1: Summary statistics

Variable                              Mean       Standard error

Dependent variables:

 N T Bi
1+N T Bi × ei (dependent variable)   0.1929         (0.5946)
 ti
1+ti × ei (alternative dep. var.)    0.0354         (0.0462)

Explanatory variables:

y/m (inverse import penetration)     34.633         (65.070)
organization dummy                   0.6147         (0.4889)

Instruments:

Buyer concentration                  0.3691         (0.0618)
Seller concentration                 0.3618         (0.1538)
Buyer number of firms                0.4092         (0.5248)
Seller number of firms               0.2263         (0.2592)
geographic concentration             0.7097         (0.1431)
Minimum efficient scale              0.0228         (0.0340)
Unionization                         0.3435         (0.1597)
Tenure                               5.5211         (1.6439)
(Factor shares)
Engineers                            0.0314         (0.0214)
White collar                         0.1536         (0.0440)
Skilled workers                      0.1081         (0.0308)
Semi-skilled workers                 0.0957         (0.0398)
Cropland                             0.0197         (0.0521)
Pasture                              0.0073         (0.0269)
Forest                               0.0005         (0.0021)
Physical capital                     0.3596         (0.2563)
Inventories                          0.0302         (0.0123)
Coal                                 0.0020         (0.0022)
Mineral                              0.0010         (0.0017)
Petroleum                            0.0332         (0.0473)
  Notes: Factor shares, including the omitted category ‘unskilled
  workers’ sum to 1.




                               30
Appendix B               Structural estimation procedures

Maximum likelihood estimation
Estimation of equations (7) or (8) by maximum likelihood poses specific challenges, because
of the endogenous nature of the explanatory variables, the censoring from below of the
dependent variable, and discrete nature of the organization dummy. As the original paper
by Goldberg and Maggi (1999) is silent on the exact way in which estimation was carried
out, we have experimented with several estimation strategies, yielding similar results. In
the main table of results, Table 2, we choose the method that leads to parameter estimates
values that are closest to the Goldberg and Maggi (1999) results for the original protection
for sale model.
   The most straightforward way to estimate the model is by a two-step procedure, initially
proposed by Nelson and Olson (1978). The endogenous variables in the Tobit model are
replaced with consistent first-stage estimates. This mirrors the estimation strategy in the
related model of Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000). Import penetration and organization
are replaced with fitted values from, respectively, a least squares and probit regression of
either variable on the full set of instruments. Alternatively, in the first stage the interaction
term (I ×y/m) can be predicted directly, with a Tobit regression, comparable to the approach
in the minimum distance results. Results for this approach are reported in column (6)
of Table 3. In the former case, where I is predicted separately, results are very similar
(γ̂ = 0.879, β̂ = 0.996, αˆL = 0.880).
   The F-test for joint significance of the instruments in the import penetration equation
and the χ2 -tests for the Probit regression of I and Tobit regression of I × y/m reject the
null hypothesis of joint-insignificance, confirming that the instruments have predictive value
in the MLE estimation.35 If we limit the set of instruments, using only physical capital and
composition of the workforce for y/m and geographic concentration and composition of the
workforce for I (and the combination of these variables for I × y/m, results are again very
similar, but the estimates for γ become 0.812 and 0.807).
   As Amemiya (1979) has shown, the two-step procedure is consistent, but not asymptot-
ically efficient. Consequently, we have also tried to implement a one-step procedure. We
did not find any example in the literature where the coefficient on the interaction of an
endogenous limited dependent variable and another endogenous variable is estimated in a
single step. If we ignore the endogeneity of the organization dummy, we can use the pro-

                                               31
cedure proposed in Smith and Blundell (1986). The original estimation by Goldberg and
Maggi (1999) mentions explicitly that: “[...] we also estimated a specification in which the
political-organization dummies were treated as econometrically exogenous; this turned out
to make no appreciable difference, either for the point estimates or the standard errors.”
(p.1143) With only a single endogenous variable on the right-hand side, the log-likelihood
function, after concentrating over σ22 (the variance of the error term in the import penetration
equation) is given by:
                      ³                ´
             ln L = ln L(²2 )L(²1 |²2 )
                      N ³ 1 X yi                      ´
                  = − ln            (     − X 0 β2 )2
                      2      N i mi
                                    h1           ²1i i             ³ ² − ntb ´
                                                                      1i    i
                       + I[ntbi >0]     ln δ + ( )2 + I[ntbi ≤0] Φ
                                      2           δ                      ω

                                             ψ 0 + θ0 Ii yi      yi
                     where ²1i = ntbi −                     − δ(    − X 0 β2 )
                                                 σ1      mi      mi
                                   σ12
                              δ =
                                   σ22
                              ω = [σ12 (1 − ρ212 )]1/2
                                     N T Bi
                            ntbi =              ei
                                   1 + N T Bi
Because the results of the one-step estimator are closer to the results obtained by Goldberg
and Maggi (1999), on a slightly different data set, and to the minimum distance results, we
used this method for all results in Table 2. Table 3 contains robustness checks using other
estimation methods.


Minimum distance estimator
The minimum distance estimation proceeds in two steps. In the first step, we estimate the
reduced form equations for each of the three endogenous variables separately as a function of
the same set of instruments (Z) used also for the maximum likelihood estimation. The (in-
verse) import penetration equation, equation (B.12), is estimated by ordinary least squares.
The interaction between the organization status and the import penetration, equation (B.13),
is estimated using a Tobit regression. As mentioned in the text, we do not have enough ob-
servations to estimate the reduced form regression for the organization dummy separately
and obtain the reduced form expression for the protection equation by multiplying out the

                                               32
interaction term. Therefore, we follow the same pragmatic solution as Eicher and Osang
(2002). Substituting the two endogenous explanatory variables into the estimation equation
of interest, equation (8), we obtain the third reduced form equation, equation (B.14), which
is also estimated using a Tobit regression. The three first-stage regressions are given here:
                             yi
                                 = ζ10 Zi + u1i                                                        (B.12)
                             mi
                           ∗ yi
                          Ii     = ζ20 Zi + u2i                                                        (B.13)
                             mi
                                           yi       yi
                             yi∗ = θ0 Ii∗     + ψ0     + λ + ²2i
                                          mi       mi
                                 = θ0 (ζ20 Zi + u2i ) + ψ 0 (ζ10 Zi + u1i ) + λ + ²2i
                                  = λ + (θ0 ζ20 + ψ 0 ζ10 ) Zi + (θ0 u2i + ψ 0 u1i + ²2i )             (B.14)
                                    |       {z           }       |         {z           }
                                             ζ30                           u 3i


       In the second stage, we estimate the structural coefficients of the model (θ0 and ψ 0 ) from
the reduced form coefficients with a two-step GMM procedure. The estimated coefficients
   0                    0       0
ζˆ3 are regressed on ζˆ2 and ζˆ1 using an appropriate weighting matrix constructed from the
scores of the first stage regressions. The method is described in detail in Lee (1995), which
also contains all the formulas and a sample algorithm.


Notes
   1
       See, for instance, Goldberg and Maggi (1999) and Eicher and Osang (2002) among others.
   2
       Goldberg and Maggi (1999) already pointed out some of the difficulties involved in using NTB’s coverage
ratios. Mitra, Thomakos and Ulubasoglu (2002) and McCalman (2004) have also highlighted this discrepancy,
and have used tariff data to measure protection in the case of Turkey and Australia respectively.
   3
       This alleviates the problem pointed out by Mitra et al. (2002), that a high estimate of the proportion
of the population politically organized and a high estimate of the government’s weight on aggregate welfare
are not mutually consistent.
   4
       In a recent contribution to this journal, Mitra et al. (2005) make substantial headway in this regard.
Taking all sectors to be lobbying, they use the resulting single estimated coefficient to identify the welfare
weight based on assumed values for the share of population involved in lobbying. Their estimation produces
a much more realistic welfare weight implying a government that does care considerably about contributions.
We do not follow their innovative approach here because we want to relate our innovation, namely partial
rent capturing, to the standard empirical protection for sale literature.
   5
       UNCTAD uses 18 different categories: quantity, price, quality,threat, advance payment, anti-dumping
duty, anti-dumping investigation, countervailing duty, countervailing duty investigation, authorization, health



                                                        33
and safety, license, inspection, labelling/marketing/packaging, product characteristics/standards, single chan-
nel, testing, embargoes/prohibitions. See also the discussion in Deardorff and Stern (1997).
   6
       Information on the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) can be obtained from the following web-
site: http://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu/default.asp. For further details on the methodology see Bradford
(2003a) and Bradford (2003b).
   7
       Total protection is calculated as the sum of the tariff and NTB’s tariff equivalent rates.
   8
       This measure is constructed by determining first, at the tariff line level of disaggregation, whether a
product is subject or not to one of 18 different types of NTB identified by UNCTAD. The “coverage ratio”
is then calculated at the 3-digit level, and measures the percent of imports covered by one or more NTB.
   9
       The original model also allows for import subsidies as well as export taxes and subsidies. The subsequent
literature has largely disregarded these policies in line with the empirical facts or even explicitly excluded
them, as in Levy (1999) and Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (2000). In our context, subsidies would paradoxically
be only partially funded by the government, and for this reason we follow the more recent literature and do
not consider them.
  10
       Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (2000) propose a model where this choice is endogenous. In their model,
quantitative restrictions emerge only if domestic importers (or foreign exporters) carry substantial political
clout.
  11
       Remember that not all individuals need to own sector-specific factors. In particular, some might own
only unskilled labor and, as in Grossman and Helpman (1994), we assume that unskilled workers are not
able to organize. As a result, even if all non-numéraire sectors in the economy were organized, the share of
the population that is organized might well be strictly less than one.
  12
       Again note that this is a generalization of the standard model where Q is empty and T contains all
non-numéraire sectors.
  13
       Note that allowing for a non-uniform distribution of these payments would affect the policy vector as
it changes the weights assigned to different parts of the rent. The effects of partial rent capturing are in a
sense similar yet more extreme, as part of the rent is not given any consideration at all. We are grateful to
an anonymous referee for pointing out this analogy.
  14
       This result follows immediately from the assumption of quasi-linearity and separability of the preferences.
See Grossman and Helpman (1994) for further details.
  15
       Note that we do not need to distinguish sectors that face a tariff from sectors subject to a quota (that
is, whether i ∈ T or i ∈ Q) because only the direct profit term would differ; however, the indicator in front
of this term does not switch on since i cannot equal j for cross derivatives.
  16
       We follow this particular specification choice for comparison purposes. As pointed out by Goldberg and
Maggi (1999), page 1140, several other possible empirical strategies could be pursued.
  17
       We relax this assumption in the section on robustness checks where we distinguish sectors that are
covered primarily by tariffs and those that are subject mainly to quantity restrictions.
  18
       In other words, the coefficient on the interaction term is large.
  19
       In the data, only left-censoring actually occurs.
  20
       Rather than estimating µ, we follow Goldberg and Maggi (1999) and fix it to a value of one. We tried
alternative values (2 and 3) and the structural coefficient estimates are not sensitive to this change.


                                                           34
  21
       Unfortunately, all the standard tests for endogeneity are invalid in the current model, because the
dependent variable is censored and the potentially endogenous variable Ii enters the model interacted with
a (certainly) endogenous variable (y/m).
  22
       See Appendix B for more details.
  23
       Robustness checks using different thresholds are discussed in Section 6.2.
  24
       See Appendix A for details.
  25
       Like Eicher and Osang (2002) – see footnote 7, page 1707 – we were not able to obtain the same dataset
used by Goldberg and Maggi (1999). Furthermore, following Eicher and Osang (2002), we have used political
contributions for the 1983-1984 cycle to construct the organization dummy while Goldberg and Maggi (1999)
use data for the 1981–1982 campaign.
  26
       The t-statistic for this test is 4.646.
  27
       The parameter estimates in Goldberg and Maggi (1999) and Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000) are
consistent with both alternative explanations for the low rates of observed protection. The weight of aggre-
gate welfare in the government’s objective function (β) and the share of the population involved in lobbying
(αL ) are both estimated very high. The sizeable cross-sectoral variation in rates of protection in the data
points towards β over αL as an explanation for low average protection rates. In contrast with previous
results, though, we estimate the share of the population involved in lobbying much lower: between 12 and
34 percent.
  28
       A likelihood ratio test leads to the same conclusion. Note that the standard error on γ is calculated
using the ∆-method. While the constant term in the estimating equation is only marginally significant, the
structural parameter γ is a nonlinear function of this parameter.
  29
       Ideally, the reduced form equation explaining the organization status as a function of the instruments
should be estimated with a Probit regression. However, the interaction of the reduced forms for organization
status and inverse import penetration (I × y/m) would generate more reduced form coefficients than we have
observations available. Therefore, we follow the same pragmatic solution as Eicher and Osang (2002).
  30
       Our results differ somewhat from those obtained by Eicher and Osang (2002), as can be seen comparing
the first two columns in Table 2. We verified with them that we used the exact same estimation approach.
We also use the same data set, provided by Kishore Gawande. One difference is that they dropped one
industry, likely because of missing values for one of the variables required in the other model they estimate.
  31
       The F-statistic is 4.108.
  32
       Ideally one should use the tariff equivalent of NTB, as in the second column of Table 1, but those are
not available at the SIC industry level.
  33
       This represents about 25% of the sample, and we have chosen this cut-off point because the distribution
of tariff rates exhibits a natural break at this point.
  34
       Thanks are due to these authors for generously making their data available to us. Eicher and Osang
(2002) use the same data set, but we have been unable to obtain the data used in Goldberg and Maggi
(1999).
  35
       We do not report the first stage estimates, but they are very similar to those obtained in Goldberg and
Maggi (1999) which use the same explanatory variables, but their left-hand side variables refer to a different
year.


                                                          35
