NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVE EFFECTS OF PENSIONS

Edward P. Lazear

Working Paper No. 1126

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Lambrldge

uij8

May 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Pensions and in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #1126
May 1983

Incentive Effects of Pensions

Abstract

Many different types of pension plans exist in American firms. The
stipulations of plans vary dramatically, even among large firms, with respect
to vesting, relationship of the pension to final salary, maximum and minimum

years of service constraints, and maximum and minimum benefit levels. These
provisions are examined to determine their effects on worker behavior.

Spe-

cifically, the paper analyes which plans encourage or discourage appropriate
worker responses in hours worked, turnover, human capital investment and

effort. An attempt is made to explain the provisions in light of the
findings.

Edward P. Lazear
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
(312) 962—7464

Private pensions have experienced rapid growth during the past 30 years.
A.lthough there are elements of pensions that many plans share, there are also

a large number of differences across plans. The most obvious differences
relate to the basic structure of the pension benefit formula: the plan may be

of the defined contribution or of the defined benefit type. In the latter
cateqory the flat or pattern plan can be distinguished from the formula or

conventonal plan.
Economists often refer casually to the effects that changes in the bene-

fit formulas have on worker behavior. Most frequently, these comments relate

to the effects of vesting on worker turnover. But as far as I am aware, no
systematic attempt has been made to analyze the ways in which various pro-

visions of the pension benefit formulas influence worker behavior.1 This
essay attempts to do just that. Specifically, it examines the effects of
pension benefit provisions on worker turnover, labor supply, investment in

human capital, and worker effort. Existing benefit formulas are compared with
formulas that produce first best results and an attempt is made to determine

if and understand why provisions may deviate from those that produce efficient

outcomes. In so doing, it is hoped that the understanding of the existence of
private pensions will be furthered.

The paper examines a number of different pension institutions. It
analyzes how worker productivity (as affected by turnover, investment in human
capital and effort) is influenced by a change from defined benefit to defined
contribution plans and why pattern plans and conventional plans induce very

different behavior. It also examines the effects of minimum and maximum years
of service requirements, industry—wide vs. company—wide plans, the relationship between hours—of—work constraints and pensions, why pensions are often

related to final salary, as well as a number of other issues. For most of the

—2—

analysis, the pension rule is taken to be exogenous so that the incentive

effects of that rule per se can be described. This is a less ambitious task
than understanding why those rules exist and what other factors are involved.
Occasionally some conjectures on the reasons for particular rules are

presented, but that is not the primary purpose of the essay. The most
important findings are:

Pension benefit formulas cannot affect worker behavior or cause deviations
from efficiency if each worker's wage is directly and appropriately

related to his own pension level. Without explicit offsets, the following
results obtain:

•

Defined benefit pattern plans induce an efficient allocation of
resources.

•

Defined benefit conventional plans induce too little turnover, too

much work, too much effort and too much human capital investment
relative to the efficient outcome.
•

Defined contribution plans always induce an efficient allocation of
resources.

•

Complete and immediate vesting is a necessary condition for fully
efficient pension plans. Incomplete vesting• tends to result in too

little work by some, and too much by others. The standard intuition
that pensions create longer job tenure on average is not necessarily

correct. The apparent inefficiency, but widespread existence, of
imperfectly vested pension plans suggests that the sorting or
retention of workers may be an important problem.
•

Minimum years of service constraints create inefficiency in pattern
plans, whereas such constraints may actually reduce the inefficiency

of conventional plans. Further, maximum years of service constraints

—3—

tend to offset the inefficiency introduced by minimum years of service
constraints.
0

The inefficiencies introduced by defined benefit conventional plans
can be undone by specifying required effort levels. Thus, piece rate
workers, who choose their own effort levels, should not have defined
benefit conventional plans.

A Model
The essence of the relationship between benefit formulas and worker

behavior can be analyzed in the context of a one—period model. Workers are

paid some wage, W, and are entitled to a pension, P, which may depend upon
years of service, salary, and a number of other rules having to do with mini-

mum and maximum age and years of service. In this one—period context, "years
of service" is thought of simply

as

the number of years or hours, H, worked

during the period so that a benefit formula that depends upon years of service

is one that has H as an argument.
Workers can control two variables: The amount of time worked, H,

is the

labor supply variable and is affected by the worker's alternative use of time

function, L(H). This reflects either the value of leisure or the wage on an
alternative job, whichever is highest. In this way, we can analyze worker
turnover in this simple framework since there need be no formal distinction
between retirement and quitting to take another job (although the pension flow
may differ depending upon what the worker does with his time).
Both effort and investment in human capital are captured by the worker's

control over K, which affects worker productivity and potentially the wage.
No distinction is made in this model between effort and human capital,

although some differences may be relevant.2 There is some cost associated

—4—

with increasing K, given by the total cost function C(K). This carries
either the interpretation of costs of investment in human capital, in the form
of formal schooling or on—the—job training which occurs before the current
period, or the disutility value associated with additional effort.

The reason that H and K must be distinguished is that effort or
investment in human capital affects pensions in a different way from years of

service. All defined benefit plans depend upon years of service, but only

some depend upon salary as well. Effort and human capital investment are
likely to affect salary directly, but years of service only indirectly.
The approach does not build in any explicit reason for the existence of

pensions, although a number have been given in the literature.3 Instead, the
reverse strategy is adopted. The effects of various provisions are analyzed
in hope of obtaining clues to the reasons for their existence.
Given the two choice variables, it is trivial to write down the

efficiency conditions for labor supply, H, and effort or human capital, K.
The value of K in increasing output is normalized to be $1 and the worker's

productivity at K = 0
(V + K)H

is V per unit of time. Thus, the workerts output is

and the efficiency criterion is derived by maximization of social

benefit minus social cost or, under separability, by

(1)

Max (V + K)H — C(K) — L(H)
H,K

The first—order conditions for efficiency are

(ii)

H =

C'(K)

and
(lii)

V+KL'(H)

—5—

Whether the worker behaves in a way so as to insure efficiency depends

upon his own utility maximization. Additionally, since firms wish to maximize
profits, it is necessary to look to the interaction between the two in order
to derive implications for changes in the pension plan.

For generality, allow that the worker's choice of K and H can affect

both W and P. Then the worker's problem is

Max W(K, H)H + P(K, H) - C(K) -

(2)

L(H)

H,K
which yields as first—order conditions,

/K =

(2i)

a/aH =

(2ii)

(aW/aK)H +

(3W/H)H +

W

P/K

—

C'(K)

= 0

+ aP/aH — L'(H) =

o

What makes the issue less than straightforward is the fact that payments
that takes the form of a pension must be offset by a decrease in the wage

rate. This is the result of the firm's zero profit constraint, which is

(V+K)H=wH+p

(3)

or
W = V + K - P/H

Equation (3) says that total payments to the worker must equal total output by
the worker.

Important is the way in which the worker perceives that his wage is

affected by his pension. Although it is true that (3) must hold for all
workers, it is not necessary that the worker's wage respond directly to his

own pension level. For example, a wage could be "fixed," and the worker could

be allowed to choose his pension by altering H, but these actions would not

affect W as he perceives it. Although it is true that for all workers (3)

—6—

must hold, any one worker's effect on W may be regarded as trivial or zero.
First, consider the opposite situation, where the worker recognizes that

any increase in P that is not accompanied by a corresponding increase in
productivity must result in a lower wage. (This would be true in a one—worker
firm.) The result is that the provisions of the pension plan cannot affect

behavior. There is never a deviation from first—best efficiency. The reason
is that the worker internalizes the full extent of his actions, no matter how

inefficient the pension formula may appear. This is trivial to show formally:
If the worker recognizes that (3) holds, then his maximization problem
from (2) becomes

Max (V + K - P/H)H +
H,K

(4)

P-

C(K) - L(H)

or
Max (V + K)H - C(K) - L(H)
H,K

which is the same as (1). The first order condition must be the same, viz.,

(4i)

or

HC'(K)

and

- =V + K- - +

(4ii)

or

- - L'

(H) = 0

V+K=L'(H)

Equations (4i, 4ii) are identical to (ii, lii) so the worker chooses (H, K)
so as to guarantee first best efficiency, irrespective of the pension benefit
formula-. ny action: that-the worker takes that affects his pension also

affects his wage in the opposite direction and by a corresponding amount. If
the worker is fully aware of this, then all pension changes are offset and

—7—

internalized, no matter how bizarre the pension formula. It is the
recognition by the worker that things must add up on the firm side of the

problem that forces him

to

behave efficiently.

There is another way to state the same proposition: Distortions caused by

the pension can always be undone by a judiciously chosen wage function. As
long as
W(K, H)

V + K — P(K, H)/H

for all K, H

the worker's behavior cannot be affected by the pension. Whatever effect K

and H have to increase P is exactly offset by a reduction in W( ). As
long as the worker understands this relationship, pension effects wash out.

Then how can pension formulas affect behavior? In a multi—worker firm,
it may well be the case that the individual's wage is not a direct function of

his own pension benefits, even though all must add up across workers. This
has nothing to do with worker heterogeneity, but is the result of an

externality that is produced by separating the wage determination process from

the pension determination process at the level of the individual worker. Two
points are worth noting: First, there is no obvious reason why the firm

doesn't make the worker explicitly aware of the true relationship between P

and W. This is explored below. Second, a difference between the defined
benefit and defined contribution plans may be that the latter makes explicit

the relationship between P and W whereas the former does not. This is
also discussed below.

Those points aside, consider the worker's problem when W is set so

that

*

*

in equilibrium P/H = V + K - P(H

,

*

K )/H

*

*

where H , K

are the result

of the worker's maximization problem, which takes 71 as constant. This
insures zero profits, but the worker does not take that condition into account

in choosing H, K. For most of what follows, it is useful to recognize that

—8—

pension benefit formulas rarely4 directly depend upon K, but instead depend

upon K indirectly through W. Therefore let P = P(W, H) for the
remainder. Further, suppose for simplicity that W is independent of H. If
workers take P/H as given, then the worker's maximization problem is

Max W(X)H + P(W, H) — L(H) — C(K)
H,K

(5)

where5

W(K) = V + K - P/H

The first—order conditions are:

ap

a

(5i)

- = H + -- — C' (K) =
-=v +x

(5ii)

—

(P/H) +

0

- - L' (H) =

0

The difference between (5i, 5ii) and (4i, 4ii) is that in (4), the

individual recognizes that increases in P are offset by decreases in W. In
(5), W is unaffected, as far as the individual worker is concerned, by

changes in P.
Even if the worker does not take into account the effect of pension on
wage, it is not necessarily the case that pensions result in an inefficient

allocation of effort, human capital, turnover, and leisure. This is easily

seen by examining the maximization prob1 in (2). In order for efficient
outcomes to result, it is sufficient that (2i) reduce to (ii) and (2ii) to

(2i). The first condition is met iff

(6a)

- = H(1

and the second condition is met if f

(6b)

— aw

—9—

Any pension—wage relationship that the worker perceives as satisfying

(6a) and (6b) induces an efficient allocation of resources.

When the worker internalizes the firm's side of the problem, he knows

that (3) holds or that
P = (V +

K-

W)H

Differentiating (3) yields

=

—

so that (6a) is satisfied and

- =V + K -

W

-

3W

so that (6b) holds. Thus, internalization of (3) results in full efficiency.

Some Implications

Pattern Plans:

Although complete internalization is sufficient for efficiency, it is not

necessary. The standard defined benefit pattern plan, where the pension
depends only upon years of service and not salary, induces an efficient

allocation of resources. That pension takes the form

P =

where

is

8

a fixed dollar amount and H is chosen by the worker. Under

those circumstances, and retaining the assumption that W = V + K —
3W/3K =

1

and 3P/3K =

0

so that (2i) becomes

H —

(7i)

Also, 3W/3H = 0

and 3P/3H =

C'(K) =

8 so

0

(2ii) becomes

Wii,

—10—

8 — L'(H) =

W +

(7ii)

0

V+K-L'(H)=O

or
Since

W = V + K - P/H

=V+K- 8.
Thus, (7i) and (7ii) are identical to (ii, lii) so efficiency is achieved.
Stated alternatively, since - = 0
since -s--

=

3w

-— = 0,

and w = v + K

and - = 1,
—

, (6b)

(6a) holds. Also,

reduces to 8

= 8 and

holds as well.

This yields the conclusion that all standard pattern plans are efficient.
The reason is that even though the worker does not explicitly take into
account that his wage is reduced by an amount corresponding to pension size,

he does implicitly. Since the increase in pension value is a function only of
time worked, as is earnings, all is implicitly internalized. The worker's

"true" annual wage is w + 3P/3H.

When the pension formula is

8H, his true

wage

= t -4-

=V + K

=V

-

+ K -

P/H

-

8

8/ - 8

so the worker's true wage, as he sees it, is equal

Thus,

to

his value to the firm.

all is efficient.

Conventional Plans:

The conventional defined benefit plan, where the pension benefit depends
upon

some salary

average times a factor times years worked does not result in

—11—

an efficient allocation of resources if the worker does not take (3) into

account explicitly. This can easily be shown:
The conventional plan has the form

P = HW
so that

+ H-)

=

and

p p aw

-5:=since

W = V + K - P/H

(The worker takes P/H as given at

Thus, - = H ,

but

W/ K =

1

so

(6a) is violated. However, aP/aH =

-=0

and

W

=

K

P/H and W is independent of H).

H H(1 — w/3K)

unless y =

0

'yW and V+K-W-H(W/H)='yw

and
since

because P/H = yW. Thus, (6b) holds.

Thus, (2i) does not become (ii) even though (2ii) does become (lii) for

conventional plans. Explicitly, for the conventional plan, first—order
conditions are:

H(1 + y)

(8i)

or

H =

—

C'(K)

C'(K)/(l

+

= 0

y)

V+K-'yw+-(w-L'(H)=o

(8ii)

or

K=L'(H)-V.

—12—

If the conventional plan results in inefficient effort and labor supply,

which way do the effects go? The answer can be easily seen in Figure 1.
First—order conditions (ii) and (lii) are shown by the solid lines, and (Bi)

is shown by the dotted line. (Recall that (8ii) is identical to (ii).)

Point Q is the s6lution to (ii, lii) and also to (7i, 7ii) corresponding to
the pattern plan since pattern plans are efficient. Point R is the solution

to (8i, 8ii). Since y > 0, the line corresponding to (Si) must lie below
that to (ii) which implies that Hc > H*

and that Kc > K*. There is too

much investment in human capital and effort, and too much labor supply with
too little turnover.

Thus, the simplest form of pattern plan provides incentives for an
efficient allocation of resources, whereas the standard conventional plan does

not. This suggests that conventional plans will also carry other provisions
that seek to undo the inefficiencies inherent in these plans. Hours
constraints, maximum and minimum numbers of years of service, and other
restrictions can be imposed to restore some of the lost efficiency and these

are explored in a later section.
It is interesting to perform some comparitive statics to predict when
inefficiencies will be most pronounced.

The most obvious relationship is that inefficiency is increased the

larger is .

Since the current specification of the conventional plan is a

one—parameter one, this simply says that the inefficiency is increased the
larger is the pension for any given number of hours worked and wage level.

This is hardly surprising since if y were zero, there would be no pension
and no inefficiency. Given the shapes of the functions, however, an increase

in y causes more inefficiency increase in K than it does in H.6

—13—

The inefficiency is greater when the value of raw labor, V,

Mechanically, this is because the K =

L'(H)

— V

is large.

function shifts to the

northwest. Intuitively, it is because the higher is V1 the larger is the
number of hours worked, even when all is efficient. Thus, the absolute size

of the inefficiency increases with V. This is more than a neutral change in
units, however, because the C(K) function is not permitted to change simultaneously.

Contrast this with the effect of a steepening of the cost function

described by an increase in C' (K) at every K. This has the interpretation
of an increase in the disutility of effort or an increase in the cost of

improving skills. The effect is similar to a decrease in y.

It reduces the

size of the inefficiency, and does so to a greater extent for K (effort and
human capital) than for H. The intuition here seems straightforward.
Steepening the cost function dampens the inefficiency effect because it makes
it more costly to behave in an opportunistic fashion.

The story is analogous for the disutility of hours worked function. An

increase in L' (H) for all H flattens the K function and results in a
reduction in both K and H. The reduction, however, is proportional so that
only the absolute size of the inefficiency decreases.

An obvious question is, "why are conventional plans widespread if they

introduce inefficiency?" There are a few possibilities:
First, everything said has been in terms of real wages, rather than

nominal ones. A conventional plan that bases the pension on the final few
years' salary indexes benefits to inflation. But even in an inflationary

environment, the same potential for distortion of too large H and K
exists. Further, pattern plans are often indexed to inflation, although

usually on an ad hoc basis. All that is necessary is that ,

the

dollar

-14—

amount

per

year of service, be adjusted to the CPI or other easily obtainable

index.

There are other possibilities. It has been assumed throughout that the
wage takes the form

W = V + K - P/H

As mentioned at the outset, it is always possible to undo the distortion
introduced by the pension by changing the wage function in a corresponding

fashion. But in this case the way by which the wage function changes to
restore optimality is of particular interest because it implies a direct
relationship between wages, human capital, and the pension formula.
It turns out that the efficient wage function that also guarantees zero
profit is

w =

+ K)

(,

That efficiency is guaranteed is easily seen. Equation (Ga) becomes

Y1)H=H(1
or

___
1 +

1

I

1 +

I

K -

W

—

and (Gb) becomes

1W = V +

W(1 + y) = V + K
w =

Since

+ K)

both (6a) and (Gb) are true, efficiency is guaranteed. Further, since

W + P/H = W(1 + y)

—15—

and since w =

+ K), W + P/H = V + K so zero profits are

guaranteed.

Thus, w =

+ K) is the efficiency inducing wage to couple with

conventional defined benefit plans. This is a specific example of the earlier
statement that setting

W V + K - P(W,

H)/H

always insures efficiency. In this case, that identity holds when

W E

+ K).

This produces an implication. The efficient wage function for a pattern
plan is

W=V+Kand

w =

+ K)

for a conventional plan so that, other things equal, wages should rise more

rapidly with K for pattern plan workers than for conventional plan
workers. As a corollary, conventional plans with large values of

y should

reward effort and human capital less well.

These implications are somewhat difficult to test because K is not
easily observed. However, since K reflects human capital investment as well
as effort, one possibility is to examine the effect of schooling and experi-

ence on wages. If wages and pensions are set to induce efficiency, then

workers on jobs with conventional plans with high 's should have the lowest
effect of schooling and experience on earnings. This will be tested in
subsequent work.

—16—

Again, no rationale for setting up conventional, as opposed to pattern,

plans is built into the analysis. The obvious explanation is that making the
pension a function of salary allows one formula to be used for many different

worker types. But most companies distinguish between worker types anyway,
assigning conventional plans to white collar workers and pattern plans to blue

collar workers. Many make finer distinctions. Tying pension to wage in order
to conserve on paper seems to be a weak explanation.
The argwnent that pensions are linked to wages for incentive reasons is

not correct. There are two related reasons: First, the wage itself is
sufficient to provide the appropriate incentives. Second, too much incentive
is generated by tying pension to wage. That was the first result of this
section. More subtle explanations are required.

Defined Contribution Plans:

What has been shown so far is that conventional defined benefit plans
result in inefficiencies when the worker's wage is not adjusted to his own

pension receipt. With defined contribution plans, what the worker receives is
equal (in an actuarial sense) to what he contributes. Thus,

defined

contribu-

tion plans cannot introduce inefficiencies, irrespective of their provisions.
This is simply a trivial restatement of the proposition that if the worker
takes into account that his wage offsets any pension benefits received, he
will always internalize the full effects of the pension and behave efficient-

ly. Writing this down rigorously, note that with the defined contribution

pension plan, the contribution per period of time, G(W, H), times the length

of working life, H, must equal the received pension benefit, P(W, H).
In the absence of pensions, the wage must be set equal to V + K in
order to achieve efficiency. This follows directly from necessary condition

—17—

(6b) because in the absence of a pension, P/H = 0.
Thus, start by setting W = V ÷ K and then introduce a defined contri-

bution plan that taxes G(W, H) per H worked. The worker's problem is then
Max H(W - G(W, H)) + P(W, H) — C(K) — L(H)

(9)

But since the rules of the plan imply that P(W, H) = HG(W, H), (9) becomes
Max WH - C(K) - L(H)

H,K
or

Max (V + K)H — C(K) - L(H)
H,K

This is identical to (1) so that efficiency is guaranteed. The first—order
conditions are
aw

- = - H - C' (K) = 0
a

(9i)

=

(9ii)

Since aW/aK = 1,
V + K

W

—

L' (H)

= 0

(9i) reduces to (ii). Further since P = [G(W, HflH, W =

from (3). Since P/H =

G

(9ii) reduces to (lii).

Thus, defined contribution plans are always efficient without any

required additional constraints. This suggests the implication that defined
contribution plans should be more prevalent in situations where the inef-

ficiencies associated with the conventional defined contribution plan are most

pronounced. Using the comparative statics results generated above, defined
contribution plans should be used over conventional plans when pensions are

relatively large (r

causes greater inefficiency), when investment in human

capital is high (C(K) function is flat) and when hours worked are large
(L(H) function is flat). This suggests the use of defined contribution plans
for high wage, highly skilled workers.7

—18—

Vesting
In order to consider the effects of vesting, it is necessary to allow for
some workers to leave before the vesting date and others to stay beyond that

date. The easiest way to do this is to allow for two types of individuals:

the first type has alternative use of time function L(H) and the second has

alternative use of time function L(H) such that L(H) > L(H)
Let A of the population be of the first type and (1 — A)

for all H.

be of the second

type.

A full and immediate vesting pension of the pattern plan type is always

efficient. This simply requires duplication of the analysis on pp. 9 and 10
above for the two types of workers because implicit in that analysis was the

assumption that pensions vest immediately. The first-order conditions of the
worker's maximization problem are
H =

V + K -

C'(K)

8 + 8 = L' (H)

for the first type, and

= C'
V + K -

(K)

3 + 3 = L'(H)

for the second type.

Now consider the same pattern plans without vesting. The simplest form

of nonvesting is to assume that 3 = 0

if H < H. There are three cases:

First, H < H and H < H. This is the same as no pension since P/H = 0
and so there is full efficiency. Second, H > H and H > H. This is the
case just analyzed as fully vested pension benefits and it yields efficiency

as well. The only interesting case arises when H < H, H > H or when
H > H, H < H.

—19—

The important feature is that there is subsidization of the stayers by

the leavers and this causes a distortion. The wage paid to workers must be

sufficiently low to cover the pension costs to A of the population who are
stayers. Thus, the zero profit condition is

A(WH + BH) + (1 — A)WH

(3')

=

+ (1

(V + K)(AH

— A)H)

or

W

= V + K

AS

-

+ (1 Now, the maximization problem for the stayers is
Max H[V + K —
K,H

(10')

AS

(
A +

+

SH

— C(K) — L(H)

(1—X)

where stars denote equilibrium values. The first—order conditions are:

= H —

(10'i)

C'(K) =

0

and

(1- X)5 —L'(H) =0.
-

dH

L1O'ii)

A + (1A)j
H*

Similarly, for leavers,
-

-

(10')

Max H[V +

)J -

IZ - (
A +

since H < H so pension = 0.

(1—X)

The first—order conditions are

- = - C'(K) =

(10'i)

C(K) - L(H)

0

3K

and

(10'ii)

-=

+—

AS

A +

(1—A)

—

=0

—20—

The situation is shown in Figure 2.

Points Q and Q are the efficient points for movers and stayers,
respectively, and are obtained in the absence of a pension. Note that H > H

and K > K because L' (H) < L' (H) for all H.
In the presence of the pension that does not vest immediately, (lOti) and
(1O'i) are identical to (lOi), but (1O'ii) and (1O'ii) shift as shown in

Figure 2. Thus, the new equilibrium points are R and R for movers and
stayers.

The most important result is that both H and K deviate from the
efficient levels. Stayers spend too much time on the job and invest in too
much human capital and effort because the marginal return to a year worked,
— A)

V+K+
A

-

+ (1—A)

exceeds the true value of work, V + K. Similarly, leavers leave too early
and do not invest in enough human capital and effort because the marginal
return to a year worked,
A8
H*

A + (1—X)jj

is less than the true value of work, V + K.
A few additional points are in order. First, average tenure in the
economy may rise or fall with the addition of an imperfect vesting provision.

Although average tenure rises for those who eventually receive a pension,

average tenure falls for those who do not. The effect on the average for the
economy as a whole depends upon the proportion of people in each group and

upon

the

increase and decrease for the respective groups, which depends in

turn upon the slopes of L(H) and L(H). But it is indeed quite possible
that average tenure falls as the result of vesting.

—21—

Second, although it has not been the approach of this analysis to
determine why or whether particular provisions exist in long run equilibrium,

ignoring those issues is particularly bothersome here. In particular, since
leavers subsidize stayers, one would expect some firms to cater only to

leavers, offering no pension and paying wage W = V + K.

This type of self—

sorting, akin to Salop and Salop (1976), causes the non—fully vested pension

equilibrium to become efficient. The reason is that firms that offer pensions

obtain only stayers: Thus A =

1

and (1O'ii) become identical with (lOu).8

A sorting equilibrium is not established if workers do not know to which

class they belong before joining the firm. Of course, as is the case with any
of these apparent distortions, a firm that offered compensation that induced
efficiency could provide higher average wealth to the workers and should

attract the entire labor force. So full and immediate vesting should

dominate. But if L(H) is positively sloped, then some specificity to the
firm-worker relationship is implied. Sorting is particularly important when
there exist substantial hiring costs or large amounts of firm—specific

capital. Still, there is no obvious reason why a pension is used instead of
deferred compensation that takes the form of steeply rising tenure—earnings
profiles.

These deeper issues aside, the point is that plans that do not vest

immediately introduce distortions. Thus, other things constant, fully-vested
plans are more efficient, which implies that plans should be organized at the

industry, or better national level to eliminate such distortions. The fact
that they are not suggests that some other issue, and the sorting of workers
is a logical candidate, raises important problems with which labor markets
must grapple.

—22—

The analysis for conventional plans is similar, has the same implications, and is not repeated here.

Minimum Benefit Levels
A number of plans have minimum benefit levels, below which pension

payments are not permitted to fall. These provisions are almost exclusively a
characteristic of conventional defined benefit plans. It might be thought
that this lump sum feature of the plan is a way by which the inefficiency

associated with conventional plans is eliminated. This is not the case.
A conventional plan with a minimum level of benefits takes the form

PySH

for P>P

= P

otherwise

Efficiency requires that (6a) and (6b) hold. When P < P, then (6a) holds
because

= 0.

But (6b) is violated because - = 0

and P > 0 implies

that W < V + K.
If the equilibrium were such that P > I', then (6a) implies that

= H(1 - 1)

=0.

This can only hold if y = 0,

i.e., if there is no pension so efficiency is

not achieved here either. Therefore, the addition of a minimum benefit level
cannot restore efficiency.

Minimum and Maximum Years of Service
for Pension Accrual

Some plans have minimum service requirements. Pension benefits do not
accrue for years worked less than, say, five so that a typical pattern plan
formula is

—23—

P = 8(H -

=

for H >

otherwise

0

Others have maximum years of service allowances so that the pension formula is

P=

for H <

8H

P =

otherwise

Some plans have both. This section examines the effects of these constraints
on behavior. The generalized pattern plan takes the form:

P=0
P = (H —

for

H<H
H<H<H

for

H>H

P = •y(H — H)W

for

H<H<H

P = r(H - H)w

for

H>H

P=0

for

H <H

P =

for

(H -

and the generalized conventional plan is

The result is that if the equilibrium level of hours, H, exceeds H

then there is too little K and H relative to the efficient amount. If H
H < H, then there is too much K, H. If H < H, then all is efficient.
The

analysis

is most straightforward for pattern or flat benefit plans.

Here, (2i) remains as in the efficient case (ii), H

- C'(K)

=

0,

but (2ii)

becomes

(b)

(c)

for H<H

K=L'(H) —V

(2iia)

K =

K =

L' (H) -

L'(H)

—

BH

V -

v +

H

for

H < H < H

for H > H

—24—

Again a graph helps to understand the solution. Q

denotes the efficient

point in Figure 3.

If H < H, then the constraint is binding for all workers and no one
receives pensions. The marginal value of hours in the creation of pension
benefits and the average cost of pension benefits is zero so this reverts to
the no pension case and all is efficient.

If the relationships are such that the equilibrium has H < H < H, then

the relevant function is K =

L' (H)

- V - 8H/H

and the equilibrium is at F1.

Here, K1 > K*, and H1 > H*, so there is too much effort, human capital,
and labor supplied. The reason is that when H > H > H, the marginal return
to an additional year worked in increasing the pension is .
the pension earned for only H —

H

But the cost of

years is spread over all years H so that

wage is reduced by less than the marginal value of pension benefits. Thus,
the net value of an additional hour worked is positive so workers overachieve,

and over—achievement depends directly upon the level of H. The larger is

H, subject to H > H, the larger is the inefficiency.
The reverse is true when H > H. Then the marginal pension value of an
additional year of work is zero, but the cost of previous accruals is spread

over all years so that W is reduced without an offsetting marginal benefit.

Thus, workers under—achieve. This is shown at F2 with H2 <H* and

K2 < K.
The analysis for conventional plans is similar, but slightly more

complicated. Here, (2i) is altered as well, depending upon the regime, since

P/W is not generally equal to zero. Instead,

—25—

(2i&)

H =

H =

(b')

[C'(K)

+

C'(K)

for H < H

yH]/(1

for H < H < H

+ 1)

for H>H.

H=C'(K)

(c')

Similarly, (2ii) becomes:

K =

(2iia')

K =

(b')

L' (H)

L'(H)

- V

- V -

for H < H

Iw

for

—fl-—

H < H < H

— H)W

K =

(C')

L'(H)

- V +

for H > H

H

Figures 4 and 5 graph the possibilities.

Figure 4 illustrates the cases where H < H and H < H < H. Efficiency

is shown at Q. If

is sufficiently high so that H < ,

then

Q is

the equilibrium arid all is efficient. No one works long enough to receive a
pension so it drops out completely and all is efficient.

If H1 is sufficiently low so that H < H < H in equilibrium, then the
relevant conditions are (2ib') and (2iib'). Equation (2ib') is shown. But

since w is a function of H, the exact shape of (2iib') is unknown. Still,
it is clear that (2iib') lies to the northwest of K =

L'(H)

— V.

Point C
*

*

denotes the solution to the standard conventional plan with H > H , K > K
The solution with H> 0 occurs at D. D can lie almost anywhere with
respect to Q and C, so nothing can be said about the efficiency of D

relative

*

to C. But it is clear that at D, H > H

*

and K > x so the

inefficiency is never eliminated. In the case of pattern plans, larger

deviations of H from zero make things worse for both H and K relative to
the efficient values. This suggests the following empirical proposition:
minimum years of service constraints should never be a feature of pattern

—26—

plans, but sometimes will make things better in a conventional plan and there-

fore may

be

part of conventional plans.

Finally,

*

in Figure 5, if H > H then it must be the case that H < H

*

K < K

because the equilibrium, E, must lie to the southwest of the

efficient point (since (2iic1) lies below K =

L'(H)

—

V).

However, whether

this is an improvement upon the conventional plan solution at F is ambigu-

ous. It is clear that it reduces K and H, but by too much. This implies
that too little investment, effort and work occur because the marginal

incentives are too low as in the flat case. Further, the inefficiency

worsens, the larger is H - H

so that the existence of a maximum years of

service constraint, when binding, should be coupled with minimum years of
service constraints.

Constraints on Work Time and Effort

Suppose that "all—or—nothing" contracts could be offered to workers. The
general rule is that these contracts can always be made efficient because they

remove all chance of opportunistic behavior by the worker. In this context,

this

would amount to a contract that specified H =

*

*
H

,

K = K

and some lump

sum payment. Ignoring costs of monitoring and enforcement, it is useful to
ask whether, when and what kind of constraints are desirable. In particular,

it is interesting to consider when fixing H or K alone is sufficient to
bring about efficiency.

A general statement follows from examination of (2). Equation (2i)
reduces to (ii) (efficiency) iff (6a) holds. So when (6a) holds, even if (6b)

is

*

violated, fixing H =

H

will result in full efficiency. The reason is

that then the worker maximizes only with respect to K and the solution to

(2i),

*

given H = H

*

is K = K

•

The reverse is true if (Gb) holds and (Ga)

—27—

*

does not. Then setting K = K

eliminates (2i) as a first—order condition
*

and the solution to (2ii), given K K ,

is

*

H

Equations (6a) and (6b) always hold for pattern plans. Therefore, there
should be no constraints on years of service or investment and effort with

pattern plans. One might then argue that mandatory retirement should be less
prevalent for workers with pattern plans than for conventional plans. This is
not a direct implication, however, because mandatory retirement refers to age
rather than to years of service.

Conventional plans satisfy (6b) but violate (6a). This implies that only

constraints on K (and not H) are required to bring about efficiency. Thus
skill levels and effort levels are to be precisely specified for conventional

plan workers. As the result, piece rate workers who are allowed to select
their effort levels, should not have defined benefit conventional plans.

Extensions of the Model and Additional Issues
Multiple Wage Rates

So far, wages have been constant over the lifetime. One question is, how
does generalization to multiperiods with different wage rates in each affect

the results? Specifically, in a two-period context, the pension can be paid
for out of the wages from either period, or from some combination of the

two. The result is that no matter how it is done, as long as the worker
recognizes that his wages depend upon the pension through the zero profit
constraint, or is forced to recognize it by an appropriate shift in the wage

function, all is internalized and no inefficiency results. Tilting the age—

earnings profile has no effect on behavior. This is easily seen. The
worker's problem is now

—28—

(11)

W1H1 + W2H2 + P(H11H21W1,W2) — C(K) — L(H11H2)

Max
K,H1 ,H2

subject to
W1H1 + W2H2 + P = (V + K)(H1

(3$)

and

+ H2)

W1=V+K- OP/H1, W2=V+K-(1 -8)P/H2 o•O1

First—order conditions are:

=
a

—
H1

8+ H2 —

(1—

p p
O)j+-j— C'(K)

= 0

(lii)

=
H1
a

(1 lii)

=

v

+

+

H2

i-

1

C'(K)

= 0

aP

ap
(1 - 8)

O—

-

+
1

1

=V

-

ap

=0

1

1

=0

+ K H1

a

= V +

K-

= V +
Equations (lii),

-

a

(1 - 0) — +

2

2

(1 liii)

aP

O-—

K-

2

-

aP
2

aL

=0
2

-0

(liii), (lliii) are the two—period analogue of (ii) and bring

about efficiency. Thus, independent of the division of pension costs, i.e.,

0,

for any

as long as the worker is aware of the competitive firm's response

to his pension increase, all is internalized and efficient.

This does not imply that pensions never distort incentives. If the
worker's own wage does not adjust to his own

pension,

but rather to the

average pension on which he has only a trivial effect, then inefficiencies can

result

as they do in the one—period case. More fundamentally, if the "true"

wage, including the value of pension accrual and other perks. does not equal
marginal product, and if the worker is allowed to choose his hours, then

inefficiencies result. But this point, which is analyzed in more detail in

—29—

Lazear [1981], is quite independent of pensions and holds even when all
compensation takes the form of a direct money wage.

Corner Solutions:

It is useful to consider some special cases. First, consider the case

where the H function, (2i), and the K function, (2ii), do not intersect in
the positive quadrant. This can happen either because the L'(H) function is
too flat, reflecting a very low utility loss associated with foregone addi-

tional hours of leisure, or because the Ct(K) function is too flat,
reflecting a very low marginal cost of effort or investment. Under such
circumstances, time worked, effort and human capital investment are infinite.

It is clear that such a situation cannot occur if for no other reason than

that the L(H) function becomes vertical (horizontal in the diagrams) when
time worked reaches length of life.

Second, it is possible that the L(H) function is perfectly inelastic at
H = 0.

This means that the worker views work at this firm as so distasteful

that he is unwilling to supply even one hour at any price. Then the intersection is at the origin, yielding the corner solution that H =

0

and K = 0.

Third, the worker may view all jobs as identical, in which case the L(H)

function is perfectly elastic at L(H) equal to the market wage. This makes

the K function a vertical line at (market wage —

V).

If this lies in the

positive quadrant, then equilibrium is at the interior intersection, because
the worker's value to this firm is sufficient to bid him away from rivals. In
the case where that vertical line lies to the left of the vertical axis, no

work occurs, because the worker's marginal product, V1 at this firm is insufficient to warrant employment given the market price of his services. If
that line is coincident with the vertical axis, then all are indifferent

—30—

because his marginal product here is identical to the market wage so neither
the worker nor firm has a preference over his work location.
Finally, if C' (K)
if L' (H)

is positive for K = 0

then a corner solution exists

is sufficiently steep (flat K function in the diagram) to avoid

an intersection in the positive quadrant. The interpretation is that the
fixed cost of effort or investment is sufficiently high to discourage any work

at this job. The solution is H = 0,

K = 0.

Incidentally, when comparing the solution, K has the interpretation of
effort or human capital specific to this firm. Obviously, if a corner

solution is reached because, say, V is too low relative to the market wage,
investment in human capital and effort at the other firm is still possible.

Maximum Age 1estrictions:
A number of plans have a maximum age of starting employment such that

workers who start after that age are not entitled to enrollment in the pension

plan. This is quite aside from any issues of vesting which depends upon years
of service, independent of age. Although no solid explanation of this
phenomenon is presented, it is useful to consider the issues.
The fact that firms do not want to put old workers of a given tenure

together with young workers of given tenure, suggests that old workers cost

more in terms of pension payouts even holding years of service constant. The
most obvious reason why this is the case is that a worker who starts at age 59
is likely to retire with fewer years of service than a worker who starts at,

say, age 45. If defined benefit plans were set up in a way that subsidized
retirees with fewer years of service, then it would be more costly to enroll

older workers in a pension plan than younger workers. Elsewhere [Lazear 1982,
1983], I have argued that it is efficient to set up pension plans the actuar-

—31—

ial value of which declines with increased years of service because of

incentive and turnover effects. I also find empirical support for this proposition. This story seems to provide an explanation for age restrictions, but
there remains the queston, why aren't plans made age— as well as experience—

dependent? Such a provision would probably be illegal under the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act, but this is a relatively recent constraint
and it is not clear why it does not apply to the provision that denies
pensions to older new hires.

Individualized Wage-Pension Combinations:

The basic result, that pensions cannot affect behavior if the corresponding wage adjustments are accounted for by the worker, leads to an obvious
question: Is the wage set independent of the pension, and if so, why? Why

doesn't

the firm

call

out a wage-pension combination such that W = V + K -

P(H, K)/H so that the worker is forced to internalize everything and

to

behave

efficiently?

The obvious answer is almost definitional. To do so makes the pension
identical to wage payments and the pension might as well be eliminated

altogether. The fact that wages and pensions are somewhat independent
provides some clue as to why there are pensions in the first place.
If pensions are part of an optimal compensation scheme that attempts to

deal with problems of incentives and turnover (as argued in Lazear 11982]),
then a pension that is independent of the wage for the individual worker
provides the extra degree of freedcn necessary to restore efficiency.

Simply

offering a higher wage does not provide the appropriate incentives because of

the contingent nature of pensions on performance. Pension "buyouts" of relatively less productive workers are part of the optimal compensation scheme.

—32—

The same is true if the pension functions as an insurance device, paying
more to workers who live longer (or who live to the same age but retire

earlier). Reducing the pension while at the same time increasing the wage

defeats the usefulness of the pension as an insurance device. Allowing the
worker to choose his wage—pension allocation results in the standard adverse
selection problem and separating equilibrium issues discussed by Akerlov
[1970] and Rothschild and Stiglitz [1976].

The exception to this is the rationalization of pensions as a tax—free

savings account.9 If it were performing only this function, then allowing the
worker to choose the combination of wage with pension would in no way negate
the tax saving effects of a pension and would allow the individual to tailor

the compensation to his individual situation. As the result, no rationalization of independent wage—pension provisions is provided by the tax argument.

Further, if taxes were the issue, a defined contribution plan would win on

almost every count. Yet defined benefit plans are prevalent.

Plans That 2re Not Actuarially Fair:

All of the analysis is conducted under the simplifying assumption that

P(H, K) is some fixed payment rather than some annual flow, which more
closely describes most pensions. If risk neutrality is assumed, the fact that

some workers may receive less than P while others receive more than P is
not essential. What is essential is that the interpretation of a pattern plan

as one that has P depend upon years of service in a linear fashion and a
conventional plan as one that depends upon some salary average and years of

service in a linear fashion is not accurate. Aside from explicit nonlinear—
ities built into the benefit formulas, there are implicit nonlinearities which
have to do with when the worker retires.

—33—

For example, in the pattern plan, it is the annual flow of pension
benefits, not the expected present value of those benefits that increases at

constant rate per year of service. In order for this to cause the present
value of pension benefits to increase at a constant rate per year of service
additional restrictions having to do with life expectancy, discount factors

and rate of accrual are required. In reality, I have shown that the contrary
is generally the case (Lazear [1982, 1983)). Beyond a certain number of years
of service, the present value of pension benefits actually declines with years

of service. A similar statement is true for conventional plans of the defined
benefit type as well.

In fact, in the case of conventional plans, the reduction in present

value with years of service beyond a certain point may help to restore the
efficiency that is lost when workers fail to account appropriately for the

relationship between wages and pensions. Since, in the absence of a decline,
workers tend to overinvest in human capital, to work too hard, and to put in
too many hours and years of service, this decline may actually move the
situation toward the first-best solution.

Finally, it has been assumed throughout that the wage never exceeds the

workerts marginal product. If it does, as I have suggested elsewhere, then
seemingly inefficient pensions may actually bring about efficiency.

Conclusion:

This paper creates as many questions as answers. The goal is to identify
the incentive effects of different pension provisions. In doing so, puzzles
arise because many provisions appear to have adverse incentive effects.

Although few of the puzzles are solved, some directions for empirical

investigation are suggested. In particular, the link between the wage

—34—

relationship and productivity variables bears a special correspondence to the

pension plan. For example, one implication is that pattern plans should be
coupled with wage functions that reward increased effort more generously than

those coupled with conventional plans. Further, the incidence of maximum and
minimum hours restrictions in pension plans is predicted, as well as the
pattern of hours and effort requirements.
Perhaps more important than the empirical implications of the model is

the clarifications of the effects induced by various pension provisions. Many
of the effects are subtle in mechanism, although not necessarily in size. Few
have been considered in the past and this essay takes a first step toward the
understanding of these institutions that often seem either innocuous or
arbitrary to the casual observer.

—35—

FOOTNOTES

*

Helpful

comments by Jerry Hausman, Herman Leonard, Barry Nalebuff, and

Sherwin Rosen are gratefully acknowledged.

Blinder, Gordon and Wise (1978), Burkhauser and Quinn (1981), and Fields
and Mitchell (1981) examine the effects on retirement behavior.

Stiglitz

(1982) considers vesting effects as well.

2For example, investment in human capital may be more easily observed
than changes in the level of effort, because the former may require the use of
the firm's resources (e.g., other employees as teachers,

.

.

3For example, some emphasize tax breaks enjoyed (Black [1980], Tepper
[1981], Merton [1982], Sharpe [1976], Bu1ow [1979, 1981] while others

emphasize incentive and mobility effects (Miller and Scholes [1981], Lazear
[1979, 1982, 1983])

4me exception is the split in benefit formula between white and blue
collar workers.

5mis is a special case because

= 1.

W(K) = V + K — P/H

implies that W'(K)

Additional distortions and offsets can be introduced by choosing other

W(K) functions. But unless the general condition that W(K, H)

V + K — P(K,H)/H

holds, the deviation from first best remains. Only then can the firm break
even and have conditions (2i) and (2ii) reduce to (ii) and (lii).

61n order to achieve an interior solution, it must be the case that the

K function is flatter than the H function, or that the disutility of labor
hours (i.e., the value of leisure) rises more rapidly than the cost of

additional human capital or effort. Suppose it did not. Then the solution

would be to continue to invest in K and keep working more and more hours.

Eventually, H approaches maximum feasible hours, so L'(H) must become

—36—

infinite, guaranteeing an interior solution.

7This ignores differences that result from consideration of the reasons

for pensions in the first place. This set of predictions is most consistent
with the view that a pension serves as a tax—free savings account, but
neglects any explanation for pensions having to do with incentives or
separation efficiency.

8hsch explores this mechanism both at the theoretical level and
empirically.

9See Miller and Scholes (1982), Bulow (1979, 1981), Black (1980), Pepper
(1981), Sharpe (1976), Merton (1982) for discussions.

—37—

REFERENCES

Akerlov,

George, "The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the Market

Mechanism," Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (ugust 1970): 488—500.
Asch, Beth, "Pensions and Self Selection," Mimeographed. University of
Chicago, 1983.

Black, F., "The Tax Consequences of Long—Run Pension Policy," Financial
Analysts Journal (July-August 1980): 3—10.

Blinder, A., Gordon, R., and Wise, David, "Market Wages, Reservation Wages and
Retirement Decisions," Princeton University, 1978.
Billow, Jeremy, "Analysis of Pension Funding under ERISA," NBER Working Paper
#402, November 1979.

Bulow, Jeremy, "What Are Corporate Pension Liabilities?" Stanford University
Working Paper, July 1981.
Burkhauser, Richard, and J. Quinn, "The Effect of Pension Plans on the Pattern
of Life Cycle Consumption," 1981.
Fields, Gary, and Mitchell, Olivia, "Pensions and Optimal Retirement
Behavior," NYSSILR WP #27 (March 1981).
Lazear, Edward P., "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political
Ecoriny 87 (December 1979): 1261—64.

Lazear, Edward P., "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity and Hours
Restrictions," xnerican Economic Review 71 (September 1981), 606—20.

Lazear, Edward P., "Pensions as Severance Pay," NBER Conference Volume on
Pensions, forthcoming, 1983.

Lazear, Edward P., "Severance Pay, Pensions, and Efficient Mobility," NBER

Working Paper #854, February 1982.

-.38—

Miller, Merton, and Scholes, Myron, "Executive Compensation, Taxes and
Incentives," University of Chicago, October 1979.
Merton, Robert C., "On Consumption-Indexed Public Pension Plans," NBER Working
Paper #910, June 1982.

Rothschild, Michael, and Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Equilibrium in Competitive
Insurance Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (November 1976): 629—49.
Salop, Joanne, and Salop, Steven, "Self—Selection and Turnover in the Labor
Market," Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (November 1976): 619—27.
Sharpe, W., "Corporate Pension Funding Policy," Journal of Financial Economics
3 (June 1976):

Stiglitz, George, "An Economic Analysis of Labor Turnover," Working Paper #53,

The Economics Series, Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social
Sciences, Stanford University, 1975.

Tepper, I., "Taxation and Corporate Pension Policy," Journal of Finance 36
(March 1981).

H

H =

H

0
H

C'(K)

C'(K)/(l+y)

K =

L'(H)-V

C

H

K

*

-v

K

Figure 1

Kc

=

H

K =

L(H) -

= L' (H) -

-v
K=L'W) _v+
A+

-v

A÷ (1—A)!_
H

A÷ (1—A)L

Figr 2

(1A

H

H = C'(K)

K = L'(H)-V—H/H
F

KL' (H)-V
(H)-Vi

H

K

K

Figure 3

H

H = C' (K)

C' (K) +

= L'(H)-V

in case where
H<H
K = L'

(H) -

V

-

H

C

H

in case

H<

-

*

Q

K

K0

Figure 4

H

H = C'(K)

(K) /(1+1)
K=

K =

L' (H) -V+1 (H-H) /H

Q

H

K

Figure 5

