                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SCHOOL-TO-CAREER AND POST-SECONDARY EDUCATION:
                 EVIDENCE FROM THE PHILADELPHIA EDUCATIONAL
                             LONGITUDINAL STUDY

                                          Frank F. Furstenberg
                                            David Neumark

                                          Working Paper 11260
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11260


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2005




We are grateful to Adena Galinsky for outstanding research assistance, and to Joshua Haimson and Thomas
Bailey for helpful comments. This paper was prepared for the Russell Sage Foundation’s Conference on
School-to-Work Transitions and School-to-Work Programs, New York, May 2004.The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by Frank F. Furstenberg and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
School-to-Career and Post-Secondary Education: Evidence from the Philadelphia Educational
Longitudinal Study
Frank F. Furstenberg and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 11260
March 2005
JEL No. I28, J24

                                           ABSTRACT

We study a set of programs implemented in Philadelphia high schools that focus on boosting
post-secondary enrollment. These programs are less career oriented than traditional school-to-
work programs, but are consistent with the broadening of the goals of school-to-work to
emphasize post-secondary education. The Philadelphia Longitudinal Educational Study (PELS)
data set that we examine contains an unusually large amount of information on individuals prior
to placement in STC programs. We use the detailed information in the PELS to study the process
of selection into these programs and to examine their impact on a set of mainly schooling-related
outcomes during and after high school, although we also consider their impact on non-academic
outcomes. The data point to positive effects of these programs on high school graduation and on
both academic and non-academic awards in high school, and similar negative effects on dropping
out of high school. The results also suggest positive effects on aspirations for higher education
and on college attendance. In addition, there is some evidence that these programs are more
effective in increasing college attendance and aspirations among at-risk youths.

Frank F. Furstenberg, Jr.
Department of Sociology
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
fff@sas.upenn.edu

David Neumark
Public Policy Institute of California
500 Washington Street, Suite 800
San Francisco, CA 94111
Institute of Business and Economic Research, UC-Berkeley
and NBER
neumark@ppic.org
                                                     Introduction


           School-to-career (STC) programs implement specialized efforts to provide students with

career information and education during the high school years to enhance their long-term

prospects of educational attainment and labor market success, sometimes for sub-groups of the

population that are less advantaged and would be less likely to attend four-year post-secondary

institutions in the absence of these programs. In this paper, we study a set of programs

implemented in Philadelphia high schools that focus on boosting post-secondary enrollment.

These programs are less career oriented than traditional school-to-work programs. But

consistent with the broadening of goals of these programs with the STWOA—in particular an

increased emphasis on post-secondary education—we treat these programs meant to encourage

post-secondary education as part and parcel of STC efforts.1

           In general, there have been and continue to be two critical challenges to testing the

presumed benefits of STC programs. First, there have been few data sets that collect extensive

information on the high school years including participation in STC programs, and track youths

through the school-to-career transition. Second, estimating the effects of STC programs

confronts serious problems of selection, as STC programs may recruit the most promising or

career-oriented students or such students may choose to participate in such programs, making the

programs appear more effective than they are. Alternatively, there may be negative selection if

students enter STC programs because they are encountering difficulties likely to hinder the

school-to-career transition.

           The Philadelphia Longitudinal Educational Study (PELS) data set that we examine in this

paper contains an unusually large amount of information on individuals prior to placement in

1
    Indeed, the replacement of the “school-to-work” label with the “school-to-career” label in many states also reflects
     the broadening of goals to emphasize post-secondary education and its role in furthering career development.


                                                            1
STC programs. Our analysis will compare students involved in STC programs with non-

participants, among students who attend public high schools in Philadelphia. We use the detailed

information in PELS to study the process of selection into these programs and to examine their

impact on a set of mainly schooling-related outcomes during and after high school, although we

also consider their impact on non-academic outcomes. This data set permits us to explore

processes that lead to participation in STC, as well as to estimate the effects of STC programs

taking account of sources of selection of the participants.

                                        Policy Background

         The 1994 Federal School-to-Work Opportunities Act (STWOA) provided more than $1.5

billion for increased STC activities in the country’s public schools. The STWOA was motivated

by a concern among policymakers and researchers that school-to-career transitions of youths in

the United States entail too much joblessness, job instability, and employment in dead-end jobs

(U.S. General Accounting Office, 1990). It aimed to help young people develop the skills to

succeed in high school and to make a successful transition to post-secondary education or into

good jobs in the labor market (Office of Technology Assessment, 1995). However, after its

initial five years the STWOA was not re-authorized, and many states have had to face the

question of whether to step in and restore the lost federal funds, and at what level (see Schmidt,

2001).

         Research evaluating the effectiveness of STC is also important in the broader policy

context. In the late 1990s, STC programs had become an integral part of high school education

in many states, spurred by the STWOA. But as reflected in the No Child Left Behind Act of

2001 (NCLB), educational reform now focuses largely on test-related outcomes measured via

standardized testing in grades K-12. Another important perspective on educational quality,




                                                 2
however, concerns the link between education and labor market success. There is no reason to

believe that a focus on testing encompasses all of what schools do to prepare students for the

transition beyond the high school years. For all students, the provision of information about

careers, tools to make decisions about further education and careers, and assistance in developing

and meeting educational goals, seem important complements to the academic component of

education. For disadvantaged students attending inner-city schools, STC programs may not only

boost academic skills and motivations, but they may also place students in a context where

teachers and peers alike subscribe to the desirability and feasibility of attending college,

differentiating them from the large number of students who will either drop out or go no further

than high school graduation. Thus, without prejudging the outcome, there is good reason to

keep STC research “on the table” in the context of broader issues of educational reform.

                        Literature Review and Conceptual Framework

Conceptual Framework

       Our interest in this paper is in identifying the causal effects of participation in STC on a

series of mainly academic and but also some non-academic outcomes relating to the school-to-

career transition: high school dropout and graduation; post-secondary enrollment; future

educational objectives; and employment. Unbiased estimation of program effects from simple

comparisons of outcomes between participants and non-participants requires that participants and

non-participants be alike with respect to anything that influences the outcome, except for their

participation in STC. However, we expect participants and non-participants to differ in some

important demographic and academic characteristics determining eligibility for participation in a

program or self-selection of participants; either one of these generates biases that must accounted

for before we can assess the program impacts.




                                                  3
           The first line of defense against differences between participants and non-participants is

to introduce an extensive set of controls for the factors that might be correlated with STC

participation and also affect the dependent variables.2 Of course, we cannot be certain that

adding a given set of proxy variables eliminates the endogenous selection problem. But

comparing the estimated coefficients of STC participation with and without a detailed set of

proxy variables can help to gauge whether biases from remaining unobservables are likely.

Specifically, if the inclusion of the detailed proxy variables has little or no impact on the

estimates, then because their inclusion reduces the bias from endogenous selection, it is arguably

less plausible that remaining unobservables generate a correlation between STC participation and

the outcomes we study (see Wooldridge, 2002).

           The PELS offers a detailed set of control variables. In addition to fairly typical

demographic controls, it includes detailed measures of family background and prior measures of

academic achievement, including test scores going back to 2nd grade. Perhaps more importantly,

the PELS also includes a potentially compelling set of proxy variables for uncovering the causal

effects of STC on schooling-related outcomes—in particular, future educational expectations and

aspirations regarding higher education, measured prior to STC participation. These expectations

and aspirations variables should capture a good deal of the information individuals possess about

their own education-related goals and aptitudes on the basis of which they might select into the

programs we study. That is, it is plausible that any unobservables underlying the endogenous

selection ought to be reflected in the reported expectations or aspirations, at least insofar as these

are good or “efficient” statistical forecasts of later behavior so that subsequent deviations of
2
    There are other statistical techniques that in other contexts can be used to address endogenous selection. Random
     assignment is not available in this case. Instrumental variables estimation requires an exogenous variable that
     influences individual program participation but not the individual outcomes of interest. No obvious instrument
     exists in this context. Finally, longitudinal data on outcomes and participants before and after participation is not
     applicable in studying STC, because the object of study is the effects of a program on individuals’ first labor
     market experiences, or on further school enrollment of those already enrolled.


                                                              4
actual from expected behavior are random. In addition, the educational expectations and

aspirations may not have any independent effects on outcomes net of the unobserved

propensities for post-high school enrollment and other schooling-related outcomes for which

they are proxies. Formally, these are the two conditions for a proxy variable to eliminate bias

due to selection.

       There is an intuitive explanation of why these expectations data may solve the

endogenous selection problem. Prior to participating in STC, students are asked about their post-

high school expectations and aspirations. Some then participate in STC and some do not, and

their post-high school behavior is subsequently observed. If, for example, conditional on

educational expectations, STC participants are more likely to be enrolled in college after leaving

high school, then it seems sensible to infer a causal effect of STC, because the expectations

questions should control for remaining unobservables associated with post-high school

educational outcomes.

Existing Research

       A 1994 report of the National Center for Research in Vocational Education (NCRVE)

summarized prior research on STC programs (Stern, et al., 1995). This compendium provides

little persuasive evidence of positive impacts of STC programs on subsequent school and adult

labor market outcomes. First, many of the studies do not construct a reasonable comparison

group, let alone consider the problem of selection into the program on the basis of unobserved

characteristics that might be correlated with outcomes. Second, even those studies that attempt

to construct a good comparison group find few beneficial effects. Finally, some of the evidence

suggests that STC programs may discourage post-secondary education.

       A subsequent NCRVE report (Urquiola, et al., 1997) provides an update. Reflecting the




                                                 5
still scant progress toward successful evaluations of STC programs, it focuses on implementation

issues, and only a short chapter reviews a few new studies that grapple more seriously with

inferring causal effects. Similarly, the national evaluation of the STWOA by Mathematica, Inc.,

also focuses on implementation (Hershey, et al., 1999).

           Reinforcing this view of the existing evidence, a recent survey of published academic

research on STC across the United States supports the claim that little progress has been made in

estimating the causal effects of STC programs (Hughes, et al., 2001). However, one exception is

the recent, ongoing evaluation of career academies by MDRC (Kemple and Snipes, 2000;

Kemple, 2001; Kemple, 2004). This study is based on random assignment of students to career

academies, as participants were chosen randomly from applicants, with participants and non-

participants followed. The evaluation one year after the scheduled completion of high school

found no impact on high school graduation rates, post-secondary education, or employment

(Kemple, 2001).3 On the other hand, more recent studies of later data from this experiment point

to increased earnings for men, at the possible cost of reduced schooling (Kemple, 2003).

           Finally, recent research by Neumark and Rothstein (2003) uses the new National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97) to study the effects of high school students’

participation in a variety of STC programs. The NLSY97 is the first large-scale data set to

include detailed information on participation in STC programs, and its richness also provides a

number of approaches to estimating causal effects, including information on schooling (and

work) expectations, although in less detail than in the PELS. The NLSY97 results indicate that

participation in school enterprises boosts post-secondary college enrollments, and participation

in coop programs and internships/apprenticeships boosts post-secondary employment.

3
    Comprehensive studies of local STC efforts in two states that developed extensive STC systems in response to the
     STWOA—Michigan and California—also failed to uncover compelling evidence on the effectiveness of STC
     (Neumark and Allen, 2003; Neumark, 2004).


                                                           6
       This last research is complementary to our analysis. However, the PELS differs in four

important ways from the NLSY97. First, the nature of the programs covered is quite different,

with those in the PELS consisting of a variety of mechanisms of support to boost post-secondary

enrollment, with less of a career focus. Second, because the focus is on a single school district,

there is greater uniformity in the types of programs in which sample members participate. Third,

the more detailed look at a large urban school district provides important information on what

STC can provide in such a setting. And fourth, the PELS offers important advantages in terms of

data on both pre-program differences and on outcomes, in part because of links to administrative

data files described in the next section.

                                            Research Design

PELS

       The Philadelphia Educational Longitudinal Study (PELS) follows a ten-percent sample of

students (approximately 2000 students) in the Philadelphia School District, beginning in the 8th

grade. The data set includes school record information and test scores going back to the 2nd

grade (for those in the school system at the time) and parent interviews (which were not used in

this paper). We also augmented the data with administrative records from the criminal justice

system, birth records, and unemployment insurance, outcomes that will be examined in future

analyses of the PELS.

       The survey began in 1996, surveying 8th graders about the 1995-1996 school year during

the summer of 1996. Wave 2 was carried out during the 9th grade academic year. The next four

waves were carried out in the summer after grades 9-12, covering the previous academic year.

No survey was done in 2001-2002, and a 7th wave covering 2003-2004 has just been completed

and will be used in future analysis along with the administrative information.




                                                   7
           For purposes of the present analysis, we are able to follow students through Wave 6, by

which time most would have graduated from high school (unless they dropped out) and

matriculated into college or entered the labor force or the military. A small portion of the sample

still remained in school or were neither in school nor employed.

Sample Attrition

           Because of the flux in the school population, it is not easy to measure sample attrition,

especially in the beginning of the study. A substantial number of the approximately 2000

students selected in the original sample did not attend any public high school and were dropped

from the study. Conversely, a sizable number of students entered the 9th grade who had not

previously been in the Philadelphia School District because they moved in from outside the

District or switched from private to public schools. Therefore, we measure sample attrition from

Wave 3, the sample of 1561 that was selected from the rolls of the 9th grade attendees. About

two-thirds of those students had been interviewed in Wave 1 and the remaining third were added

to the sample at Waves 2 or 3. Of those students interviewed by Wave 3, we managed to re-

interview slightly more than 75 percent at Wave 6, a respectable response rate for a sample in

which we relied on telephone interviews. (See Appendix Table A1 for detailed information on

entry into the sample and sample attrition.) In fact, our true response rate is probably somewhat

higher since an unknown portion of the students moved out of the city or switched to private or

parochial schools and would not have been eligible for follow up. We had only limited success

in tracking students who moved from the District to other localities.4

STC Programs in the PELS

           There are a variety of STC-related programs in which students in the PELS can report

4
    Where the young adult is not interviewed because he or she could be reached after 20 or more attempts, we collect
    information on schooling and work from a parent in order not to lose PELS outcome data on participants.
    However, the parent did not receive the full survey, and those observations are therefore not used in this paper.


                                                           8
participation in Waves 3-5. Most are not traditional school-to-work programs but rather efforts

to provide academic support, counseling, role models, and career guidance to students who might

not normally get such advice from teachers or family members, as the vast majority of students

attending the public schools in our sample do not come from families with a college-educated

parent. Over the past decade or so, the School District, with support largely from private

funders, has established an array of programs to motivate students to get post-secondary training

or education. Few of the existing programs actually encourage students to enter the labor force

immediately upon high school graduation. In referring to “school-to-career” programs, then, we

are really examining efforts that promote college attendance or some alternative form of post-

secondary education. The implicit premise of the STC programs that we examine in our

analysis is that the best way to help students achieve socioeconomic success may be to expose

them to careers (and presumably the benefits thereof) that come from post-secondary education.

       Many of the programs are quite small and they vary considerably in their intensity and

comprehensiveness. We will consider the high degree of heterogeneity in the analysis that

follows. But virtually all of the programs that we have identified share a common set of

objectives: reinforcing careers objectives, exposing students to knowledge and requirements to

enter careers, providing role models and mentors, exposing students to peers that share their

ambitions and expectations, and helping students to garner resources to make the transition to

higher education. These programs, and brief descriptions, are displayed in Table 1.

       Appendix Table A2 provides information on participation for each of the STC programs.

With the exception of College Access, the numbers for the programs are quite small, and among

the others only exceed one percent of the sample for Academics Plus and PRIME; but over one-

half of the sample reported in Waves 3, 4, or 5 that they had been involved in at least one STC




                                                9
program. On average, the exposure to such programs was 1.7 years, if we consider participation

reported in one year to imply program participation over the year. Participation was higher at the

beginning and toward the end of the high school years, suggesting that the programs may have

initially aimed at providing orientation to the future and toward the end of high school helped to

prepare students for the transition to college, further training, or employment.

        As might be expected, when we restricted our analysis to the subsample of those students

who responded to all waves of the study (approximately half of the sample), participation in

STC’s was slightly higher. About 60 percent had been involved in one or more of the programs,

spending on average about two years in STC programs. (See Appendix Table A2.) Thus, we

can detect a modest bias for the programs selecting more stable and committed students;

alternatively, programs may have increased school attendance and thus led to a greater likelihood

of responding to the survey. (In general, we had somewhat lower success in maintaining

involvement in the survey among the students who dropped out or did not attend school on a

regular basis.) In the analysis that follows, we shall examine separately all students and those

students who participated in every wave in which STC information was collected to take account

of this potential source of selectivity.

        Based on the reports of a knowledgeable informant, we attempted to identify

characteristics of the programs reported by students. It appears that many of the smaller

programs were transitory efforts to promote access to higher education through exposing

students to role models, exemplars, and contacts in the workplace, providing information about

colleges and universities, offering mentoring and remedial services, and helping to identify

sources of financial aid. Programs varied greatly in the type and mix of services. There was no

single or consistent model that could be identified across the programs or even within established




                                                 10
programs. The largest-scale program was College Access, which by-passed traditional high

school counselors. It offered information to students about higher education in resource centers

located in some schools and in the community. These centers provided information and

assistance in filling out college applications, visits to nearby college campuses, and connections

to sources of financial aid. College Access also helped students prepare for the SAT’s. Many of

the smaller programs provided similar types of aid though the mix varied, depending on the site.

       The heterogeneity between (and within) programs makes it very difficult to determine

just how much of what types of services were offered to particular students in the PELS sample.

Hence it is difficult to match particular components of the programs to particular outcomes in the

analysis that follows. Nonetheless, we can safely assume that students who participated in the

array of programs listed in Appendix Table A2 received more encouragement to apply to

college, more information about how and where to apply, more assistance in the application

process, and more sponsorship in garnering financial aid, than non-participants.

Outcome Measures

       The PELS data set is extremely rich, and it is not possible to analyze in a single paper all

of the potential available outcomes. We have chosen to concentrate in this analysis on the most

obvious measures of academic success or related behaviors that should be linked to exposure to

an STC program: dropping out, high school graduation, attendance at community college or four

year program, educational plans after graduation; and employment. Among the potential labor

market outcomes that can be studied are: current employment and wages for those who stopped

attending school and for all respondents in later waves, information on after-school and summer

jobs, participation in the underground economy, criminal behavior, and employment and

earnings information from the UI records. In the present analysis, we confine our analysis to a




                                                11
subset of such outcomes, and consider them only briefly, since many of the participants have

only recently moved into the labor market. In subsequent research that draws on the data

collected in the most recent wave of the study, we will examine more closely labor market and

other behavioral outcomes.

Control Variables and Proxies

       The PELS offers detailed control and proxy variables. Some of these come from the

administrative records. The school record includes information on test scores, absences and

suspensions, and assignments to special education. Our package of controls includes a series of

standard demographic characteristics including gender, race, and ethnicity, family structure (two

biological parents, stepfamily, single-parent, and other), and test scores prior to entering high

school. In later analyses, we also control for students’ educational aspirations and expectations

at the time of the 8th grade interview.

Data Analyses

       The proposed empirical analyses are relatively straightforward statistically, a simplicity

that is afforded by the rich data set. We first explore the differences between students who enter

STC programs and those who do not in our sample. This provides a starting point for assessing

the degree to which selectivity is operating in program participation. We then examine a series

of models for the key outcomes of dropout, school completion, matriculation in college, teen

childbearing, and other related behavioral outcomes. For each of the outcomes, we introduce a

package of controls that takes account of the likely sources of selection that might account for

differences between participants and non-participants in the STC programs. We expect that the

specifications controlling for family characteristics and prior academic achievement will account

for most of the pre-program differences between participants and non-participants. For models




                                                 12
of schooling-related outcomes, we believe that the schooling expectations and aspirations

measures will even more fully account for pre-program differences, and we therefore expect that

these specifications will provide our best estimates of the effects of STC on these outcomes. We

also examine whether the variation among the STC programs is large enough to suggest

differences in the effectiveness of the programs in producing a given outcome.

       One potential limitation of the schooling expectations variables is that they could to some

extent be outcomes of the high school experience, including STC. To avoid this problem, we

use information on work and schooling expectations recorded prior to STC participation.

Fortunately, the PELS asked many of these questions in Wave 1, so the “cleanest” approach is to

use this Wave 1 information. However, one might object that responses from Wave 1, when

respondents were only at the end of 8th grade, are uninformative. To address this concern, we

also examine the relationship between the expectations from Wave 1 and eventual outcomes, to

see whether the early expectations predict realized behavior.

                                        Empirical Results

Descriptive Information on Participants and Non-Participants

       Descriptive information on many of the demographic characteristics, test scores, and

other characteristics of the entire sample and participants in the STC’s is displayed in Table 2.

As we anticipated, the program participants differ in some important respects from the larger

sample of PELS. But the differences in all cases are relatively modest. Participants are more

likely to be female (.59 of participants vs. .54 in the total sample) and black. However, they are

very close in terms of the share Latino, household structure, their distribution across types of

school, and test scores. Participants do have somewhat higher educational aspirations,

suggesting the importance of controlling for these aspirations and factors related to them.




                                                 13
Overall, though, the figures in Table 2 reveal that the various differences between STC

participants and non-participants do not invariably favor the STC participants in terms of

predictors of academic success. And they also suggest that there are not sharp differences

between participants and non-participants.

High School Outcomes

       We begin our analysis of the effects of STC programs by examining their impact on an

array of academic outcomes, and then move to non-academic outcomes where we might expect

to find less pronounced impacts. We start by looking in Table 3 at the link between STC

participation and dropout from high school. Virtually all the programs share the common goals

of helping students to remain in school and to avoid dropout. The models first examine the

overall effect of participation in any program, adding packages of related control factors (gender

and race), family structure, and test scores in the first four models. Note that the sample

becomes smaller when data on test scores are required. Consequently Model 3 is the same as

Model 2, but estimated for the sample with non-missing test scores, to enhance comparability of

the estimates upon including the test scores, in Model 4, which examines all of the controls

simultaneously. Model 5 looks for effects by type of program, separating out the two larger

programs, the small programs, and programs that had not been identified prior to the survey

(“Other”). We also test in Model 5 for heterogeneity of program effects. Model 6 looks at the

amount of program exposure rather than simply a dichotomous indicator for STC participation.

Finally, we repeat the analysis for Models 4 and 6 including only participants who completed all

the sample waves in which there was STC information.

       Controlling only for gender and race in Model 1, we find that participation in an STC is

associated with a statistically significant decline in dropout from high school. The coefficient




                                                 14
barely changes as we add other controls, indicating that the result is robust to different model

specifications. The magnitude of the estimated effect implies that participation in an STC

program reduces the probability of dropping out by about five or six percentage points. Model 5

reveals that the effect is roughly the same for most of the programs, although in this instance the

combined small programs seem to produce smaller results on dropout. We are not inclined to

make too much of this difference in view of the relatively small sample size; moreover, we do

not reject the restriction of equal program effects. Model 6 reveals that increased exposure to the

programs is associated with a lower rate of dropout as we might expect given the other results;

note here that we expect the coefficient to be smaller since the scale of the variable is increased.5

           When we examine only the students who were in all of the waves, we find a significant

program effect that is roughly the same magnitude as we found for the larger sample. This result

suggests that the program impact operates similarly among this more selective sample in which

there is a lower overall rate of dropout, providing further confirmation that the effect of the STC

programs on reducing high school dropout is not driven by selective attrition that is related to

STC participation.

           The flip side of dropout is high school graduation. As might be expected from the

previous table, we observe in Table 4 that the percentage that graduates from high school is

significantly and sizably greater among the STC participants than the non-participants. Once

again, this result is unaffected by controls for family structure. Controls for test scores (which

also predict high school graduation) do reduce the overall effect size slightly; nonetheless, the

association remains large and statistically significant. Moreover, it is just as large for the

students who were in all of the survey waves—a further indication that the impact of the

5
    It would be of interest to study directly the effects of multiple years of exposure to specific programs, but as the
     estimates reveal, participation in individual programs is sufficiently low that the effects of individual programs are
     imprecisely estimated.


                                                             15
programs is not spurious.

         Note that the figures in Tables 3 and 4 suggest dropout rates under 10 percent by Wave 6,

and graduation rates near 80 percent. The low dropout percentage and high graduation

percentage in large part reflect attrition from the sample by Wave 6 of those more likely to drop

out and less likely to graduate. This is confirmed based on administrative data on dropping out

and graduation that are available whether or not one is surveyed in wave 6. Without exception,

these administrative data show that among those entering the PELS in an early wave,

administrative dropout rates are lower and administrative graduation rates are higher for those

respondents who had not attrited by wave 6.6 A further problem is highlighted by findings

reported in Neild, et al. (n.d.); in particular, administrative dropout rates were higher for the

sampling universe of the PELS than for those who were ever surveyed, suggesting that there was

also selective inclusion in the sample based on a lower likelihood of dropping out. Thus, the

mean dropout and graduation rates displayed in Tables 3 and 4 are not representative of either

the surveyed population or the sample universe. However, an appendix explores the sensitivity

to attrition bias of the estimates of the effects of STC participation for many of the outcomes we

study, and the findings suggest that any such bias is negligible.

         We also examined a series of other indicators of high school success such as grade

progression, skipping classes, absences from school, and receipt of academic and non-academic

awards in high school. In most instances, the same pattern shown for dropout and graduation

recurs. Though the association with STC participation does not always reach statistical

significance, with the exception of cut or skipped classes, the pattern is always in the direction of

showing that STC participants fare better than non-participants. (See Appendix Table A3).

6
  On the other hand, as of wave 6 the administrative and self-reported data show similar dropout rates and similar
graduation rates, and regressions using the administrative data on dropout and graduation yield quite similar results
to those in Tables 3 and 4 based on the self-reported data.


                                                          16
More specifically, STC participation has a negative and significant effect on the probability of

failing to progress, and positive and significant effects on the probabilities of receipt of both

academic and non-academic awards. Thus, it appears that the participants do indeed receive the

kind of reinforcement for investing in school that might be predicted from involvement in an

STC program.

Post-High School Education-Related Outcomes

       Now, we turn to some post-graduation outcomes to see if participation in an STC

program is linked to changes that are maintained after completion of high school. We look first

in Table 5 at educational aspirations for the years beyond high school. This is an important

indicator of educational success because previous research shows that aspirations are associated

with educational attainment. Furthermore, aspirations generally decline during the high school

years, especially when students begin to encounter setbacks in school and face the difficult

challenges of proceeding on to higher education. Therefore, as measured at Wave 6, the year

after expected high school graduation, educational aspirations tell us a lot about a student’s

orientation toward post-secondary schooling.

       Large differences occur between STC participants and non-participants in their desires to

continue their schooling. As is shown in Table 5, participants are much more likely to desire to

aspire to higher educational levels. Controls only modestly reduce the overall difference

between the program participants and non-participants. However, we should note that the

participants in the small and varied programs (“combined small programs”) do not follow the

overall pattern of the larger programs or those in programs that were not otherwise classified.

This disparity may be due to the fact that some of the smaller programs could stress a school-to-

work strategy rather than a school-to-higher education approach. Also in this case we find a




                                                  17
smaller effect of STC participation for those who were in all of the sample waves compared with

those who responded to the survey more intermittently; if persistence in the sample is also

associated with higher educational aspirations, as seems plausible, this difference suggests that

the educational aspiration results may be driven in part by selectivity.

       We extend our analysis in Table 6 to examine a range of other measures of educational

aspirations or expectations. The consistency of the findings is striking and is unaffected by the

large package of controls that we included to account for selection. It would appear that

designation and participation reinforce and perhaps strengthen future ambitions to complete

college. From the current analysis, we cannot determine which elements of the program matter,

but the strength of the findings, their consistency, and their robustness all indicate that STC

programs galvanize students’ ambitions to graduate from college.

       In Table 7 we turn to actual post-secondary education. The results indicate that a

significantly higher proportion of participants than non-participants enter a four-year college (a

difference of about 10 percentage points). This association is strong with just the demographic

controls and does not weaken when test score information is included in the model. This result

holds up for the more selective sample of those who completed all waves of the study. Table 8

elaborates on this result by looking at variations of college attendance. It appears that STC

participation works primarily to improve matriculation in college overall, as well as at four-year

colleges specifically. When left to their own devices, students likely experience considerable

difficulties in engaging in the planning that it takes to apply to college—particularly, perhaps,

four-year programs—gaining the support for trying to get admitted, and securing the funding to

matriculate. Thus, it is not necessarily that the non-participants do not want to go on to higher

education; rather, they may be less able to mobilize the resources to succeed in navigating the




                                                 18
pathway to a college education.

       It would be folly to claim that, in the analyses thus far, we have managed to control for

all of the unmeasured differences that might account for the set of findings described in the series

of academic outcomes described in the preceding tables. We took the further step of going back

to the interview at Wave 1, before students entered high school, to add some additional controls

dealing explicitly with academic ambitions. While our sample size shrinks because it does not

include students added during the first two years of high school, the added controls provide a

further safeguard against confusing selectivity with program effect. As it turns out, the students

who participated in STC programs did not invariably have higher expectations and aspirations

than the comparison group; see Table 9. Not surprisingly, then, the introduction of these controls

did not change the findings reported in Tables 3 through 8. As summarized in Table 10, the

magnitudes of the program impacts were if anything reduced only slightly by adding controls for

pre-existing ambitions, commitment to school, and perceived chances of graduating high school

and completing college.

       We also considered the possibility that the outcomes might have been linked to the type

of high school that students attended: whether they went to a magnet school that required tests or

screening to be admitted, or whether they attended one of the less selective neighborhood

schools. The latter include neighborhood schools that the vast majority of students attend and

vocational schools that are few in number. We consider evidence on the effects of different

types of school by estimating the models with a main effect of STC participation, main effects

for type of school, and interactions between the type of school and STC participation; the

interactions identify differences in the effects of STC programs across school types. As shown

in Table 11, the findings reveal that the effects of STC programs that we have documented thus




                                                19
far arise for the non-magnet schools, but tend not to appear for the far smaller number of magnet-

school students.7 This probably occurs because the non-participants also are having their

aspirations reinforced by peers in these more selective environments. The evidence is somewhat

more mixed for the vocational schools. For high school outcomes (dropout and graduation),

these students, like those in magnet schools, appear unaffected by STC participation. But for

them the effects of STC participation on educational aspirations and college attendance (but not

at four-year programs) is boosted relative to non-magnet, non-vocational students. On the other

hand, only in Models 3 and 4, for educational aspirations and college attendance, are the

differences in effects of STC programs significantly different by type of school.

        In contrast to the previous table testing for differences in effects by type of school, we

next examined differences in effects by type of student. In particular, we identified a number of

variables that might be viewed as prior indicators of “at-risk” students, and estimated the models

for each of the schooling outcomes adding the indicator, as well as an interaction between the

indicator and STC participation. The at-risk indicators included: non-nuclear family; 8th grade

math scores below median; 8th grade reading scores below median; aspires to less than 4-year

college (as reported in Wave 1); and mother’s education of high school or less. In these

specifications, then, the main effect of STC participation (“any STC”) measures the effect of the

not-at-risk sample, and the estimated coefficient of the interaction captures the difference in the

effect for those at-risk. The results are reported in Table 12. In general, there is some evidence

of more beneficial effects of STC participation for at-risk students. In particular, STC

participation appears to have larger effects on college attendance for those with low math scores

(and insignificant effects for the others), and have larger effects on educational aspirations as


7
 For example, for dropout, the estimated overall effect of STC is −.087, but for magnet school students the
estimated interaction of .085 nearly completely offsets this.


                                                         20
well as college attendance for those whose mother’s have only a high school education or less

(and again insignificant effects for the others). Finally, STC appears to reduce dropout more for

those with low educational aspirations (at Wave 1). Thus, there is some evidence—although it is

not overwhelming—suggesting that STC is more effective for at-risk youths.

           Finally, we examined the impact of program participation on academic outcomes for

males and females separately. Many of the point estimates of the effects were quite close by

gender, and none were significantly different. However, the estimated impact of STC

participation on high school graduation was considerably larger for males, by a factor of nearly

two, providing a hint of more beneficial effects for them on this one outcome. (See Appendix

Table A4.)

Non-Academic Outcomes

           As noted earlier, the types of STC programs we study in the PELS are focused on post-

secondary education. Nonetheless, we might expect to see some effects on non-academic

outcomes. For example, there may be indirect effects on a set of behaviors that we would not

necessarily expect to be directly driven by participation in an STC program, but that are

associated with the academic outcomes that STC appears to promote. In addition, STC programs

generally focus on careers more than education per se, so it is of interest to look at labor market

outcomes.

           We therefore looked at effects of STC participation on a number of labor market

outcomes for those who had left high school, including employment (overall, for those not in

college, and for those in college), earnings, and wages.8 There was very little if any evidence of

program effects—at best a hint of positive employment effects for those not in college. Given


8
    Hours of employment cannot be studied because the skip pattern in the survey only elicits hours information for
    those with multiple jobs.


                                                           21
that the STC programs we study appear to have focused on college attendance, these results are

perhaps not surprising. However, future analysis that will draw on the final follow up (Wave 7),

conducted two to three years after the date of expected high school graduation, to revisit the

labor market and other non-schooling related effects of these STC programs. Very possibly, it

was too early to detect labor market outcomes from the Wave 6 data we use in the present

analysis.9

                                            Summary and Conclusion

           Previous research on the impact of school-to-career programs has been mixed in part

because of the nature of the programs, the populations that they serve, the design of the studies,

and the types of analysis employed. Our study (and our results) most closely resemble the

previous research by Neumark and Rothstein (2003), using data from the new 1997 National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth. They found a strong association between participation in some

STC programs and positive academic outcomes. Our data from a large and representative

sample of Philadelphia high school students was collected annually from 1996 when a random

sample was drawn of students at the end of the 8th grade. It offers a richer set of controls

including test scores and indicators of motivation prior to high school, and finds similar positive

effects on academic outcomes—in this case a wide array of such outcomes.

           In particular, the data point to positive effects of these programs on high school

graduation and on both academic and non-academic awards in high school, and similar negative

9
    While much of focus of existing research on STC is on schooling and employment outcomes, the PELS also elicits
    information on fertility and unprotected sexual activity and on criminal activity. If participation in STC increases
    the likelihood of high school graduation and strengthens academic goals, it might also increase the opportunity
    costs of teenage parenthood. Therefore, we also examined whether female STC participants were less likely to
    become pregnant or have a live birth by Wave 6. Although the estimates were in the direction of a reduced
    likelihood of pregnancy or live birth for participants, the estimated effects were generally not statistically
    significant. With regard to crime, convictions are extremely rare in this data set, perhaps because of the young
    ages of respondents, so all we can look at are arrests. For arrests, there is no evidence of a consistent pattern of
    STC effects. However, future analysis with the data from Wave 7 will provide a look at criminal activity further
    on, and using administrative records, which should be more informative.


                                                            22
effects on dropping out of high school. The results also suggest positive effects on aspirations

for higher education and on college attendance. In addition, there is some evidence that these

programs are more effective in increasing college attendance and aspirations among at-risk

youths.

          The findings are generally quite robust and are only slightly attenuated by the

introduction of factors that might be indicative of selection or “creaming effects.” Some

programs were more effective than others, but the variability of effects generally did not differ

significantly, suggesting that at least the effects were almost invariably in the predicted direction.

We did discover that the setting of the programs matter: the impact of the programs was

generally greater in the neighborhood as opposed to the magnet schools. For the most part, the

effects were similar for males and females though the impact on high school graduation may be

more pronounced for males. Finally, there is some evidence that effects of the STC programs we

study were greater for at-risk students, especially those whose mothers have at most a high

school education.

          However extensive the set of controls that are permitted by the PELS data set, we cannot

rule out the possibility of other unmeasured sources of bias between the participants and non-

participants. In future analysis, we shall explore the pathways by which effects operate such as

through channeling students into more challenging programs, providing greater access to

resources and services, and creating segregated peer environments of students more committed

to going on to higher education.

          Ultimately, there is a pressing need for more random assignment experiments in such

programs. Given the fact that the programs do not seem simply to cream the more capable

students, but rather to have beneficial effects (at least as far as we can tell in non-experimental




                                                  23
data), the conditions are ripe for such experimentation. At the very least, we can say with some

confidence that the results of our analysis suggest that greater experimentation is warranted.




                                                24
                             Appendix: Attrition and Attrition Bias

       We have touched briefly on the potential effects of attrition bias with regard to presenting

estimates for respondents in any of Waves 3-5 and those in all three waves. We also explored

attrition more directly. The key concern is selective attrition that would bias the estimated

effects of STC. For example, if among non-participants attrition is random, but among

participants those with worse performance in high school tend to attrit, then the estimates would

tend to be biased in the direction of positive effects of STC participation on education-related

outcomes.

       To explore whether there is attrition of this nature, Appendix Table A5 reports estimates

of models for attrition by Wave 6 of those in any of Waves 3-5. The models include the same set

of controls used in the previous models, but also interactions between STC participation and a

number of variables thought to be associated with better or worse outcomes (test scores, living

arrangements, whether the individual was held back a grade in earlier waves, and dropout as

recorded in the administrative data). For many of the variables, the differentials in attrition rates

associated with STC participation were not significant. However, for the interactions with held

back a grade, the estimates are consistent with the type of selective attrition pattern outlined

above, as those who were held back and participated in STC were much more likely to attrit.

This type of attrition pattern suggests that the estimates of the beneficial effects of STC

estimated earlier may be upward biased because of selective attrition.

       Aside from including variables such as test scores and living arrangements as controls,

we can go further in correcting the estimates for attrition bias based on these observable

measures. In particular, to correct for attrition bias, we re-estimated models for some of the key

outcomes, reweighting the observations to account for attrition associated with STC participation

and being held back, dropping out, etc. What this reweighting does is restore the

                                                 25
representativeness of the Wave 6 observations. For example, consider the attrition model in

column (4) of Appendix Table A5, which looks at the relationship between being held back, STC

participation, and attrition. Given that those held back who participated in STC attrit at a higher

rate, the weight on observations on such individuals in Wave 6 is increased so that the

representation of these individuals is the same as in the Wave 3-Wave 5 sample. We do this

correction using the implied probabilities of attrition from the attrition model in column (4), as

well as the model in column (5) that accounts for more predictors of attrition and their

interactions with STC participation.

       Appendix Table A6 reports the earlier uncorrected results, and then the results corrected

for attrition using this method. Despite the non-random attrition, these results reveal that any

bias from attrition is trivial. Although in each case the point estimate of the beneficial effect of

STC participation falls (in absolute value), the changes in the estimated coefficients are minimal.

Thus, these findings provide further confirmation that the STC programs we study in the PELS

improved educational outcomes.




                                                 26
                                          References

Hershey, Alan M., Marsha K. Silverberg, and Joshua Haimson. 1999. “Expanding Options for

       Students: Report to Congress on the National Evaluation of School-to-Career

       Implementation.” Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., Princeton, New Jersey.

Hughes, Katherine L., Stephen F. Hamilton, and Robert J. Ivry. 2001. “School-to-Career:

       Making a Difference in Education.” Institute on Education and the Economy, Teachers

       College, Columbia University, New York, New York.

Kemple, James J. 2004. “Having an Impact on the Transition from School to Work: Evidence

       from Career Academies.” Unpublished manuscript, Manpower Demonstration Research

       Corporation, New York, New York.

Kemple, James J. 2001. “Career Academies: Impacts on Students’ Initial Transitions to Post-

       Secondary Education and Employment.” Manpower Demonstration Research

       Corporation, New York, New York.

Kemple, James J., and Jason C. Snipes. 2000. “Career Academies: Impacts on Students’

       Engagement and Performance in High School.” Manpower Demonstration Research

       Corporation, New York, New York.

Neild, Ruth Curran, Scott Stoner-Eby, and Frank F. Furstenberg. n.d. “Connection Entrance and

       Departure: The Transition to Ninth Grade and High School Dropout.” Unpublished

       manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

Neumark, David. 2004. “Evaluation of the Effectiveness of the School-to-Work Opportunities

       Act in California,” Public Policy Institute of California Working Paper No. 2004.02.

Neumark, David, and Ann Allen. 2003. “What Do We Know About the Effects of School-to-

       Career? A Case Study of Michigan,” Journal of Vocational Education Research, Vol.

       28, No. 1, pp. 59-84.
Neumark, David, and Donna Rothstein. 2003. “School-to-Career Programs and Transitions to

       Employment and Higher Education,” Public Policy Institute of California Working Paper

       No. 2003.22.

Office of Technology Assessment, United States Congress. 1995. “Learning to Work: Making

       the Transition from School to Work.” Publication No. OTA-HER 637, U.S. Government

       Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

Schmidt, Tracy J. 2001. “Inside the State House: The People and Ideas that Shaped School-to-

       Career Legislation.” National Conference of State Legislatures, Washington, D.C.

Stern, David, Neal Finkelstein, James R. Stone, John Latting, and Carolyn Dornsife. 1995.

       School to Work: Research on Programs in the United States (Falmer Press: London and

       Washington).

Urquiola, Miguel, David Stern, Ilana Horn, Carolyn Dornsife, Bernadette Chi, Lea Williams,

       Donna Meritt, Katherine Hughes, and Thomas Bailey. 1997. “School to Work, College

       and Career: A Review of Policy, Practice, and Results, 1993-1997.” National Center for

       Research in Vocational Education, University of California, Berkeley, California.

U.S. Department of Education. 2003. TRIO Home Page, Washington, D.C., n.d.

       (http://www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ope/trio/index.html, retrieved September 15, 2003).

U.S. General Accounting Office. 1990. “Preparing Noncollege Youth for Employment in the

       U.S. and Foreign Countries.” Washington, D.C.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data (The MIT

       Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts).
Table 1: STC Programs in the PELS
Program             Description
Academics Plus      State licensed and accredited school that offers private instruction, tutoring,
                    summer school in a variety of advanced courses
ASPIRA              Develops leadership skills, educational endeavors, cultural awareness, and social
                    action among Puerto Rican and Latino students
College Access      Provides college readiness services, individual advising, financial aid and
                    scholarship assistance to low-income youth from the most disadvantaged areas of
                    the city, emphasizing those who would be the first in their family to attend college
LASER               Program to expose Philadelphia high school students to advanced science and
                    engineering
Legacy              Federal TRIO Program providing comprehensive services to disadvantaged or
                    disabled students to assist in pursuing post-secondary education
Philadelphia        Offers numerous programs to help disadvantaged Philadelphia teenagers excel in
Futures             their studies and prepare for college and careers
PRIME               Enhances minority student skills in mathematics, communications, and
                    engineering, through mentoring, math/science/engineering competitions, and
                    summer programs and internships before starting college
Say Yes to          Sponsors students from very disadvantaged backgrounds, providing educational
Education           enrichment, tutoring and mentoring, counseling, and other resources, emphasizing
                    relationship with institution of higher education
Upward Bound        Focuses on high school students from low income families and families in which
                    parents have low education. Provides instruction in academic subjects, tutorial
                    services, mentoring programs, information on post-secondary education, assistance
                    in preparing for college entrance examinations, and work experiences to expose
                    students to careers for which post-secondary degrees are required
White-Williams      Program provides disadvantaged Philadelphia public high school students who
Scholars            maintain good grades with modest monthly stipend and school-related expenses
                    such as test and college application fees
For details on TRIO program, see U.S. Department of Education (2003).
Table 2: Demographic Characteristics of STC Participants and Non-Participants, Sample in Any Wave with STC Information
                                                                                 Proportion of sample:
                                                                                Lives with                                              Educational      Reading     Math test
                                                                   Lives with   one bio and                                            aspirations 4-   test score    score
                                                          Asian/   bio mother    one step      Other living   Magnet      Vocational    year college      below       below
                                Female   Black   Latino   Other       only        parent       arrangement    school       school        or higher       median      median
Overall                           .54     .70     .07      .03         .37          .18             .14         .10          .08            .83            .44         .43
sample
                Participation
STC                  rate
participants:    (number)                                                       Proportion in group among participants:
Academics        .033 (56)       .59      .91      0       .02        .50          .09              .16         .13          .04            .93            .43         .57
Plus
ASPIRA             .004 (6)      .83      .33     .50       0         .50           .17             0           .33           0              1             .33          0
College          .449 (752)      .59      .82     .06      .02        .38           .19            .15          .07          .06            .85            .43         .43
Access
Laser             .001 (1)        1        1       0        0          0             0              1            1            0              0              0           0
Legacy            .004 (7)       .86       1       0        0         .57            0              0           .14          .14             1             .50         .67
Philadelphia      .005 (9)       .44      .89     .11       0         .44           .22            .22           0            0              1              0          .40
Futures
PRIME            .042 (70)       .71      .91     .03      .04        .39           .17            .17          .19          .10            .93            .34         .30
Say Yes to        .001 (2)        0        1       0        0         .50            0              0            0            0              1             .50         .50
Education
Upward            .004 (6)        1       1        0        0         .33           .17             0            0            0              1             .67          1
Bound
White-           .011 (18)       .83      .89     .05       0         .50           .17            .17          .06          .06            .80            .30         .36
Williams
Scholars
Other            .087 (145)      .64      .77     .05      .04        .41           .12            .19          .14          .10            .96            .38         .43
Combined          .026 (43)      .74      .88     .09       0         .51           .12            .14          .12          .05            .86            .38         .46
small
programs
Any STC          .513 (860)      .59      .81     .06      .02        .38           .18            .15          .10          .07            .87            .42         .43
participation
There are 1675 observations in all columns except the last three, because of missing data. In the first row of the last two columns, the shares below the median are
different from 0.5 because the medians are computed for the full sample of available test scores. The combined small programs include Aspira, Laser, Philadelphia
Futures, Say Yes to Education, and White-Williams Scholars.
Table 3: Effects of STC Participation on Dropping Out of High School by Wave 6
                                                                                      Sample in all waves with
                                Sample in any waves with STC information                   STC information
                           (1)         (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)      (6)          (7)          (8)
Mean of dep. var.              .088                           .071                              .054
Any STC                  -.059       -.059     -.066    -.061        …        …          -.058          …
                        (.019)      (.019)    (.021)   (.021)                           (.025)
Academics Plus             …           …         …        …        -.050      …            …            …
                                                                  (.060)
College Access             …           …         …        …        -.048      …           …            …
                                                                  (.021)
PRIME                      …           …         …        …        -.054      …           …            …
                                                                  (.047)
Combined small             …           …         …        …        -.004      …           …            …
programs                                                          (.079)
Other                      …           …         …        …        -.047      …           …            …
                                                                  (.033)
Test equality of STC       …           …         …        …         .990      …           …            …
coefficients (p-
value)
Number of programs        …          …          …         …         …        -.025        …           -.018
x years                                                                     (.009)                   (.010)
Female                   -.006      -.005       .008      .010      .013      .010        .028         .027
                        (.019)     (.019)     (.021)    (.021)    (.021)    (.021)      (.024)       (.024)
Black                    -.038      -.058      -.060     -.086     -.084     -.088       -.081        -.085
                        (.024)     (.025)     (.028)    (.029)    (.029)    (.029)      (.032)       (.032)
Latino                   .030       .011        .039      .015      .016      .011        .035         .027
                        (.043)     (.043)     (.048)    (.048)    (.048)    (.048)      (.069)       (.069)
Asian/other              -.020      -.015      -.062     -.058     -.054     -.055        .009         .014
                        (.057)     (.057)     (.064)    (.064)    (.064)    (.064)      (.078)       (.078)
Lives with bio             …        .034        .020      .016      .020      .020       -.001         .003
mother only                        (.023)     (.025)    (.025)    (.025)    (.025)      (.028)       (.028)
Lives with one bio         …        .079        .039      .034      .034      .033        .053         .054
and one step parent                (.028)     (.032)    (.032)    (.032)    (.032)      (.036)       (.036)
Other living               …        .104        .094      .081      .086      .084        .062         .066
arrangement                        (.030)     (.034)    (.034)    (.034)    (.034)      (.038)       (.039)
Only non-missing                                  X         X         X         X           X            X
test scores
Reading test (1995)        …          …           …      -.108     -.109      -.107      -.097        -.100
 10-2                                                   (.048)    (.048)     (.048)     (.056)       (.055)
Math test (1995)           …          …           …      -.018     -.012      -.018      -.011        -.013
    -2
 10                                                     (.049)    (.049)     (.049)     (.054)       (.055)
N                         940        940         606      606       606        606        372          372
Estimates of linear probability models are reported. STC information is available in Waves 3-5.
Table 4: Effects of STC Participation on High School Graduation by Wave 6
                                                                                    Sample in all waves with
                                Sample in any waves with STC information                STC information
                          (1)         (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)         (7)          (8)
Mean of dep. var.              .768                          .799                            .832
Any STC                  .136        .136      .138     .128       …        …          .138          …
                        (.030)      (.029)    (.034)   (.033)                         (.047)
Academics Plus            …           …         …        …        .090      …           …            …
                                                                 (.091)
College Access            …           …         …        …        .087      …          …             …
                                                                 (.033)
PRIME                     …           …         …        …        .142      …          …             …
                                                                 (.075)
Combined small            …           …         …        …        .087      …          …             …
programs                                                         (.132)
Other                     …           …         …        …        .083      …          …             …
                                                                 (.052)
Test equality of STC      …           …         …        …        .972      …          …             …
coefficients (p-
value)
Number of programs       …          …         …        …         …           .055      …             .051
x years                                                                    (.015)                  (.016)
Female                   .069      .064       .044      .038     .033        .041       .025         .028
                        (.029)    (.029)    (.034)    (.033)   (.033)      (.033)     (.039)       (.039)
Black                    -.054     -.030     -.011      .060     .058        .064       .104         .111
                        (.036)    (.038)    (.044)    (.045)   (.045)      (.045)     (.052)       (.052)
Latino                   -.180     -.153     -.151     -.091    -.093       -.082       .110         .128
                        (.066)    (.066)    (.076)    (.075)   (.076)      (.075)     (.116)       (.116)
Asian/other              .072      .068       .164      .153     .142        .146       .112         .102
                        (.087)    (.086)    (.100)    (.097)   (.097)      (.097)     (.127)       (.127)
Lives with bio             …       -.021      .017      .025     .018        .018       .003        -.006
mother only                       (.035)    (.040)    (.040)   (.040)      (.040)     (.046)       (.046)
Lives with one bio       …         -.099     -.119     -.104    -.104       -.105      -.137        -.139
and one step parent               (.043)    (.051)    (.050)   (.050)      (.050)     (.060)       (.060)
Other living             …         -.170     -.137     -.097    -.108       -.104      -.106        -.120
arrangement                       (.046)    (.053)    (.053)   (.053)      (.053)     (.063)       (.063)
Only non-missing                                X         X        X           X          X            X
test scores
Reading test (1995)      …          …         …        .277     .280        .277       .149         .157
 10-2                                                 (.076)   (.076)      (.076)     (.092)       (.092)
Math test (1995)         …          …         …        .078     .063        .075       .195         .194
 10-2                                                 (.077)   (.077)      (.077)     (.091)       (.091)
N                        876       876       567       567      567         567        357          357
See notes to Table 3.
Table 5: Effects of STC Participation on Educational Aspirations at Wave 6
                                                                                          Sample in all waves with
                                 Sample in any waves with STC information                     STC information
                           (1)         (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)
Mean of dep. var.               9.24                          9.32                                 9.34
Any STC                   .482        .484      .473     .424        …            …          .289          …
                         (.112)      (.112)    (.131)   (.127)                              (.167)
Academics Plus             …           …         …        …         .209          …           …            …
                                                                  (.347)
College Access             …           …         …        …         .223          …           …              …
                                                                  (.126)
PRIME                      …           …         …        …         .850          …           …              …
                                                                  (.283)
Combined small             …           …         …        …        -.481          …           …              …
programs                                                          (.480)
Other                      …           …         …        …         .680          …           …              …
                                                                  (.193)
Test equality of STC       …           …         …        …         .049          …           …              …
coefficients (p-
value)
Number of programs         …           …          …          …         …          .179        …              .157
x years                                                                         (.055)                     (.064)
Female                    .235        .216        .033      -.008     -.051      -.008       -.184          -.190
                         (.109)      (.109)     (.131)     (.127)    (.126)     (.127)      (.162)         (.161)
Black                     .071        .086       -.008       .290      .257       .302        .337           .307
                         (.139)      (.144)     (.171)     (.175)    (.174)     (.175)      (.218)         (.216)
Latino                    .201        .228        .215       .517      .485       .541        .574           .572
                         (.257)      (.260)     (.296)     (.290)    (.288)     (.290)      (.478)         (.473)
Asian/other               .655        .648        .350       .306      .226       .280       -.259          -.283
                         (.328)      (.329)     (.388)     (.375)    (.372)     (.375)      (.525)         (.523)
Lives with bio             …          .019        .018       .057      .020      -.034       -.019          -.042
mother only                          (.133)     (.156)     (.150)    (.150)     (.150)      (.190)         (.189)
Lives with one bio         …          -.096      -.195      -.118     -.117      -.110       -.117          -.114
and one step parent                  (.165)     (.197)     (.190)    (.189)     (.190)      (.245)         (.244)
Other living               …          -.228      -.252      -.088     -.153      -.110       -.126          -.168
arrangement                          (.177)     (.209)     (.204)    (.203)     (.204)      (.262)         (.261)
Only non-missing                                    X          X         X          X           X              X
test scores
Reading test (1995)        …           …          …           1.57       1.57        1.57       2.07          2.08
 10-2                                                        (.29)      (.29)       (.29)      (.38)         (.38)
Math test (1995)           …           …          …          -.096      -.175       -.094      -.355         -.372
    -2
 10                                                         (.292)     (.291)      (.292)     (.370)        (.369)
N                         891         891         577         577        577         577        359           359
Educational aspirations are coded as: 1-8th or less, 2-9th-11th, 3-technical training with high school degree, 4-
GED, 5-graduate from high school, 6-post-high school vocational or technical training, 7-some college, 8-
degree from two-year college, 9-degree from four-year college, 10-Master’s degree, 11-law, Ph.D, or M.D.
Estimates are from linear regressions.
Table 6: Effects of STC Participation on Educational Goals, Aspirations, and Expectations at Wave 6
                                                                Lowest level of                                                 Educational
                         Disappointment Lowest level of education with                  Educational                           expectations 4-
                        if do not graduate education with which satisfied aspirations 4-year                  Educational     year college or
                            from college    which satisfied       4-year college    college or higher        expectations          higher
                           (1)       (1’)     (2)        (2’)      (3)       (3’)      (4)      (4’)         (5)      (5’)     (6)        (6’)
 Mean of dep. var.              4.04              7.40                 .464                .832                  8.98               .753
 Any STC                  .184        …      .501         …       .124        …       .072       …          .400       …      .106         …
                         (.117)             (.180)               (.041)              (.032)                (.130)            (.037)
 Number of                 …         .146     …         .239       …        .064       …        .032         …        .177     …         .051
 programs x years                   (.050)             (.077)              (.018)              (.014)                (.056)             (.016)
 N                         603       603      571        571       571       571      577       577         556       556      556        556
Sample includes those in any waves with STC information. All specifications include controls for demographics, family structure, and
test scores. In columns (1) and (1’), coding is 1-5, from not too disappointed to very disappointed. For coding in columns (2)-(2’) and
(5)-(5’) see notes to Table 5. Estimates are from linear regressions/linear probability models. Note that in contrast to the estimates in
Table 5, column (5), for all of the dependent variables in this table equality of the coefficients of the disaggregated STC programs is
never rejected at the 10-percent level.
Table 7: Effects of STC Participation on Attending 4-Year College at Wave 6, for Graduates
                                                                                      Sample in all waves with
                                 Sample in any waves with STC information                 STC information
                           (1)         (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)      (6)         (7)          (8)
Mean of dep. var.               .378                          .400                             .431
Any STC                   .100        .101      .108     .112        …        …          .111          …
                         (.040)      (.040)    (.049)   (.046)                          (.059)
Academics Plus             …           …         …        …        -.072      …           …            …
                                                                  (.111)
College Access             …           …         …        …         .123      …          …             …
                                                                  (.045)
PRIME                      …           …         …        …         .160      …          …             …
                                                                  (.093)
Combined small             …           …         …        …         .122      …          …             …
programs                                                          (.165)
Other                      …           …         …        …         .102      …          …             …
                                                                  (.065)
Test equality of STC       …           …         …        …         .547      …          …             …
coefficients (p-
value)
Number of programs         …          …          …         …         …         .077      …             .073
x years                                                                      (.019)                  (.022)
Female                    .088       .095        .117      .108      .099      .108       .060         .058
                         (.039)     (.039)     (.047)    (.045)    (.045)    (.045)     (.056)       (.055)
Black                     -.080      -.036      -.066      .083      .062      .065       .108         .083
                         (.048)     (.051)     (.062)    (.062)    (.063)    (.062)     (.076)       (.075)
Latino                    .051       .072        .167      .254      .227      .250       .413         .390
                         (.095)     (.095)     (.116)    (.110)    (.110)    (.108)     (.173)       (.170)
Asian/other               .278       .275        .231      .239      .232      .228       .162         .150
                         (.113)     (.112)     (.128)    (.121)    (.120)    (.119)     (.172)       (.170)
Lives with bio              …        -.113      -.116     -.097     -.099     -.103      -.114        -.120
mother only                         (.046)     (.056)    (.053)    (.053)    (.052)     (.066)       (.064)
Lives with one bio         …         -.055      -.070     -.057     -.058     -.055      -.030        -.031
and one step parent                 (.059)     (.075)    (.071)    (.071)    (.070)     (.088)       (.087)
Other living              …          -.136      -.140     -.091     -.108     -.104      -.124        -.146
arrangement                         (.066)     (.079)    (.075)    (.075)    (.074)     (.092)       (.091)
Only non-missing                                   X         X         X         X          X            X
test scores
Reading test (1995)       …            …         …        .444       .458     .448       .578         .587
 10-2                                                    (.108)     (.108)   (.106)     (.132)       (.131)
Math test (1995)          …            …         …        .242       .209     .229       .179         .158
    -2
 10                                                      (.106)     (.106)   (.104)     (.132)       (.130)
N                         650         650       438        438       438      438        290          290
See notes to Table 3. Estimates are from linear probability models.
Table 8: Effects of STC Participation on College Attendance, for Graduates
                                                  Attend 4-year
                                                      college                             Full-time college
                                                 conditional on                               attendance
                                                      college        Full-time college      conditional on
                            Attend college          attendance           attendance      college attendance
                            (1)         (1’)      (2)        (2’)      (3)        (3’)      (4)          (4’)
  Mean of dep. var.              .616                   .639                 .561                 .892
  Any STC                  .096          …       .095         …       .111         …       .051           …
                          (.046)                (.061)               (.046)               (.040)
  Number of programs        …          .040        …         .088       …         .054      …           .035
  x years                             (.019)                (.024)               (.019)                (.016)
  N                        443          443       274        274       442        442       278          278
 “College attendance” includes college, university, or technical school. Sample includes those in any waves
with STC information. All specifications include controls for demographics, family structure, and test
scores. Estimates are from linear probability models.
Table 9: Descriptive Statistics on STC Participation and Wave 1 Educational Expectations, Attitudes, and
Aspirations
                             Disappointment if        Have to do well in          Chance will          Chance will
                               do not graduate      school to be successful      graduate high     graduate college by
                                from college                 in life           school by age 25          age 25
                                      (1)                      (2)                    (3)                  (4)
 Any STC (N=332)                     4.41                     1.18                   2.80                 2.63
                                    (1.21)                    (.40)                  (.46)                (.56)
 No STC (N=314)                      4.21                     1.27                   2.71                 2.59
                                    (1.32)                    (.52)                  (.55)                (.57)
Means are reported, with standard deviations in parentheses. Sample is restricted to observations with STC
information in any of Waves 3-5, and information on all of the education expectations, etc., questions. Educational
aspirations are coded as: 1-no school, 2-8th or less, 3-9th-11th, 4-graduate from high school, 5-post-high school
vocational or technical training, 6-some college, 7-degree from two-year college, 8-degree from four-year college,
9-Master’s degree, 10-law, Ph.D, or M.D. Disappointment if fails to graduate from college is coded as 1-5, from
not too disappointed to very disappointed. Have to do well in school to be successful is coded as: 1-strongly agree,
2-agree, 3-disagree, and 4-strongly disagree. Chances of graduation are coded as: 1-low, 2-middle, and 3-high.
Table 10: Effects of STC Participation on Schooling-Related Outcomes, Controlling for Wave 1
Educational Expectations, Attitudes, and Aspirations
                                          Graduate high       Educational         College      4-year college
                           Dropout           school           aspirations       attendance       attendance
                             (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)
 Without wave 1
 controls:
 Any STC                     -.061             .139               .449             .082             .105
                            (.022)            (.035)             (.131)           (.048)           (.048)
 With wave 1
 controls:
 Any STC                     -.057              .133              .398             .082             .096
                            (.022)            (.035)             (.128)           (.048)           (.048)
 Disappointment if           .012              -.029              .128             -.018            .038
 do not graduate from       (.009)            (.015)             (.055)           (.020)           (.020)
 college
 Have to do well in            .021               -.063             -.172             .032              .085
 school to be                 (.024)             (.036)            (.135)            (.054)           (.054)
 successful in life
 Chance will                   -.065               .110             .461              .102              .090
 graduate high school         (.024)             (.037)            (.140)            (.058)           (.058)
 by age 25
 Chance will                   -.002               .005             .097              -.050            -.030
 graduate college by          (.022)             (.033)            (.124)            (.046)           (.046)
 age 25
 N                              529                497               503               394              389
Sample includes those in any waves with STC information, and with Wave 1 information as explained in notes
to Table 9; also see notes to that table for coding of Wave 1 variables. All specifications include controls for
demographics, family structure, and test scores. The results—including the signs of the Wave 1 controls (and
the rough magnitudes)—were generally similar when they were entered one at a time in separate specifications.
Table 11: Effects of STC Participation on Schooling-Related Outcomes, Controlling for Type of
School and Allowing Different Effects by Type of School
                                       Graduate high       Educational       College       4-year college
                         Dropout          school           aspirations      attendance       attendance
                           (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)
Previous
specifications:
Any STC                    -.061            .128               .424            .096             .112
                          (.021)           (.033)             (.127)          (.046)           (.046)
With type of school
controls:
Any STC                    -.067             .135              .469            .089              .106
                          (.022)           (.034)             (.129)          (.047)           (.046)
Magnet school              -.075             .122              .486            .077              .177
                          (.031)           (.048)             (.186)          (.061)           (.060)
Vocational school          -.024            -.006              .182            -.110            -.169
                          (.034)           (.054)             (.206)          (.076)           (.076)
With type of school
controls and
differential effects
by type of school:
Any STC                    -.087             .157              .463            .095              .134
                          (.025)           (.039)             (.148)          (.056)           (.055)
Magnet school              -.117             .146              .713            .160              .258
                          (.042)           (.065)             (.250)          (.086)           (.085)
Vocational school          -.051             .054              -.128           -.218            -.176
                          (.045)           (.070)             (.266)          (.098)           (.097)
Any STC x magnet           .085             -.043              -.482           -.161            -.152
school                    (.057)           (.088)             (.340)          (.111)           (.110)
Any STC x                  .058             -.150              .811            .273              .045
vocational school         (.069)           (.111)             (.414)          (.154)           (.155)
Test equality of STC       .277              .384              .033            .043              .336
coefficients (p-
value)
N                           606               567             577               443              438
Sample includes those in any waves with STC information. All specifications include controls for
demographics, family structure, and test scores.
Table 12: Effects of STC Participation on Schooling-Related Outcomes, At-Risk vs. Others
                                          Graduate high        Educational          College       4-year college
                           Dropout           school            aspirations        attendance        attendance
                             (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)               (5)
 Non-nuclear
 family:
 Any STC                     -.023              .092                .519              .075              .140
                            (.035)             (.054)              (.208)            (.072)           (.072)
 Any STC x non-              -.059              .056                -.149             .035             -.045
 nuclear family             (.043)             (.067)              (.258)            (.092)           (.092)
 N                            606               567                  577               443              438
 Math scores below
 median:
 Any STC                     -.068              .104                .332              .054             .065
                            (.026)             (.040)              (.154)            (.053)           (.053)
 Any STC x low               .016               .060                .228              .120             .133
 math scores                (.036)             (.056)              (.215)            (.076)           (.076)
 N                            606               567                  577               443             438
 Reading scores
 below median:
 Any STC                     -.044              .109                .476              .114             .104
                            (.026)             (.040)              (.153)            (.052)           (.052)
 Any STC x low               -.042              .049                -.130             -.053            .024
 reading scores             (.035)             (.055)              (.211)            (.076)           (.076)
 N                            606               567                  577               443             438
 Aspires to less than
 4-year college:
 Any STC                     -.022              .112                .352              .051             .073
                            (.024)             (.039)              (.140)            (.054)           (.055)
 Any STC x low               -.166              .141                .137              -.002            .025
 aspirations                (.061)             (.101)              (.370)            (.156)           (.158)
 N                            483               452                  463               358             353
 Mother’s education
 high school or less:
 Any STC                     -.069             .138                -.079             -.071            -.031
                            (.039)            (.060)              (.219)            (.080)           (.081)
Any STC x low                .021              .004                .578              .237              .222
mother’s education          (.049)            (.076)              (.277)            (.105)           (.106)
N                             416              388                  399               315              311
Sample includes those in any waves with STC information. All specifications include controls for
demographics, family structure, and test scores, as well as for the main effect for the new interaction if it is
not already included (such as the indicator for low mother’s education). The mean for the low mother’s
education indicator is about 0.6. The educational aspirations and mother’s education data are available in
Wave 1. See notes to corresponding tables for more details.
Appendix Table A1: Observations by Wave and File in the PELS
                                 W1           W2          W3           W4          W5          W6
Total                           1470         1332        1561         1447        1280        1169
In W1                            …           1111        1031          915         818         742
Not in W1                        …            221         530          532         462         427
In W2                            …            …          1045          903        806          719
Not in W2                        …            …           516          544        474          450
In W3                            ...          …            …          1160        1000         878
Not in W3                        ...          …            …           287        280          291
In W4                            …            …            …            …         1016         873
Not in W4                        …            …            …            …          264         296
In W5                            …            …            …            …           …          854
Not in W5                        …            …            …            …           …          315
In no previous waves                          221         368          137          68          13
In all previous waves            …           1111         883          691         537         378

In W3, W4, or W5 (some             …           …            …            …            …         1097
STC info)
       Also in                                                                                   639
       administrative file
       (non-missing test
       scores)
In W3, W4, and W5                  …           …            …            …            …          601
(complete STC info)
       Also in                                                                                   387
       administrative file
       (non-missing test
       scores)
The highlighted entries in the last column give the sizes of the potential analysis samples with and
without test scores, and requiring that respondents be interviewed in any or all of Waves 3-5,
when the STC questions were asked. The actual samples analyzed are smaller because of missing
data on other variables.
Appendix Table A2: Descriptive Statistics for STC Participation
                                               Sample in any wave          Sample in all waves
                                              with STC information        with STC information
                                               Total        In W6          Total         In W6
# of observations                              1676          940            823           572
By program:
Academics Plus                                  .033           .031          .040           .033
ASPIRA                                          .004            .004         .002           .003
College Access                                  .449            .485         .530           .544
Laser                                           .001           .001          .001           .002
Legacy                                          .004            .003         .005           .005
Philadelphia Futures                            .005           .004          .006           .005
PRIME                                           .042           .051          .056           .066
Say Yes to Education                            .001           .002          .001           .002
Upward Bound                                    .004           .001          .005           .002
White-Williams Scholars                         .011            .012         .017           .014
Other                                           .087           .101          .112           .110
Total:
Any STC participation                           .519           .553          .604           .614
Number of programs                              .896           1.006         1.198         1.229
(x years)
Number of programs                             1.744           1.819         1.984         2.003
(x years) for participants
By year:
Any STC participation, W3                       .346            .353         .352           .361
Any STC participation, W4                       .231            .262         .315           .325
Any STC participation, W5                       .243            .299         .372           .383
STC information is reported in Waves 3-5. Sample for any STC participation in Wave 3 is
smaller because some respondents report being in grade 8 in Wave 3, in which case STC data are
treated as missing. Sample proportions or means are reported. Sample also excludes those with
missing or contradictory information on race, ethnicity, or sex, and those who report dropping out
in Waves 3-5.
Appendix Table A3: Effects of STC Participation on Other High School Behaviors/Achievements
                            Failed to progress     Number of time
                              through grades,        cut or skipped    Number of days       Academic award,          Non-academic
                                 waves 3-6          classes, wave 6     absent, wave 6            wave 6             award, wave 6
                               (1)        (1’)       (2)        (2’)      (3)       (3’)      (4)         (4’)       (5)         (5’)
 Mean of dep. var.                 .150                   6.87                11.14                .510                   .312
 Any STC                     -.064         …        1.79         …       -.31        …       .132          …        .137          …
                            (.030)                 (1.48)              (1.46)               (.042)                 (.039)
 Number of programs            …         -.022        …         -.02      …         -.68      …          .062        …          .057
 x years                                (.013)                 (.64)               (.63)                (.018)                 (.017)
 N                            606         606        486        486      503        503       606         606        606         606
Sample includes those in any waves with STC information. All specifications include controls for demographics, family structure,
and test scores. Failure to progress is defined as failure to move to a higher grade in each year for which data are available; it can
include dropping out. Academic awards include academic honor, award in science or math fair, special recognition for good grades
or honor roll, or special recognition for writing an essay or poem. Non-academic awards include elected officer of a school class,
named most valuable player on a sports team, community service award, or award in technical or skills competition. Estimates are
from linear regressions/linear probability models.
Appendix Table A4: Effects of STC Participation on Schooling-Related Outcomes, by Sex
                                          Graduate high       Educational         College      4-year college
                           Dropout           school           aspirations       attendance       attendance
                             (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)
 Females:
 Any STC                     -.059             .100               .436             .123             .128
                            (.028)            (.041)             (.169)           (.058)           (.061)
 N                            364              337                 349              271             267
 Males:
 Any STC                     -.075             .187               .450             .105             .104
                            (.034)            (.056)             (.195)           (.077)           (.074)
 N                            242              230                 228              172             171
 Test of equality of         .733              .274               .807             .669             .884
 STC coefficients for
 males and females
 (p-values)
Models are estimated separately by sex. Sample includes those in any waves with STC information. All
specifications include controls for demographics, family structure, and test scores. See notes to
corresponding tables for more details. The test of equality is from a regression pooling observations for
males and females but adding an interaction of STC participation with gender; the p-value reported is for the
test of significance of this interaction.
Appendix Table A5: Predictors of Attrition
                            (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)
 Any STC                  -.126       -.054     -.050     -.082     -.142
                         (.044)      (.045)    (.031)    (.026)    (.059)
 Female                   -.116       -.094     -.084     -.088     -.106
                         (.031)      (.024)    (.027)    (.024)    (.036)
 Black                     .000        .004     -.003     .009      .002
                         (.042)      (.033)    (.035)    (.032)    (.041)
 Latino                    .042        .071     .027      .074      .026
                         (.067)      (.054)    (.063)    (.054)    (.067)
 Asian/other               .018        .006     -.023     .013      .004
                         (.093)      (.075)    (.094)    (.075)    (.092)
 Lives with bio            .074        .080     .007      .053      .050
 mother only             (.038)      (.043)    (.033)    (.031)    (.053)
 Lives with one bio        .106        .157     .101      .122      .141
 and one step parent     (.046)      (.051)    (.040)    (.036)    (.065)
 Other living              .125        .129     .056      .105      .144
 arrangement             (.049)      (.056)    (.043)    (.039)    (.071)
 Reading test below        .062         …         …         …       .061
 median                  (.049)                                    (.049)
 Math test below          -.047          …         …       …        -.039
 median                  (.050)                                    (.050)
 Held back grades 3-        …            …       -.035     …        -.211
 5                                              (.050)             (.066)
 Dropout by wave 6            …          …         …      .136      .144
 (administrative data)                                   (.053)    (.071)
 Reading test below         -.071        …         …       …        -.084
 median Any STC            (.068)                                  (.068)
 Math test below            -.047        …         …       …        .123
 median Any STC            (.050)                                  (.068)
 Lives with bio               …        -.035       …       …        .020
 mother only Any                      (.059)                       (.073)
 STC
 Lives with one bio           …        -.060       …       …         -.076
 and one step parent                  (.071)                        (.090)
 Any STC
 Other living                 …        -.031       …       …         -.034
 arrangement Any                      (.077)                        (.096)
 STC
 Held back grades 3-          …          …       .171      …         .291
 5 Any STC                                      (.073)              (.096)
 Dropout by wave 6            …          …         …      .049       .094
 Any STC                                                 (.081)     (.114)
 N                          1062       1675      1299     1675       1062
Sample is restricted to those in any of Waves 3-5. Estimates are from linear
probability models.
Appendix Table A6: Effects of STC Participation Reweighting to Correct for Attrition
Bias
                                            Graduate high       Educational      4-year college
                              Dropout          school           aspirations        attendance
                                (1)              (2)                (3)                (5)

 Uncorrected:
 Any STC                        -.061            .128               .424              .112
                               (.021)           (.033)             (.127)            (.046)
 Reweight based on
 estimates in Appendix
 Table A4, column (5):
 Any STC                        -.061            .117               .414              .105
                               (.023)           (.035)             (.128)            (.045)
 Reweight based on
 estimates in Appendix
 Table A4, column (4):
 Any STC                          -.059         .120               .398                .106
                                 (.022)        (.034)             (.128)              (.045)
 N                                 606          567                577                  438
Sample includes those in any waves with STC information. All specifications include controls
for demographics, and family structure. Estimates are from linear probability models, with
observations weighted by the inverse of one minus the predicted attrition rate for the individual
based on estimates in columns (4) and (5) of Appendix Table A5. The uncorrected estimates in
the first row are from earlier tables.
