                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   ON THE RENMINBI:
                            THE CHOICE BETWEEN ADJUSTMENT
                           UNDER A FIXED EXCHANGE RATE AND
                           ADJUSTMENT UNDER A FLEXIBLE RATE

                                             Jeffrey Frankel

                                         Working Paper 11274
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11274


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2005




The author would like to thank Maral Shamloo for efficient research assistance, the Kuwait Fund at Harvard
University for support and Yong Zhang and participants at a May 2004 conference in Dalian, China, for
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jeffrey Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Renminbi: The Choice between Adjustment under a Fixed Exchange Rate and
Adjustment under a Flexible Rate
Jeffrey Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 11274
April 2005
JEL No. F0

                                            ABSTRACT

Fixed and flexible exchange rates each have advantages, and a country has the right to choose the
regime suited to its circumstances. Nevertheless, several arguments support the view that the de facto
dollar peg may now have outlived its usefulness for China. (1) China's economy is on the
overheating side of internal balance, and appreciation would help easy inflationary pressure. (2)
Although foreign exchange reserves are a useful shield against currency crises, by now China's
current level is fully adequate, and US treasury securities do not pay a high return. (3) It becomes
increasingly difficult to sterilize the inflow over time, exacerbating inflation. (4) Although external
balance could be achieved by expenditure reduction, e.g., by raising interest rates, the existence of
two policy goals (external balance and internal balance) in general requires the use of two
independent policy instruments (e.g., the real exchange rate and the interest rate). (5) A large
economy like China can achieve adjustment in the real exchange rate via flexibility in the nominal
exchange rate more easily than via price flexibility. (6) The experience of other emerging markets
points toward exiting from a peg when times are good and the currency is strong, rather than waiting
until times are bad and the currency is under attack. (7) From a longer-run perspective, prices of
goods and services in China are low -- not just low relative to the United States (.23), but also low
by the standards of a Balassa-Samuelson relationship estimated across countries (which predicts .36).
In this specific sense, the yuan was undervalued by approximately 35% in 2000, and is by at least
as much today. The paper finds that, typically across countries, such gaps are corrected halfway, on
average, over the subsequent decade. These seven arguments for increased exchange rate flexibility
need not imply a free float. China is a good counter-example to the popular "corners hypothesis"
prohibition on intermediate exchange rate regimes.
Jeffrey Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02140
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
On the Renminbi:
          The choice between adjustment under a fixed exchange rate
                     and adjustment under a flexible rate


         An exchange rate that is de facto fixed has served China well over the last eight
years. Nevertheless, four major reasons have been given to suggest that it may now be
time to allow the yuan to appreciate. First, calculations based on the Balassa-Samuelson
relationship suggest that the real value of the renminbi is (and has for some time been)
low -- not just low compared to the U.S. dollar or other rich countries, but substantially
below even the equilibrium value for a country at China’s stage of development. Second,
although history shows that foreign exchange reserves are a useful shield against
currency crises, China’s level of balance of payments surplus and reserve acquisition has
by now been very high for several years, so that the country is currently giving up a lot
when it buys (low-return) US treasury securities with the proceeds it raises from (high-
return) inward investments. Third, the domestic economy is in danger of overheating.
While the necessary cooling off could be attempted through shrinkage of government
spending, tighter domestic credit and higher interest rates rather than through a higher
value of the currency – and China has started to make some appropriate efforts along
these lines – a strategy that continues to exclude appreciation from the policy response
mix will become increasingly difficult. The country is in the range where monetary
inflows and inflation are likely to accelerate if the renminbi is not allowed to appreciate.
Fourth, a country as large as China probably requires an exchange rate regime with some
flexibility, and the experience of other emerging markets suggests that it is better to exit
from a peg when times are good and the currency is strong, than to wait until times are
bad and the currency is under attack.
         This need not mean a move to pure floating. An intermediate regime such as a
target zone has many attractions for the time being. Indeed the case of China well-
illustrates the limitations of the popular “corners hypothesis.” 1

        The author is not necessarily endorsing recent urgings of American politicians.
US trade deficits and unemployment are not substantially attributable to China’s
exchange rate policy.2 Furthermore, any country is free to choose to peg its currency if it
wishes. Thus allegations of “illegal exchange rate manipulation” are probably
inappropriate. It is not even true that an appreciation of the renminbi against the dollar
would have an immediately noticeable effect on the overall US trade deficit or
employment (and especially not in time for the 2004 presidential election!), though the
effect on the US trade balance would eventually be moderate if other Asian countries
were to respond by letting their currencies appreciate against the dollar as well. But in



1
  Among many others urging appreciation of the renminbi are Goldstein (2003), Goldstein and Lardy (2003)
and Merrill Lynch (2004), all of whom suggest an initial step appreciation followed by a move to a band
around a basket.
2
  The recent US position on the Chinese yuan has a precedent 15 years earlier when US policy urged
appreciation and liberalization of the Korean won: Frankel (1993). And before that, the Japanese yen:
Frankel (1984).


                                                                                                     3
any case, the first order of business for China should be to determine what policy is in its
own interest.
        This is not to say that surplus countries have no obligations under the
international monetary system3, nor that no country can ever be asked to take into
account the interests of others, as part of a reciprocal system that has gains for all. But in
the author’s view it is not appropriate to use the language of WTO violations for the
question of balancing the pros and cons of fixed exchange rates, which is inherently
much less clear-cut than the question of balancing the pros and cons of free trade.4

         It should be conceded from the outset that a regime of fixed exchange rates has a
number of advantages.5 Probably two advantages of fixing the exchange rate in terms of
a particular major currency like the dollar are most important. First is the provision of a
nominal anchor to prevent inflationary monetary policies and expectations thereof. But
there are other possible alternate candidates for nominal anchor, including nominal GDP,
the CPI, and an export price index.6 Second is the facilitation of trade with those
countries that use the dollar, or at least are pegged to the dollar.7 Other advantages of
fixed rates include facilitating financial integration, forestalling competitive appreciation
or depreciation, and preventing the sort of speculative bubbles that seem occasionally to
afflict floating exchange rates. There is of course a corresponding list of advantages of
floating rates.

        The paper presents the arguments for exchange rate flexibility in a general context.
The freedom to depreciate when the balance of payments is in deficit, or output has fallen
below potential, is as important as the freedom to appreciate in the opposite
circumstances. But we emphasize the specifics of China’s current macroeconomic
situation, particularly the features of payments surplus and rapid growth. In the latter part
of the paper, we consider the long-run implications of the Balassa-Samuelson effect,
offering some simple calculations that shouldn’t be novel, but apparently are.

The Need For Two Policy Instruments: Exchange Rate As Well As Spending



3
  Goldstein (2004) argues that there is an obligation not to manipulate the currency to frustrate adjustment,
and that a fixed exchange rate is not proof against such charges.
4
  Frankel (2004) is a more comprehensive survey of the pros and cons of exchange rate regimes among
emerging market countries.
5
  McKinnon has long argued the advantages of dollar links for Asian countries; e.g., McKinnon and
Schnabl (2003).
6
  Of these three candidates for nominal anchor, inflation targeting, by which is usually meant the CPI, has
caught on internationally; and the others have not. Setting a target for the CPI suffers the disadvantage
that in the event of an increase in the world market price of imported commodities such as oil, the rule says
to tighten monetary policy enough to appreciate the currency (so as to leave the price of imports unchanged
in local currency), whereas precisely the opposite response is called for in response to such an adverse shift
in the terms of trade. The two old favorite candidates for nominal anchor, price of gold and money supply,
have been largely discredited
7
  Since Rose (2000), we have come to realize that the empirical effect of a fixed exchange rate on the
quantity of trade is stronger than had been previously thought, at least in the case of a common currency.
Clark, Tamirisa, and Wei (2004) find little effect of variability versus a regular fixed exchange rate.


                                                                                                            4
        It is sometimes pointed out that changes in exchange rates are not necessary or
sufficient to adjust the trade balance. This proposition is true, so far as it goes, but is
much less helpful than at first appears. It is true that other policies, especially those that
affect the level of spending, are important. A trade deficit can indeed be viewed as an
excess of spending over income, and a trade surplus as the reverse. Thus changes in
spending affect the trade balance. But this does not mean that changes in the exchange
rate are not important too. We will see that, because any country has other goals in
addition to trade balance adjustment, the real exchange rate does have an important role
to play. That will mean giving the nominal exchange rate a role to play as well, for a
majority of countries – especially countries as large as China.

         The claim that the exchange rate is unimportant for adjustment can arise from two
– mutually inconsistent – views of trade. One polar view is that trade elasticities, which
describe the response of exports and imports to relative prices, are extremely low, and so
of little help in adjustment. The other extreme view is that the trade elasticities are
extremely high – so high that firms are forced to adjust all prices instantaneously in
response to fluctuations in the exchange rate or else face the loss of all their customers.
Reality, as so often, lies in between these two extremes. The price level adjusts partially
to changes in the exchange rate, especially in the short run. This paper will proceed on
that assumption. A simple and standard model focuses on the distinction between goods
that are internationally traded and those that are not. It is assumed that the short-run
adjustment of prices to exchange rate changes is complete within the traded good sector,
so that variability in the real exchange rate arises entirely from the nontraded goods
sector. But all the points I wish to make in this paper could as easily be made with other
models, so long as elasticities are greater than zero but less than infinite and the price
level in the short run adjusts only partially to changes in the exchange rate.

         The more general point is the classic framework of targets and instruments.8
Assume that the People’s Bank of China has at its disposal two policy instruments: the
exchange rate, and the interest rate. The interest rate is used as shorthand here for all of
monetary policy including domestic credit, reserve requirements placed on banks, etc.,
and indeed for other policies that affect the level of domestic spending. Figure 1 shows
the two instruments on the two axes. If we were only interested in one policy goal or
target, then life would be simple. Consider as the first target the trade balance, as a
criterion for external balance. For simplicity, let us say the target for the trade balance is
zero. In fact, it may be appropriate for a rapidly growing country with a low
capital/labor ratio and a high return to investment to run a trade deficit and finance it by
borrowing from abroad. But whether the target level is zero or some other number does
not matter for the analysis.

Trade balance equilibrium schedule



8
 The targets and instruments framework goes back to Tinbergen, Meade and Mundell (1968). Our version
will be based on the diagram of Swan (1963). See Krugman (1987) for a cogent and still-relevant
application to the question of how the US should adjust to its current account deficits.


                                                                                                   5
        There are different combinations of the real exchange rate and the real interest
rate that are consistent with a zero trade balance, and they are represented by the
downward-sloping TB line in Figure 1. (We are defining the nominal and real exchange
rates as the domestic price of foreign currency or goods, respectively; so an increase is a
depreciation.) To see that the line slopes down, consider a deficit country at point D, e.g.,
Asian crises victims Thailand or Korea in 1997 (or the U.S. today!) At point D, the
country can eliminate the trade deficit either by real appreciation -- a movement upward -
- or by expenditure reduction, a movement rightward.
        Imagine now that the country finds itself with too large a trade surplus. Then it is
located above or to the right of the TB schedule, at a point like C. It can get back to
equilibrium either by lowering the real exchange rate or by lowering the interest rate.
Lowering the interest rate would operate by stimulating domestic spending, some of
which would spill abroad as increased imports (or as increased consumption of goods that
might otherwise be exported), thereby reducing the trade balance. Lowering the real
exchange rate could, in turn, be achieved either by appreciating the currency or allowing
prices to rise; either way, domestic goods lose competitiveness on world markets and the
goal of reducing the trade balance is again achieved. Thus the authorities can either
lower the interest rate or lower E; the more of one, the less of the other. An inverse
tradeoff between i and E characterizes the combination of points that give equilibrium in
the trade balance. That is the external balance relationship

                          Figure 1. Attaining Internal and External Balance

                            Overheating                                     Internal
   E                                                                        balance

(Price of                              C 2004
foreign                     Surplus                                                Recession
exchange)


                                                        C 2002
                  Deficit



                                     D
                                                                 external
                                                                 balance


       i    (interest rate) or other expenditure-reducing policy




                                                                                               6
         Which way of achieving a change in the real exchange rate is to be preferred, a
reduction in the nominal exchange rate or an increase in the price level? The choice
between flexible and fixed exchange rates depends on a number of further factors, which
vary from case to case. Many of these criteria fall within the general title of Optimum
Currency Area theory. A very small, very open, economy -- such as Hong Kong [S.A.R.]
-- will find it relatively more costly to give up an exchange rate peg, and would find it
easier to let the price level adjust instead. China is a large country with a large internal
market, indicating that adjustment via the exchange rate is relatively more attractive.9

        If the trade balance were the sole objective, then perhaps there would be no need
to adjust the real exchange rate. The nominal exchange rate could be fixed – with all the
advantages that entails. There would also no be need to undergo changes in the price
level either. Adjustment could take place in the level of expenditure, rather than through
expenditure-switching. In terms of central bank instruments, monetary policy could do
all the work.

Internal balance schedule

        The big problem with the attitude that one needs only a single kind of policy
instrument, such as those instruments that work through the level of spending, is that the
trade balance is not the sole objective. Governments should and do have other
macroeconomic objectives. We consider now internal balance. Because the country
has more than one policy objective, it will need more than one category of policy
instrument to achieve them. The interest rate alone is not enough. (Subsequently we will
turn to a third objective: the capital account or overall balance of payments.)

        The target for internal balance can be defined as output equal to potential output,
or as employment equal to the natural rate of employment, or as an absence of
inflationary or deflationary pressures. Let us say that the country in question finds itself
with output above potential , Y> Y , i.e., there is excess demand for goods. As a result the
economy is overheating. To cool off the economy, the government can either raise
interest rates or undergo a real appreciation. In terms of Figure 1, we are talking about
an economy that finds itself to the left of the upward-sloping Y= Y line; it can get back
to internal balance either by moving to the right in Figure 1, or by moving down. Not
long ago, in 2002, it was possible to argue that China was to the right of the Y= Y curve,
in the zone of Excess Supply of Goods. At that point, some easing of monetary policy
was called for, to increase spending and restore internal balance. By 2004, however,
China had clearly moved to the other side of the line, to a point like C2004. As a result,
some combination of an increase in interest rates or a real appreciation is called for.

        There is only one point on the graph that achieves the desired settings for both
objectives, and that is where the two lines intersect. The key lesson is that, in general,
9
  The emphasis on the share of traded goods in the economy as an optimum currency area criterion dates
from McKinnon (1963). The term “optimum currency area” itself dates from Mundell (1961), who
focused on a high level of cross-border labor mobility as his criterion for giving up a monetary
independence.


                                                                                                         7
one must use two sorts of policies -- expenditure-reduction and expenditure-switching, as
represented by the two axes -- to attain both goals simultaneously. China’s economy has
recently occupied the upper quadrant of the graph: a combination of trade surplus and
excess demand. Without more precise information it is not possible to know what
direction of movement in the interest rate is entailed by the optimal combination of
adjustment in the two instruments. It depends exactly where in that quadrant China lies.
But it is possible to know what direction of movement is called for in the real exchange
rate: downward, i.e., real appreciation. (Below we will consider another argument why
a move to equilibrium for China today would imply real appreciation: the Balassa-
Samuelson effect.)

        Some real appreciation took place in the 1990s, in the form of inflation, and that
may now be starting to happen again. But it is probably not desirable that the real
appreciation take this form. Inflation is not good. Especially if one of the leading
arguments for a fixed exchange rate is as an anti-inflationary anchor for monetary policy,
the argument for abandoning the peg is reinforced if economic circumstances imply high
inflation even under a peg. Those circumstances in China today are increases in the
international reserve component of the monetary base as opposed to the net domestic
asset component. Such increases are helping drive up inflation. Hence the argument
for nominal appreciation instead.

Target for the overall balance of payments

        The Government of China announced that the trade surplus had disappeared in the
first quarter of 2004. Perhaps the trade surplus will soon return. Or perhaps the goal for
a rapidly growing country like China is a trade deficit, financed by borrowing from
abroad. The phasing in of WTO commitments is likely to explain some deficit in goods
and services. Or perhaps some American representatives would dispute the statistic, or
would emphasize the bilateral deficit (although the only case for the latter emphasis
would be political, not economic). Let us set any such arguments aside, and assume for
the moment that the trade balance is where it should be. There is still the question of the
overall balance of payments, the sum of the current account and the private capital
account.

        The statistics show that the foreign exchange reserves held by the People’s Bank
of China continue to increase. This says that China is running a surplus on its overall
balance of payments. If it is true that the current account balance is small or zero, the
surplus must currently be taking the form of capital inflows. Although portfolio capital
inflows are still heavily restricted by the government of China, they are nevertheless
finding their way in through one route or another; and in any case inward Foreign Direct
Investment is large. Which measure of external balance is the right one? One cannot
definitively assert that it is correct to have an objective for the current account but not for
the overall balance of payments, or vice versa. Both measures are of interest to
policymakers.
        Why does the balance of payments matter? One disadvantage of a balance of
payments deficit, for any country, is that the central bank is running down its reserves. If



                                                                                              8
this process continues indefinitely, it will eventually have to adjust course. Under
conditions of open capital markets, if reserves reach a critical level (which need not be as
low as zero), a sudden speculative attack could force the adjustment to take place rapidly,
and under unpleasant conditions.10 In the East Asian crisis of 1997-98, for example, the
economies that had run down their reserves suffered sharp crises (Thailand, Korea, etc.),
while the economies with high levels of reserve holdings were the ones able to ride out
the storm (China, Hong Kong SAR, and Taiwan Province of China).
        One disadvantage of a balance of payments surplus, on the other hand, is that the
reserves, which are typically held in the form of US Treasury bills and bonds and other
dollar securities, pay a low rate of return. Interest rates on US treasury bills are low
because the market is so liquid and because default is assumed to be very unlikely -- and
also, during the period 2001-2004, because the Federal Reserve has held short-term
interest rates well below normal historical levels. The Chinese authorities have evidently
already diversified out of Treasury bills, into agency bonds and other longer term
securities, which will probably help the yield somewhat. But it is more likely than not
that the dollar will depreciate over the next ten years (not necessarily in the short run), in
light of the large US trade deficit, which would reduce even further the return to holding
dollar securities. (Diversification into the euro or other currencies has evidently not yet
gone far.) Meanwhile, China is presumably paying to foreign investors on their inward
investment a higher return than it is earning, which means that the arrangement is a
losing deal for the country in the aggregate.
        The author’s feeling is that China has not been irrational -- in light of the
observed volatility of the preceding decade -- to want to accumulate reserves. Thus one
can rationalize a balance of payments surplus above and beyond the trade surplus (though
I would guess that exports and employment are the more important motivations in the
minds of Chinese policy-makers when they intervene to maintain the de facto peg11). In
any case, by now the level of reserves is so high that further accumulation would seem to
accomplish very little by way of increased security. So I will assume in the analysis that
the target for the overall balance of payments is now zero.

         Another consideration in selecting the desired level of the overall balance of
payments is the implications of reserve flows for the monetary base. If reserves are
flowing in through a balance of payments surplus, that puts upward pressure on the
monetary base. Conversely, if reserves are flowing out through a balance of payments
deficit, that puts downward pressure on the monetary base. If the central bank wishes to
makes its domestic monetary policy decisions unencumbered by changes in foreign
exchange reserves, that may be a further argument for a target of zero for the balance of
payments. (We return to this issue shortly.)

Balance of payments equilibrium schedule
       Regardless what numerical target is selected for the overall balance of payments,
the combinations of i and E in Figure 1 that correspond to that target are, as for the trade

10
   This is predicted by most theories of speculative attacks. Chapter 23 of Caves, Frankel and Jones (2002)
is a brief survey of crises in emerging markets.
11
   Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber (2003) surmise on these grounds that Asian central banks will
happily absorb ever-more dollars indefinitely.


                                                                                                         9
balance, downward sloping. We have already seen that the real exchange rate and the
interest rate have the same direction of effects on the trade balance (via competitiveness
and spending, respectively); so if one goes up the other must go down to maintain
equilibrium. But in addition, they probably also have the same direction of effects on the
capital account: an increase in interest rates attracts a capital inflow, other things equal,
while an increase in the exchange rate also makes domestic assets more attractive
(cheaper) to foreign residents. Again, if one goes up the other must go down, if the
capital account is to remain equal to some particular number. Thus the relationship
governing the overall balance of payments has the same negative slope as the relationship
governing the trade balance. [One might choose to draw the BP=0 curve more steeply
than the TB=0 curve. This is somewhat arbitrary, but is motivated by the thought that
currency depreciation can sometimes engender expectations of further depreciation
and/or inflation, which might work to discourage capital inflows, rather than the reverse.]

       If we substitute the balance of payments objective for the trade balance objective,
then we again find China today in the upper quadrant of the Figure, at a point like C.
Again, an appreciation of the currency is called for.

Sterilization

         We have already mentioned that a balance of payments surplus implies that the
reserve component of the monetary base is increasing. Some expansion in the monetary
policy may be entirely appropriate, especially in an economy with strong long-term
growth. But in an economy that is in danger of overheating, the central bank may wish to
sterilize the inflow, so as to prevent expansion in the overall money supply. Sterilization
could be defined narrowly, as reduction in the net domestic assets of the central bank, e.g.,
by selling bonds, so as to keep the monetary base from rising. Or sterilization could be
defined more broadly, as reduction in domestic credit of the consolidated banking system,
e.g., by raising reserve requirements on banks, so as to keep M1 from rising.
         Sterilization can be a good response to an inflow, for a period of time. It can help
the country maintain its exchange rate target without abandoning a target for the money
supply or interest rate. But it can become increasingly difficult over time, especially if
traditional barriers to capital flows have been gradually eroded. One problem is that it
just prolongs the balance of payments disequilibrium, because it by-passes the automatic
mechanism of adjustment that reserve flows provide under the monetary approach to the
balance of payments. Another potential problem is the quasi-fiscal deficit: if the central
bank has to pay high interest rates to get domestic residents voluntarily to absorb
“sterilization bonds,” while receiving low interest rates on its reserves of US treasury
securities, then it is running a deficit. Some governments are able to force their bonds
down the throats of their banks without paying market interest rates, a form of financial
repression; but this just weakens the balance sheets of banks and raises the odds of a
banking crisis somewhere down the road. So far, the PBoC seems to have had little
difficulty selling its sterilization bonds, but this could change.




                                                                                          10
Avoiding currency crises
        Asian countries are understandably anxious to avoid crises such as those that
afflicted much of the continent in 1997-98. Many areas of policy are relevant for trying
to minimize the probability and severity of crises. Some decisions, such as the speed of
liberalization of the capital account, are highly controversial. Others are more widely
agreed upon, such as the desirability of strong banking regulation, holding adequate
reserves, and tilting the composition of capital inflows away from short-term dollar-
denominated bank loans and toward Foreign Direct Investment and longer-term securities.
        Although much ink has been spilled over the question of exchange rate regime,
there is no clear verdict. The late-1990s saw the development of a surprisingly wide
consensus in favor of the corners hypothesis: hard pegs or pure floats, in preference over
intermediate regimes. But the author has been skeptical of this view all along. China,
for one, is too large a country to dollarize or adopt a currency board, but is probably not
ready for pure floating yet either. That leaves intermediate regimes: either the current
adjustable peg, on the one hand, or alternatives such as a target zone, centered either on
the dollar or on a basket, on the other hand.12
        Baskets tend to be less transparent and less credible than defining a parity in terms
of a single existing currency. Asia currently lacks a currency in use that is a suitable
anchor for individual countries. China does not yet have the necessary developed and
open financial markets to make the renminbi a regional anchor currency, while Japan’s
yen fluctuates too much versus the dollar and euro. As a possible pathway to Asian
monetary integration, I have proposed that Singapore unilaterally adopt a firm and
transparent basket peg (with weights on the dollar, euro, yen and renminbi), and that
other countries in the region then use the Singapore dollar as their anchor to whatever
extent they wish to target their own exchange rates.13
        Some have argued that for China to minimize the probability of crisis, it would
have to avoid appreciation, so as to keep the current account as strong as possible. It is
true that overvalued currencies played a role in the East Asia crisis of 1997, even though
some westerners had urged appreciation for surplus countries in the past. It is also true
that real appreciation is likely to lead to trade deficits and net borrowing from abroad, and
that countries that borrow from abroad are more likely to have crises. But there is
another respect in which moving to a regime of increased flexibility now might reduce
the chance of future crises rather than increase it.
        If and when inflow turns to outflow, as part of the cycle that so many developing
countries have gone through so many times before, it is important not to cling to a peg for
too long. Many countries procrastinate, postponing adjustment either through
devaluation or expenditure reduction. The crisis comes when reserves have been run
down to low levels. By then the national balance sheet is so weak (lots of short-term and
dollar-denominated debt) that the adjustment options are no longer attractive: the result
is often a sharp recession regardless of the mix of devaluation and expenditure-
reduction.14 The lesson is not to procrastinate.

12
   Williamson (2000) has been a consistent defender of the intermediate regimes, even when the corners
were most in fashion (which was just before the collapse of Argentina’s currency board).
13
   At the end of Frankel (2004).
14
   Why can’t the authorities maintain internal balance even after a “sudden stop” of capital inflows has
shifted the external balance line adversely, in terms of Figure 1, by the right mix of devaluation and


                                                                                                           11
       There is an understandable temptation to cling to an exchange rate peg that has
worked well for some years, economically and politically. Mexico in 1994 is one of
many examples. One lesson from past experience is that of the exit strategy. If an
eventual exit from a peg, to a regime with greater flexibility, is likely to occur eventually
anyway, it is better to do it at time when the balance of payments is strong and the initial
movement is likely to be appreciation. The alternative of waiting for a time of balance of
payments deficit often turns out to mean exiting the peg under strong downward
speculative pressure, with the result that confidence is undermined and the national
balance sheet is weak.15 Hence the argument for being safe, and increasing flexibility
before any cut-off in capital flows.

        These points are drawn largely from the experience of emerging markets such as
Colombia and Korea in the early 1990s. Those countries were able to sterilize capital
inflows only for a year or two, before it became too difficult, due to high interest rates on
the sterilization bonds and the prolongation of strong capital inflows (as in standard
macro models). Chinese officials may be correct that their case is somewhat different,
due to a financial system that is less open and less market-oriented. The capital inflow
has consisted largely of Chinese citizens bringing capital flight money back home,
speculating on a revaluation, and so far the authorities have not had to pay high interest
rates locally to sterilize it. But they mind it increasingly difficult to sterilize further
inflows.

        The foregoing logic was predicated on the assumption that China is running a
substantial balance of payments surplus. Events in the world economy are changing
rapidly. The last year has been a time when low US interest rates encouraged money to
flow to a wide range of assets and countries, including into emerging market debt, as
reflected in very low sovereign spreads (below 400 basis points, for the first time since
before the Thai crisis of 1997). Over the coming year, the trend is likely to be sharply
upward in US interest rates. In several past episodes, Fed increases in interest rates have
helped trigger “sudden stops” in lending to emerging markets, such as the 1982
international debt crisis and the 1994 Mexican peso crisis. As this paper was written, the
correction in emerging market debt had already begun, in early May, in anticipation of
the increases in US interest rates that began June 30. In this light, China might want to
wait to see if its balance of payments surplus persists after the actual tightening has
begun, before liberalizing its system, and in particular before further removing controls
on outflows.



The Balassa-Samuelson relationship



increase in the interest rate? The problem is that in the presence of a lot of dollar-denominated debt,
devaluation is contractionary. This balance sheet effect makes the internal balance line slope down rather
than up. As a result, it may be hard to find a sensible intersection between the two lines.
15
   Eichengreen and Masson (1998).


                                                                                                         12
        Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) is often calculated as a guide for what the
equilibrium level of the exchange rate, for China as for other countries. But the
overwhelming majority are estimates of relative PPP, that is, based on price indices.
They do not necessarily show the yuan to be strongly undervalued. But that may be
because they use the past as the benchmark, and the yuan may have been undervalued in
the past.
        Comparisons of price levels across countries are difficult, because such absolute
PPP data are much less available than relative PPP data (for which one only needs price
indices and exchange rates). But some data are available. As of 1990, China’s price
level was reported as only .119 of the US price level, according to the Penn World Tables,
Mark 5.6.16 That prices are lower in China is not in itself a surprise. Even if we thought
that markets in internationally traded goods were perfectly integrated, there is no
mechanism to arbitrage disparities in prices of nontraded goods. There is abundant
empirical evidence, along both the cross-section and time-series dimensions, that prices
of non-traded goods, and thereby of general price levels, rise with levels of productivity,
real wages and real income. This robust empirical regularity is called the Balassa-
Samuelson effect, and is most often explained by the assumption that productivity growth
is more rapid in traded goods than non-traded goods.17

Estimation for 1990

        The news is that China’s prices have been, not just low, but well below the level
that one would predict from the country’s per capita income and the cross-country
empirical relationship between the real exchange rate and real income. According to the
same source, China’s real per capita income in 1990 was .125 of the US level. Rogoff’s
(1996) regression estimates that for every 1 percent increase in a country’s real per capita
income (in a cross-section), its real exchange rate is stronger by 0.366 per cent.
Notwithstanding the relatively good fit of this univariate regression (R2=.42) there are
some substantial outliers. China is one of them, though far from the most egregious.
        We have re-run the Rogoff regression for 1990 (with data from the year 2000
Penn World Table), as reported in the Econometrics Appendix. The estimate is a highly
significant .317: every one percent increase in income is associated with a real
appreciation of .317 percent. We confirm that China is an outlier: apparently
undervalued by 42 % in logarithmic terms, or by 34% in absolute terms.18

        Few economists would seriously recommend a revaluation over a short period of
time of the yuan on the order of magnitude suggested by this interpretation of the
Balassa-Samuelson equation. In the first place, a sudden revaluation of the currency of
this magnitude would be disruptive. In the second place, other considerations matter in
addition to the Balassa-Samuelson regression, including current monetary conditions. In

16
   China’s prices showed up as the lowest of 31 countries; the next lowest was Bangladesh at .154.
Summers and Heston (1991) describe the data. See Rogoff (1996, p. 659-660).
17
   Useful references include Balassa (1964), De Gregorio, Giovannini, and Wolf (1994) and Kravis and
Lipsey (1988).
18
   The word “undervaluation” or “overvaluation” has no single agreed upon definition among economists.
But the renminbi seems now to qualify for most of the various possible definitions of undervalued.


                                                                                                     13
the third place, one would first have to investigate the reliability of the Chinese price data.
It is possible that the numbers in the Penn World Table have been extrapolated
extensively from a slender base.19 The possibility of measurement errors in the level and
growth of real GDP has also been widely discussed. If China is indeed lagging far
behind other countries in the extent to which it has allowed or encouraged the sort of
detailed gathering of good price data that is necessary for international comparisons of
China’s absolute price level and real income, then this should be rectified.

        Nevertheless, the numbers are suggestive of a disequilibrium that in the very long
run may have to be corrected one way or another. Even if the adjustment is drawn out
over a long period of time, to correct the disparity with no change in the nominal
exchange rate would imply substantial inflation, not desirable as a long-term trend. Thus
the Balassa-Samuelson calculation seems another reason to plan on a transition to a more
flexible exchange rate regime.

        The yuan appreciated in real terms during the course of the 1990s. In nominal
terms, the currency depreciated substantially, particularly in 1994 when the official rate
was unified with the already-depreciated parallel rate, as reported in Table 1 of the Data
Appendix. In 2000 the nominal exchange rate was 8.28 (the level at which it has been
pegged since 1998), as compared to an official rate of 4.78 in 1990. But the cumulation
of inflation during the 1990s has been greater than the depreciation, implying a real
appreciation.20 China has also experienced rapid growth in real income, as reported in
Data Appendix Table 1. Thus the real exchange rate predicted by the Balassa-Samuelson
equation has changed. The gap between the current real exchange rate and the level
predicted by Rogoff’s equation appears to have been (very roughly) as big at the end of
the decade as it was at the beginning.

Estimation for 2000

        We can do better at updating the calculation than simple extrapolation. The Penn
World Tables, Version 6.1, report absolute PPP data for 2000. China’s absolute price
level in 2000 was .23, relative to the U.S., and its real income per capita was $3747.3,
which was .11 relative to the US.
        We have run a new regression for the year 2000 on a cross-section of 118
countries. (Details are available in the Econometrics Appendix.) The regression yields a
highly significant coefficient of 0.382 on the log of relative income. In other words,
every one percent increase in real per capita income is associated with 0.38 percent in
real appreciation. The price level (relative to the United States) that is predicted for
China by the equation is 0.362 (derived from -1.015 in logs). China’s actual price level is
0.231 relative to the US (derived from -1.464 in logs). The residual of the log was -


19
   As a rough check MacPPP suggests that Chinese prices are about .56 of US prices. Parsley and Wei
(2004).
20
   If the base is the real exchange rate in the 1990 Penn World Tables, adding the cumulative changes in
price levels and the exchange rate from 1990 to 2002 produces an estimate that China’s prices are now up
to .181 of US prices: He (2004). But it makes more sense to work off of the 2000 PWT.


                                                                                                       14
0.448. In other words the regression suggests that the yuan was undervalued by 44.8 %
in logarithmic terms (36.1% undervalued in absolute terms) in 2000.

        To fine-tune this calculation, one must allow for whatever movement in the real
exchange rate has taken place since 2000, the year of the last Penn World Table. The
cumulative change over the last four years turns out to have been relatively small, as
reported in Tables 2 and 4. The nominal exchange rate is virtually unchanged vis-à-vis
the dollar, due to the peg, and the Chinese price level is evidently not far from where it
was in 2000, because deflation in 2002 offset inflation in 2000-01 (and 2003). Thus,
amazingly, that leaves as the dominant component of the change in the real exchange rate:
US inflation, which cumulated to 5 % from 2000 to 2002. It would be foolish to rely too
much on the precision of these numbers. On the one hand, official statistics suggest that
Chinese inflation has by now pulled ahead of US inflation (in the last quarter of 2003
and the first quarter of 2004), which would imply that the 5% has begun to reverse a bit.
On the other hand, Chinese real growth has again zoomed ahead, so the target is receding
even farther away. The important point is that the “undervaluation” in the sense of the
Balassa-Samuelson equation has, if anything, widened since the calculation of the gap on
2000 data.

Regression toward the mean

        To characterize the empirical literature on the Balassa-Samuelson effect, the
relationship between the real exchange rate and real income is fairly robust on a cross-
section basis, but is more uncertain on a time series basis, even when changes are
observed over intervals as long as ten years. This raises the question of the predictive
power of the relationship for a given country over time. But a plausible interpretation is
readily at hand. Most economists believe that real exchange rates are influenced not
solely by the long-term trend of the Balassa-Samuelson effect nor solely by the short-
term fluctuations of monetary policy and nominal exchange rate changes, but rather are
influenced by both.21 A reasonable characterization is that in the long run Balassa-
Samuelson factors dominate, but in the short run monetary factors can pull the real
exchange rate away from the Balassa-Samuelson equation. This framework contains the
powerful prediction that if a country lies substantially off the Balassa-Samuelson
regression line in one year, it can be expected to return part way – not necessarily all the
way – to the regression line over the subsequent decade. This claim has important
implications for our ability to make predictions, and furthermore is testable with data
from the last decade.

        We have tested whether residuals from the 1990 regression have explanatory
power for the year 2000. On a cross-section (of countries with data available for both
years), we regressed the 2000 real exchange rate against the fitted values from the 2000
regression (which is also equivalent to regressing them against 2000 income levels, as


21
   One does not necessarily need prices of non-traded goods to be sticky – let alone prices
of traded goods – to get the result that devaluations or changes in monetary policy can
have transitory effects on the real exchange rate in the short run. Dornbusch (1973).


                                                                                         15
before) together with the residuals from the 1990 regression. The results are also
reported in the Econometrics Appendix. The coefficient on the predictions from 2000
incomes is .98, insignificantly different from 1, as expected. The coefficient on the 1990
residual is .48, which is not only highly significantly greater than zero, but is also highly
significantly less than 1. This provides confirmation for the theory, and also provides
the useful prediction that, in expected value terms, approximately half of any deviation
from the Balassa-Samuelson regression line is corrected over the subsequent decade.
For the case of China, it says that even if the big differential in productivity growth
between China and its trading partners were to disappear tomorrow, Balassa-Samuelson
factors nonetheless would predict that by 2010 the yuan would undergo an expected real
appreciation of about half of the year-2000 gap, which is half of 44.8 percent, or 22.4%.

        A real appreciation toward long-run equilibrium could be accomplished with no
change in exchange rate regime, by an inflation rate of 2.24% per year in excess of the
US level, which is not especially large compared to recent swings in China’s inflation
rate. Nevertheless, the theory predicts that more movement in the same direction would
have to continue over the subsequent decade, and, more importantly for present purposes,
that an allowance for Chinese growth to continue on the order of 6 % greater than US
growth would require adding another 2.3 % of real appreciation per year (.38 times the
relative growth rate). Adding together the correction of the past undervaluation and the
continued trend gives a real appreciation in excess of 4% per year. A 4% differential
above the US inflation rate seems too high to be desirable as a long-term inflationary bias.
Again, the implication is that the yuan would have to appreciate in coming years.

        This idea of gradual “regression toward the regression line” bridges the gap
between the first half of this paper and the second half. The Balassa-Samuelson
calculation suggests real appreciation on the order of 4% a year averaged over the next
decade or more, better achieved through nominal appreciation than through inflation.
The targets and instruments framework of the first half of the paper suggests that
appreciation is needed to curtail excessive build-up of reserves through the current
balance of payments, and the dangers of excessive monetary expansion, overheating, and
inflation. Perhaps past devaluations (or deflation, as recently as 2002) help explain
how the yuan got so far off the equilibrium line in the first place. At least as important is
that China’s rapid productivity growth and increased trade integration mean that levels of
the nominal exchange rate that might have been consistent with long-run equilibrium in
the past have now become undervalued. In terms of Figure 1, the external and internal
balance lines have been shifting down, so that a decline in the real exchange rate (i.e.,
real appreciation) is necessary just to keep up with the point of intersection. This could
explain how China finds itself at a point like C in Figure 1, despite having already
undergone some real appreciation in the 1990s. Either way, if this gap is real, better to
address it through appreciation than inflation.



       **




                                                                                           16
17
                                           References

Balassa, Bella, 1964, "The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal," J. Political
Economy, 72, 584-596.

Caves, Richard, Jeffrey Frankel and Ronald Jones, 2002, World Trade and Payments: An
Introduction (Addison Wesley Longman: Boston MA). Chinese translation expected
soon.

De Gregorio, Jose, Alberto Giovannini, and Holger Wolf, 1994, "International Evidence on
Tradables and Nontradables Inflation," NBER WP no. 4438; European Economic Review,
38, no.6, June 1994, 1225-44.

Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber, 2003, “An Essay on the
Revived Bretton Woods System,” NBER Working Paper No. 9971.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1973, "Devaluation, Money and Nontraded Goods," American
Economic Review December, 871-880.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Paul Masson, 1998, "Exit Strategies: Policy Options for
Countries Seeking Greater Exchange Rate Flexibility,” Occasional Paper No. 168,
International Monetary Fund, Washington DC.

Frankel, 1984, "The Yen/Dollar Agreement: Liberalizing Japanese Capital Markets,"
Policy Analyses In International Economics No.9, M.I.T. Press for Institute for
International Economics: Washington, D.C..

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1993, "Liberalization of Korea'
                                                s Foreign Exchange Markets, and the
Role of Trade Relations with the United States," in Shaping a New Economic
Relationship: The Republic of Korea and the United States, edited by Jongryn Mo and
Ramon Myers, Hoover Institution Press, Stanford, CA, 1993: 120-142.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 2004, “Experience of and Lessons from Exchange Rate Regimes in
Emerging Economies,” NBER WP No. 10032. In Monetary and Financial Integration
in East Asia: The Way Ahead, edited by Asian Development Bank, (Palgrave Macmillan
Press, New York ) vol. 2, 91-138.

Goldstein, Morris, 2003, “China'
                               s Exchange Rate Regime,” Testimony before the
Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy, Trade, and Technology,
Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington, DC,
October 1.

Goldstein, Morris, 2004, “Adjusting China’s Exchange Rate Policies,” High-Level
Seminar, Dalian, China, May 26-27, 2004.




                                                                                        18
Goldstein, Morris, and Nicholas Lardy, “Two-Stage Currency Reform for China,” Wall
Street Journal, September 12, 2003.

He, Guang, 2004, “Policy Selection on Exchange Rate of Renminbi,” Second Year Paper
Analysis, Kennedy School of Government, April.

Kravis, Irving, and Richard Lipsey, 1988, "National Price Levels and the Prices of
Tradables and Nontradables," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 78, 2,
May, 474-78.

Krugman, Paul, 1987, "Adjustment in the World Economy,” Group of Thirty Occasional
Papers 24, 1987, pp.1-40. Reprinted in Currencies and Crises, 1992, pp. 3-25.

McKinnon, Ronald. 1963. “Optimum Currency Areas,” American Economic Review,
53:17-724.

McKinnon, Ronald, and Gunther Schnabl, 2003, “The East Asian Dollar Standard, Fear
of Floating, and Original Sin,” Stanford University, September.

Merrill Lynch, “China’s FX Regime: Moving the Great Wall,” March 3, 2004.

Mundell, Robert. 1961. “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,” American Economic
Review vol. 51 (November): 509-517.

Mundell, Robert, 1968, International Economics (MacMillan: New York).

Parsley, David, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2003, “A Prism into the PPP Puzzles: The Micro-
Foundations of Big Mac Real Exchange Rates,” NBER Working Paper No. 10074, Nov.

Rogoff, Kenneth, 1996, “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle, J. Economic Literature, 34:
(2) June 1996, 647-68.

Rose, Andrew, 2000. “One Money, One Market? The Effect of Common Currencies on
International Trade,” Economic Policy, 30, April, 9-44.

Summers, Robert, and Alan Heston, 1991, “The Penn World Table (Mark5): An
Expanded Set of International Comparisons, 1950-1988,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, May, 106, no 2, 327-68.

Swan, Trevor,1963, "Longer Run Problems of the Balance of Payments," in H.W. Arndt
and W.M. Corden, eds., The Australian Economy, Cheshire, Melbourne.

Williamson, John, 2001,“The Case for a Basket, Band and Crawl (BBC) Regime for East
Asia,” in David Gruen and John Simon, eds., Future Directions for Monetary Policies in
East Asia, Reserve Bank of Australia, July, 97-109.




                                                                                     19
Data Appendix                                                                                 MS 5/19/04
Real exchange rate and real income for China, 1990-2000
Nominal Ex Rate Nominal             Exchange rate in RMB /$
P       (US=1)                      Price Level of Gross Domestic Product relative to US
Real GDP/capita ($ chain)           Real GDP per capita (Constant price: Chain series)




                  Table 1 -Real exchange rate and Real Income for China, 1990-2000

           year     Nominal ExRate       p               Real             US Real       Real
                                                         GDP/Capita       GDP/Capita    GDP/Capita
                                                                                        rel. to the US

             1990               4.7832          0.2351        1786.5474      26457.82         0.0675
             1991               5.3234          0.2112        1975.3807      25897.92         0.0763
             1992               5.5146          0.2154        2202.6613      26488.70         0.0832
             1993               5.7620          0.2380        2455.4704      26956.07         0.0911
             1994               8.6187          0.1925        2644.9477      27877.94         0.0949
             1995               8.3514          0.2282        2818.1204      28408.86         0.0992
             1996               8.3142          0.2433        2968.5394      29193.91         0.1017
             1997               8.2898          0.2454        3109.6103      30190.34         0.1030
             1998               8.2790          0.2396        3275.9917      31090.66         0.1054
             1999               8.2782          0.2351        3414.9809      32127.90         0.1063
             2000               8.2785          0.2314        3747.2977      33292.99         0.1126

           averg.            7.2539       0.2287 2763.5953            28907.6      0.0946
        1 Data Source: Alan Heston, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.1




                          Table 2 - Real Exchange Rates for China, 2001-2003

                          USA                        China
                                                                                 Change in
                                                                                 LogRER rel
              Inflation   Pu                 Inflation   Pc           NomEx      2000            RER
      2001         2.8     119.458            0.5    128.18          8.277            0.050      0.243
      2002         1.6     121.353           -0.8    127.20          8.277            0.027      0.238
      2003         1.2     122.809            1.2    128.73          8.277            0.027      0.238
      1
        Data Source: IMF – International Financial Statistics, Country Tables: http://imfstatistics.org/




                                                                                                           20
                Table 3 – Chinese Real Exchange Rates - Log Form, 1990-2000

   year                       Log RER                    Log GDP             Log relative real GDP
      1990                     -1.4477                   7.4880                     -2.6953
      1991                     -1.5547                   7.5885                     -2.5734
      1992                     -1.5354                   7.6974                     -2.4871
      1993                     -1.4354                   7.8061                     -2.3959
      1994                     -1.6475                   7.8804                     -2.3552
      1995                     -1.4774                   7.9438                     -2.3106
      1996                     -1.4134                   7.9958                     -2.2859
      1997                     -1.4051                   8.0423                     -2.2730
      1998                     -1.4290                   8.0944                     -2.2503
      1999                     -1.4478                   8.1359                     -2.2416
      2000                     -1.4637                   8.2288                     -2.1843
   average                     -1.4779                   7.9001                     -2.3684
1 Data Source: Alan Heston, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.1


                Table 4 - Real Exchange Rates for China-Log Form, 2001-2003

                      USA                    China

                                                                             Change
                                                                             in
                                                                 Log         LogRER      Log
                        LogPu                   LogPc            (NomEx)     rel 2000    RER
    2001                 4.783                  4.853              2.113      0.050       -1.413
    2002                 4.799                  4.846              2.114      0.027       -1.437
    2003                 4.811                  4.858              2.113      0.027       -1.437
  1
    Data Source: IMF – International Financial Statistics, Country Tables: http://imfstatistics.org/




                                                                                                       21
Econometric Appendix:
Estimates of Balassa-Samuelson Effect
                Cross-Country Regression for Year 2000
Data Definitions:

RER – Real Exchange Rate is obtained by dividing Price Level of Gross Domestic Product for
each country by that of the US (normalised to 100).
LogRER – Log of Real Exchange Rate
rgdpch – Real GDP per capita (Constant price: Chain series)
Loginc – Log of real GDP per capita

Data source: Alan Heston, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.1,
Centre for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), October 2002.

The regression logRER vs. loginc was run for 118 countries, based on their year 2000 data for
RER and Real GDP per capita. It yields:
                                     log RER = -4.15 + 0.382 loginc
The coefficient on loginc is statistically significant.
. reg logRER00 loginc00


Number of obs =     118
F( 1,     116) = 151.14          Prob > F      = 0.0000
R-squared      = 0.5658          Adj R-squared = 0.5620
Root MSE       = .393
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    logRER00 |      Coef.   Std. Err.      t
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
    loginc00 |   .3820538   .0310764    12.29
       _cons | -4.159057    .2686416   -15.48
------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                .370385
     logRER00




                -2.15096
                           6.17768                                           10.6917
                                                   loginc00


                                                                                                22
The residual for each country was calculated.
Particularly interesting is the residual for China (-0.448)
. predict loginchat00, residual


di logRERhat[18]                  =     -1.0152169

di logRER00[18]-logRERhat[18]                      =      -.4484849

This means that
                                  log RER00 - logRERhat = -0.448
                                      RER 00
                                  (          ) = 0.639
                                      RERhat

or in other words, the real exchange rate is 64% of the value predicted by the regression.



                            Fitted values                             logRER00
                            CHN

   .370385




                                                         CHN




  -2.15096
              6.17768                                                                        10.6917
                                                          loginc00




                                                                                              23
                                 Cross-Country Regression for Year 1990
The regression logRER vs. loginc was repeated for the same for 118 countries, based on their
year 1990 data for RER and Real GDP per capita.
The regression yields:            log RER = −3.40 + 0.317 loginc
The coefficient on loginc is again statistically significant.
. reg logRER90 loginc90


Number of obs               =      118
F( 1,    116)               =    55.33        Prob > F      =   0.0000
R-squared                   =   0.3230        Adj R-squared =   0.3171
Root MSE                    =   .50591

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    logRER90 |      Coef.   Std. Err.      t
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
    loginc90 |   .3169071   .0426029     7.44
       _cons | -3.398784    .3621096    -9.39
------------------------------------------------------------------------------



           .947565
logRER90




           -3.06398
                      6.20193                                            10.1996
                                                loginc90




                                                                                               24
       Again, the residual for each country was calculated and this value for China is (-.422)

       . di ehat90[18]           =      -.42194867                           Thus
                                                             log RER00 - logRERhat = -0.422
                                                                 RER 00
                                                             (          ) = 0.656
                                                                 RERhat
       or in other words, the real exchange rate is 66% of its predicted value by the regression, very
       close to the value found for the 2000 data.



                           Fitted values                                    logRER90
                           chn90

   .947565




                                               CHN




   -3.06398
              6.20193                                                                              10.1996
                                                             loginc90



       Exchange Rate Deviations for China

          Price level relative       Predicted Price level            estimated real         implied fall in RER
           to US = 1/RER             by the B-S regression          “undervaluation”        needed for B-S equil.
                (in logs)                   (in logs)            (% in logarithmic terms)   (% in absolute terms)
1990             -1.448                     -1.026                        42.2%                     34%
2000             -1.464                     -1.015                        44.8%                     36%




                                                                                                          25
Predictive power of deviations from the 1990 regression
To examine whether the deviations from the regression in 1990 have predictive power, we run a
regression of logRER in 2000 vs. two variables: a) deviations from the 1990 regression and b) the
fitted values of the 2000.

. reg logRER00 ehat90 logRERhat

Number of obs    =      118
F( 2,     115)   =   153.50             Prob > F      =      0.0000
R-squared        =   0.7275             Adj R-squared =      0.7227
Root MSE         =   .31276

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    logRER00 |      Coef.   Std. Err.      t    P>|t|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
      ehat90 |   .4744686   .0574358     8.26   0.000     .3606993    .5882379
   logRERhat |   .9811399    .064758    15.15   0.000     .8528668    1.109413
       _cons |   -.016719    .064222    -0.26   0.795    -.1439305    .1104924
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                                                              26
