NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BOYS NAMED SUE:
DISRUPTIVE CHILDREN AND THEIR PEERS
David N. Figlio
Working Paper 11277
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11277
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2005

I am grateful to the National Science Foundation for research support, to Dale Ballou, Steve Levitt, Diane
Whitmore, participants at the AEA and AEFA annual meetings, and seminar participants at the National
Bureau of Economic Research for helpful comments, and to an unnamed school district for providing me
with the data necessary to conduct this project. All errors are my own.The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by David N. Figlio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Boys Named Sue: Disruptive Children and their
David N. Figlio
NBER Working Paper No. 11277
April 2005
JEL No. I2
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes an unusual identification strategy to estimate the effects of disruptive students
on peer behavior and academic outcomes. I suggest that boys with names most commonly given to
girls may be more prone to misbehavior as they get older. This paper utilizes data on names,
classroom assignment, behavior problems and student test scores from a large Florida school district
in the school years spanning 1996-97 through 1999-2000 to directly study the relationship between
behavior and peer outcomes. I find that boys with female-sounding names tend to misbehave
disproportionately upon entry to middle school, as compared to other boys and to their previous
(relative) behavior patterns. In addition, I find that behavior problems, instrumented with the
distribution of boys' names in the class, are associated with increased peer disciplinary problems and
reduced peer test scores, indicating that disruptive behavior of students has negative ramifications
for their peers.
David N. Figlio
Department of Economics
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32611-7140
and NBER
figlio@ufl.edu

Boys Named Sue: Disruptive Children and their Peers
“Some gal would giggle and I’d get red/ And some guy’d laugh and I’d bust his head./
I tell ya, life ain’t easy for a boy named Sue.”
--“A Boy Named Sue”, by Shel Silverstein, performed by Johnny Cash (1969)
In the 1999-2000 round of the Schools and Staffing Surveys conducted by the U.S.
Department of Education, nearly half of all surveyed teachers in the United States
reported that student misbehavior in their school interfered with their ability to teach
effectively, and a similar fraction stated that student disrespect toward teachers is a
“serious” or “moderate” problem in their school. Teachers expressed unhappiness with
student misbehavior and disrespect at a higher rate than expressed concern with student
apathy, students coming to school unprepared to learn, or lack of parental involvement.
The typical teacher reported having to interrupt class more than twice per day to deal
with student disruptions, and nearly one-fifth of teachers reported student disruptions that
interrupted their teaching at least hourly. And one in five teachers argue that their
principals do not enforce the rules of student conduct. Student disruption is correlated
with low teacher morale: Teachers reporting disruption to be a problem in their school are
more than three times as likely to say that they “definitely plan to leave teaching as soon
as I can” and are one-third less likely to state that they will continue to teach “as long as I
am able.”

School administrators apparently agree with teachers about the perils of disruptive
children in the classroom. Half of the schools in the Schools and Staffing Survey have
programs for disruptive students, and 40 percent of teachers participate in annual
professional development in classroom management and student discipline.

1

It is clear from the survey data that many teachers, school districts and states view
classroom disruption as a significant problem that interferes with their jobs and,
consequently, the education of the peers of disruptive children. Lazear (2001) presents
theoretical results suggesting that classroom disruption could strongly interfere with
student outcomes, and can more than counteract any educational benefits accruing due to
reduced class sizes.

Yet while the potential presence of peer effects in education has been studied extensively
over the past decade, with a few prominent examples of recent papers including Angrist
and Lang (2002), Evans, Oates and Schwab (1992), Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin (2002),
Sacerdote (2000) and Zimmerman (2002), the question of whether disruptive children
influence peer learning and behavior in school has gone unstudied. To date, the study
that most closely addresses this question is Hoxby’s (2000) analysis of the effects of
additional male students in a classroom on student outcomes, the argument being that
male students are more likely to disrupt the learning environment than are female
students. And Gaviria and Raphael (2001) investigate whether school-level peer effects
lead to juvenile delinquency and other behaviors, but do not consider whether delinquent
behavior spills over to peer academic performance. One explanation for the lack of
research on the effects of disruptive children on their classmates involves data; there exist
few opportunities to link disruptive children to their classmates in the existing datasets.
But it is also the case that it is particularly difficult to disentangle the effects of disruptive
children from non-random selection; if low-performing students are more likely to

2

misbehave, and children are either grouped by ability within a school or otherwise selfselect into classrooms by ability, then any finding of an effect of disruptive children on
peer performance or behavior could be spurious.

I propose an unusual identification strategy to estimate the effects of disruptive students
on peer behavior and academic outcomes. I suggest that boys with names most
commonly given to girls may be more prone to misbehavior as they get older. The
argument goes as follows: Up until a certain point in childhood, boys with names
associated with girls are unaffected by their names, either positively or negatively. But as
they enter middle school and (1) become more aware of their own sexuality and (2) are
mixed with a new group of children (including those older than they are) who did not
attend their elementary school, boys with names associated with girls may begin to
misbehave in school at a disproportionate rate. The data bear this out: In the large
Florida school district that provided me with the data for this analysis, in elementary
school there is no relationship between names and boys’ behavior, but in sixth grade, the
first year of middle school in this school district, a large gap emerges in behavior between
boys with names associated with girls and other boys. I therefore propose boys’ names as
an instrument for misbehavior in sixth grade; given that behavior problem differentials
did not exist prior to sixth grade, there is no reason to suspect non-random selection into
classrooms by boys with names associated with girls.1 However, the evidence described
in this paragraph (and presented in more detail below) suggests that boys’ names may
have substantial first-stage explanatory power.
1

I treat a name as “feminine” if it is empirically shown to be given more frequently to girls than to boys. I
have experimented with more restrictive thresholds of sex ratios in naming, and the results reported herein
are insensitive to these changes in specification.

3

I utilize data on names, classroom assignment, behavior problems and student test scores
from a large Florida school district in the school years spanning 1996-97 through 19992000. While I am unable to identify the school district in question due to confidentiality
reasons, I can state that I observe 76,795 students in 159,874 student-year pairs. The
observed population is evenly split between males and females. Because I know which
classes each child takes from the child’s academic history transcript, I can identify the
child’s peer group in each year. Since I have access to discipline records, I can proxy for
misbehavior using student suspension data. While this is not a perfect measure of
classroom disruption, it seems a reasonable proxy, and is supported by my own
classroom observation and interviews with teachers and school personnel.2 And I can
measure student test scores in grades three through six on a nationally norm-referenced
examination. I find that, as suggested above, boys with female-sounding names tend to
misbehave disproportionately in sixth grade, as compared to other boys and to their
previous (relative) behavior patterns. In addition, I find that behavior problems,
instrumented with the distribution of boys’ names in the class, are associated with
increased peer disciplinary problems and reduced peer test scores, indicating that
disruptive behavior of students has negative ramifications for their peers.
2

In addition, the National Educational Longitudinal Survey of 1988 allows me to empirically investigate
the correlation between children who are suspended at school and children who misbehave in the
classroom. In this survey, tenth-grade students report whether they have been suspended from school and
two of their teachers report how often students are “disruptive” or “inattentive.” I find that students who
have been suspended are more than twice as likely to be considered “frequently disruptive” or “consistently
inattentive in class” are are students who have not been suspended, and that this very high correlation
persists even when comparing students with comparable test scores or parental education levels. Similar
questions were asked of teachers in eighth grade, but I do not know about students’ eighth grade suspension
levels; I merely know whether or not they have been sent to the office multiple times for misbehavior, a
strong correlate to suspension in the tenth-grade NELS data. Here too, I find that eighth graders who have
been sent to the office for misbehavior are dramatically more likely to be considered disruptive by their
teachers. Therefore, suspensions seem to be strong proxies for classroom disruption.

4

Boys named Sue?
I seek to explore the relationship between the number of disruptive children in a
classroom and the outcomes of the other children in the classroom. Specifically, my
fundamental research question is whether disruptive children adversely affect their peers’
performance or induce bad peer behavior. My basic regression equation is

(Outcome)ig = αi + βg + γPig + θDig

for student i in grade g. Because I observe multiple years of data for individual students,
I control for student fixed effects and grade fixed effects. The coefficient of interest is θ,
the coefficient on the fraction of a student’s classmates who are disruptive (measured by
the fraction who get suspended at least once for five or more days.) I control for other
observed peer characteristics (the vector P)—the fraction of classmates who are Black,
the fraction of classmates who are immigrants, the fraction of classmates who are lowincome (as proxied by free lunch eligibility), the fraction of classmates who are male and
the average third grade test score of the student’s classmates. 3

However, as mentioned above, there is ample reason to expect that there would be
simultaneity between a student’s outcomes and the rate of classroom disruption. I
propose classmates’ names as an instrument for the rate of classroom disruption. My
first-stage, therefore, is

3

In the cases in which a student has multiple classes, I average the student’s class attributes together. The
results are not sensitive to taking simple averages of the classes or weighted averages of the classes based
on student enrollment in each class.

5

Dig = ηi + λg + ϕPig + φNig

where N is the fraction of a child’s male classmates who have names more commonly
given to girls than to boys. That is, I instrument for the rate of disruptive behavior among
classmates using the fraction of boys in the classroom with feminine names. In the
following subsection, I demonstrate that the first-stage relationship between names and
behavior is stronger in sixth grade than in elementary grades, so I therefore also
instrument using the fraction of classmates with feminine names interacted with a dummy
variable for the sixth grade.4

I do not suggest that there is a causal effect of names on behavior, but rather merely wish
to exploit the exogenous variation in classmate names as an indicator for classmate
disruptive behavior. The remainder of this section documents the likely exogeneity of
this variation.

Classifying boys’ names
I adopt an agnostic approach to measuring the “femininity” of a boys’ name. I consider a
boy’s name to be associated with girls if it is empirically observed to be given to girls
more frequently than boys. Just under two percent of boys have names that are more
frequently given to girls than to boys, suggesting that a child will share a class with a boy
with a feminine name in about one of three classes. Among the boys’ names given
overwhelmingly to girls, the most commonly given in the state of Florida between 1989
4

I also estimate models in which I identify the effects of disruptive peers solely using this interaction, and
the “main effect” of the fraction of boys in the classroom with “feminine” names is included in both the
first and second stages.

6

and 19945 are, in order, Alexis (given 90 percent of the time to girls), Courtney (94
percent), Shannon (92 percent), Kelly (93 percent), Shelby (95 percent) and Ashley (99
percent). Among the broader set of names given more frequently to girls than to boys,
the most common names are Taylor (71 percent female), Dominique (66 percent), Alexis
(90 percent), Jamie (81 percent), Ariel (80 percent) and Courtney (94 percent). These
names are all reasonably common; the name Taylor is observed among boys at the same
rate as Derek, Nathan and Paul, while the name Dominique is observed among boys at
the same rate as Darrell, Lucas or Max. These names are, however, much more popular
for girls, with Taylor appearing as frequently as Elizabeth, Emily and Megan and
Dominique appearing as frequently as Catherine, Julia and Paige. Historically, many of
these names were not as sex-linked as they are today: For instance, in the 1990 Census’s
lists of American name popularity, regardless of age, males are named Taylor at twice the
rate of females, and males and females are named Ariel at about the same rates. The rate
of feminine names being given to boys in this school district (1.9 percent) is very similar
to the state of Florida in general (1.9 percent) and to the United States as a whole (1.8
percent), according to Social Security Administration data.

The presence of Dominique among the top “female” names for boys may call into
question the effeminacy of the names in question; after all, Dominique Wilkins was
among the National Basketball Association’s top players at the time when the children in
this study were born. To ensure that names of sports stars are not driving my results, I
estimated all regressions reported below both with and without any boys’ names typically
given to girls but also given to any athlete who were either among the top 25 salaried
5

These figures come from birth vital records data provided by the Florida Department of Health.

7

players in the National Basketball Association, Major League Baseball or National
Football League or played in that league’s All-Star Game in any year during the 1990s.6
The results presented below are not substantively affected by excluding these names
shared by top professional athletes; indeed, the results are slightly stronger when
“feminine” athletes’ names are omitted from the analysis. The results presented in the
paper, therefore, treat all “feminine” boys’ names the same.

Another concern with the use of “feminine” names as a proxy for behavior is that these
names are somewhat more common among immigrant children and native-born English
language learners than they are in the general population. But immigrants and English
language learners may also have a difficult time assimilating with the remainder of their
class or may be treated differently, and their presence may also affect peer behavior and
performance. To ensure that this possibility is not driving the results, I control for the
share of classmates who are immigrants (or native-born English language learners) in
both the first and second stages of the model. It turns out that the results are unaffected
by the inclusion or exclusion of controls for immigrant or English language learner peers.

I begin by exploring whether boys with names typically given to girls differ
systematically along other attributes than do boys with names that are generally given to
boys. I find that boys with feminine names are eight percent more likely to be lowincome (as proxied by free lunch status) than are those with names typically given to
boys. This difference, however, is entirely due to the racial differences of the students.
Holding constant student race, boys with feminine names are only one percent more
6

These names are Ashley, Dominique and Shannon.

8

likely to be low-income than are other boys, and among African-Americans, the
difference is less than one percent. Boys with feminine first names are also slightly
more likely to be immigrants; therefore, I control for the racial, ethnic, immigrant and
socio-economic composition of the classroom in both my first and second stages of the
model.

Names and behavior
Figure 1 plots the likelihood that a child will be suspended for at least five days on at
least one occasion, by grade, sex, and, for boys, the gender-orientation of the name, for
children in the unnamed school district between 1996-97 and 1999-2000.7 One observes
that, across the board, few children get into serious trouble in third or fourth grade, but
that in fifth grade the rate of serious trouble increases considerably, and this rate
continues to increase in sixth grade. The bottom line in the figure is for girls;
unsurprisingly, girls are less likely to get into serious trouble than are boys, regardless of
grade. The next two lines represent the serious disciplinary rate of boys. It is clear that
boys with feminine names track the rest of the male population almost perfectly through
fifth grade, but in sixth grade boys with feminine names are about one-third more likely
than boys in general to get into serious trouble. The top two lines perform the same
analysis for African-American boys. As with boys in general, African-American boys
with feminine names follow almost identical disciplinary paths on average as do AfricanAmerican boys in general. But again in sixth grade, these two groups begin to differ
dramatically, with African-American boys with feminine names around one-third more
7

I also investigate alternative definitions of misbehavior. I observe very similar patterns of results when
using different definitions of misbehavior, as described below.

9

likely than African-American boys in general to get into serious trouble in school.
Indeed, the general pattern observed for boys is driven by African-American boys; White
boys with feminine names continue to track the population of White boys in general.
This general pattern supports the notion that the gender orientation of names could be
used to explain behavior problems in school.

One possible explanation for the fact that African-American boys with feminine names
are apparently more affected by their names than are White boys with feminine names is
that these names may send a stronger signal in the African-American community than in
the White community. In the African-American community, the distribution of first
names is considerably less concentrated than in the White community, so there are fewer
“common” names. But feminine African-American boys’ names tend to be very popular
for White girls, which may lead to an additional sense of alienation for African-American
boys with feminine names.

As mentioned above, boys with effeminate first names are somewhat more likely to be
immigrants than are boys with names typically given to boys. However, there is reason
to believe that the results presented below are not sensitive to this fact. For one, the
pattern of misbehavior among immigrant boys with effeminate names tracks very closely
the pattern of misbehavior among native boys with effeminate names. And for AfricanAmerican boys, immigrants with names typically given to girls tend to misbehave less
than do native boys with feminine names. In addition, I explicitly control for the
immigrant status of classmates in both my first and second stages of the regression.

10

Taken together with the descriptive information presented above, these results suggest
that differential selection is not a major factor in explaining the first stage of my
regression.

This sentiment is bolstered by the fact that there is reason to suspect that, at least for
African-American boys, the relationship between name and behavior is related to the
names of the girls in the school. African-American boys with feminine names who do
not share their name with any female contemporaries at their school increase their
suspension behavior by six percentage points between fifth and sixth grade. But those
who share a name with a female school-mate increase their suspension behavior by 16
percent. Those who attend a school with three or more girls with their same first name
increase their suspension behavior by 22 percent. African-American boys with feminine
names who have at least one girl in their grade with their same name increase their
suspension behavior by 21 percent, and those (albeit only six students) with three or more
eponymous girls in their same grade increase their suspension behavior by 32 percent! It
is apparent, therefore, that African-American boys appear sensitive to having female
school-mates with their same name, and tend to misbehave at greater rates in such a
circumstance.

Exogenous assignment to classrooms
In order for this to be a valid instrumenting strategy, there must be evidence that boys
with feminine names are approximately randomly assigned to classrooms. This appears
to be the case: As Table 1 shows, there is no apparent relationship between a student’s

11

ability level and his or her likelihood of sharing a class with a boy with a feminine name.
The numbers reported in this table are the fractions of the male peers with feminine
names for children of different measured ability types. This table shows that the
likelihood that a child across the ability spectrum (as measured by third grade
mathematics test scores) will have a male classmate with a feminine name is
approximately equal in third grade, and remains uniform through grades four through six.
No differences are ever statistically significant at the ten percent level. In grade six, the
fraction of male classmates with feminine names falls for all student groups because sixth
graders tend to have a larger number of peers by virtue of the fact that they take multiple
classes, often with different classmates. The fact that my instrumental variable does not
vary across ability groups, either in cross-section or over time, increases the credibility of
its use as an instrument in the present context.

Likewise, the evidence suggests that boys with feminine names tend to have similar
elementary school achievement levels to boys with more masculine names. In
elementary school, African-American boys with feminine names averaged in the 42nd
national percentile in mathematics, while African-American boys with names typically
given to boys averaged in the 40th national percentile. White boys with feminine names
averaged in the 74th national percentile in mathematics, while white boys with names
typically given to boys averaged in the 73rd national percentile. Therefore, in elementary
school, boys with feminine names look extremely similar to boys with more masculine
names in terms of key observables.

12

First stage estimates of the relationship between gender orientation of names and
discipline problems
The first column of Table 2 presents estimates of the first stage of the instrumental
variables regression. One observes no evidence of a differential rate of suspensions
among boys prior to grade six, but in sixth grade this gap widens considerably (as
evidenced by the large, statistical coefficient on the interaction term). The other
coefficient estimates in the first stage regression are unsurprising: Classrooms with more
African-American or male students have more disciplinary problems in general, as do
classes with lower average third-grade test scores, my proxy for initial ability levels.

The second column of Table 2 presents an augmented first stage estimate, in which I
estimate separate effects of the rate of African-American boys with feminine names and
this variable’s interaction with a sixth grade dummy variable. One observes that the firststage results are clearly due to African-American boys, rather than boys in general.
These results empirically support the supposition made earlier that children with male
peers with feminine names are also likely to experience greater rates of disciplinary
problems in their classroom, particularly if their male classmates with feminine names
tend to be African-American. The names of a child’s peers has strong independent
explanatory power in predicting the likelihood that that child’s peers will get into trouble
in school, with the partial r-squared associated with names equaling 0.03 in the model
that does not distinguish between African-American boys with feminine names and other
boys with feminine names, and 0.08 in the model that makes this distinction.

13

One can interpret the first-stage coefficients presented in Table 2 as elasticities of
classmates’ behavior with respect to their names. In specification 1, an increase in the
fraction of male classmates with effeminate names of two percent is associated with an
increase in the observed rate of classroom disruption of two-fifths of one percent.
Specification 2 suggests a larger elasticity of approximately one for African-American
males, implying a doubling of the fraction of African-American boys with effeminate
names is associated with a doubling of the fraction of disruptive children in the
classroom. These first-stage elasticities are similar in magnitudes to the raw data
presented in Figure 1: African-American boys with effeminate names are four percentage
points more likely than American-American boys in general to be disruptive in sixth
grade, as compared to the overall rate of disruption among all boys of six percent or the
overall rate of disruption in general of just over four percent. The overall percentage
increase in suspensions, therefore, predicted to come about through this channel is 0.02 x
1 x 0.04 = 0.0008 (where 0.02 is the rate of effeminate names in the male population, 1 is
the elasticity of classroom disruption with respect to effeminate names, and 0.04 is the
overall rate of classroom disruption observed in the population.)

Instrumental Variables Regression Results
Table 3 presents the second-stage results of the instrumental variables model described
above. Each column represents two different dependent variables: (1) the propensity of a
given child to him- or herself be suspended at least once for at least five days, and (2) the
national percentile ranking of that child’s mathematics score on a nationally normreferenced test such as the Iowa Test of Basic Skills or the Stanford Achievement Test-

14

8.8 In each model, I control for student fixed effects, grade dummies, and controls for
classmate attributes (the fraction African-American in a class, the fraction male in a class,
the fraction immigrant in a class, the fraction low-income in a class, and the average
third-grade test score of a student’s classmates.) Each of the four columns in Table 3
represents a different combination of instruments employed and main effects controlled
for.

Specification 3 in Table 3 presents the results of the model in which I use both the
fraction of male classmates with feminine names and its interaction with sixth grade as
instruments for the fraction of students who are disruptive. The coefficient estimates,
taken literally, would represent the estimated effects of moving from zero percent to 100
percent of the student’s classmates being disruptive, so are not directly interpretable. To
put these estimates in perspective, in a typical classroom of 30 students, the estimates
suggest that adding one additional disruptive child to the classroom results in reduced
peer mathematics test scores of 2.2 national percentiles and a 3.2 percentage point
increased likelihood that a peer will him- or herself get into serious trouble at school, as
measured by being suspended at least once for five or more days. These estimated effects
are substantial in magnitude as well as being statistically significant.

In model specifications not presented in the paper but available on request, I
experimented with models that treated the relationship between the fraction of disruptive
children in the classroom and the peer outcomes as nonlinear. However, I could find no
evidence that this relationship is either quadratic or reflects some type of “tipping”
8

I cannot reveal the precise examination because it may identify the school district.

15

model, and instead, all models indicated that the relationship, at least through sixth grade,
is linear. It may be the case that in higher grades where the rate of disruptive behavior
may potentially be even greater, the relationship is nonlinear, but at least through sixth
grade this does not appear to be the case.

Specification 4 in Table 3 reports the results of the same basic identification strategy, but
this time I control for the fraction of male classmates with feminine names, identifying
the instrumental variables model only off of the interaction with sixth grade. The
estimated effects of disruptive children on their peers’ outcomes are nearly identical, with
the coefficient estimates indicating that adding one more disruptive student to a
classroom is associated with 2.2 national percentiles lower peer mathematics
performance and 2.9 percentage points increased likelihood of peers getting into trouble
themselves.

Specifications 5 and 6 in Table 3 use as instruments both the fraction of all boys in the
class with feminine names and the fraction of African-American boys in the class with
feminine names, given that the first stage appears to be driven mainly by AfricanAmerican boys, rather than all boys. Specification 5 includes the main effects of these
variables as instruments, while Specification 6 controls for them in both the first and
second stage, and identifies the instrumental variables model off of the interaction terms
with sixth grade. As before, the results are large and statistically significant, and
comparable in magnitude to those reported above (with the math score results somewhat
larger): Adding one more disruptive child to the classroom is estimated to lead to 2.7 to

16

4.0 national percentiles lower peer mathematics performance and 2.9 to 3.3 percentage
points increased likelihood that peers will be suspended at least once for five or more
days.

Alternative measures of classroom disruption
A student being suspended for five or more days is a strong indicator of classroom
disruption. However, it is important to determine whether the instrumental variables
results are sensitive to alternative measures of disruptive behavior. Therefore, I repeat
specification (6) from Table 3 (the specification with the strongest first stage explanatory
power) using two alternative measures constructed from disciplinary records—whether a
classmate has been suspended at least once, and whether a classmate has had two or more
disciplinary incidents in a year’s time. The instrumental variables coefficient on
classroom disruption in the peer suspension of five or more days specification is 0.57
(standard error=0.06) to 0.82 (standard error=0.08), depending on the measure of
disruption, and the coefficient on classroom disruption in the mathematics test score
specification is -75.85 (standard error=7.02) or -106.58 (standard error=8.93), depending
on the measure of disruption. Therefore, at least across several different measures of
classroom disruption, the results remain consistent.

Sex differences in outcomes
It is possible that disruptive classmates may have differential impacts on their peers
depending on the sex of the peer. One would expect that a disruptive classmate that
inhibits teacher instruction and peer concentration would likely lead to similar learning

17

problems for male and female peers. However, it is uncertain whether this same
disruptive classmate’s behavior would have similar behavioral effects on peers. On the
one hand, since boys are more prone to behavioral problems in school than are girls, one
might expect that the presence of a disruptive classmate would have a larger effect on
male peers’ behavioral outcomes than on female peers’ behavioral outcomes. But on the
other hand, if girls are less likely to themselves be disruptive unless others in the class are
also disruptive, one might expect a larger effect on girls than on boys. In Table 4 I repeat
the instrumental variables models separately for boys and girls. For simplicity, this is the
model reported in Specification 6 of Table 3, in which I identify the instrumental
variables model exclusively off of the interactions between sixth grade and both the
fraction of male classmates with feminine names and the fraction of African-American
male classmates with feminine names. All other control variables (student fixed effects,
grade dummies, peer characteristics, the fraction of male classmates with feminine names
and the fraction of African-American male classmates with feminine names) are included
in both the first and second stages.

One observes that the first stage coefficients on the instrumental variables are remarkably
similar for both boys and girls, which is reassuring because this first stage should not
differ across these two groups. However, the second stage coefficients on the fraction of
disruptive classmates do differ by sex. Adding one more disruptive classmate to a
classroom is associated with 3.97 national percentiles lower mathematics test scores for
male peers and 4.03 national percentiles lower mathematics test scores for female peers.
But while adding one more disruptive classmate to a classroom is estimated to increase

18

the likelihood of male peer misbehavior by 3.9 percentage points, it is estimated the
likelihood of female peer misbehavior by 2.5 percentage points. Given that girls are half
as likely as boys to be disruptive, in percentage terms the estimated effects of disruptive
classmates on peer behavior are somewhat larger for girls than for boys.

Conclusion
This paper presents the first empirical evidence of the effects of disruptive classmates on
their peers’ performance. I find that disruptive classmates apparently reduce overall
mathematics achievement and increase the likelihood that other classmates will become
disruptive and experience behavioral problems as well. The results indicate that boys and
girls alike suffer academically from the presence of disruptive classmates, and that boys
are particularly prone to misbehave when their classmates are disruptive.

These results suggest that children in classrooms with more disruptive children may
require additional remediation, perhaps via smaller class sizes or more experienced
teachers. I do not have information on teacher experience in my dataset, and class sizes
in this school district do not vary appreciably within a grade level in a school, so I cannot
directly test for whether these remedies would offset the negative effects of classroom
disruption, but I intend to pursue these questions in future work.

The results also suggest a potential role for early prevention of disruptive children. I
have identified a boy’s name as a possible early-warning flag of disruptive behavior in
middle school, and there are surely other pre-indicators of classroom disruption that I

19

have not uncovered. It may be beneficial for schools to seek to determine the variables
that predict future classroom disruption and either schedule classes with this in mind or
actively seek to remediate potentially disruptive children before they become so. It is not
obvious how to do this, but understanding the precursors to classroom disruption may
help states and school districts to develop more effective classroom disruption prevention
programs, the outcomes of which could—given the results presented in this paper—bear
substantial fruit.

20

References
Angrist, Josh and Kevin Lang (2002). “How Important are Classroom Peer Effects:
Evidence from Boston’s METCO Program.” National Bureau of Economic Research
working paper 9263.
Evans, William, Wallace Oates and Robert Schwab (1992). “Measuring Peer Group
Effects: A Study of Teenage Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 966-991.
Gaviria, Alejandro and Stephen Raphael (2001). “School Based Peer Effects and
Juvenile Behavior,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 257-268.
Hanushek, Eric, John Kain and Steven Rivkin (2002). “New Evidence about Brown v.
Board of Education: The Complex Effects of School Racial Composition on Student
Achievement.” Working paper, Stanford University.
Hoxby, Caroline (2000). “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
Variation.” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 7866.
Lazear, Edward (2001). “Educational Production,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
777-803.
Sacerdote, Bruce (2000). “Peer Effects with Random Assignment.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 681-704.
Zimmerman, David (2002). “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a
Natural Experiment.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 9-23.

21

Figure 1: Percentage of children suspended 5+ days on at least
one occasion
20
18

Black males with female
names

16
14

Black males

12
Males with female names

10
8

Males

6
Females

4
2
0
3

4

5
Grade

6

Table 1
Fraction of male classmates with feminine names, by student type and grade
Student type

Grade
3
4
5
6
0.018 0.017 0.017 0.012

Bottom quartile
of third grade math test distribution
Second quartile
0.017 0.015 0.015 0.013
Third quartile
0.016 0.016 0.014 0.012
Top quartile
0.016 0.017 0.015 0.013
Note: None of the numbers in any column are statistically distinct from one another at the
ten percent level.

Table 2
First-stage estimates of the relationship between boys with female names
and the rate of classroom disruption faced by students
Dependent variable: Fraction of classmates suspended at least once for 5+ days

Child fixed effects
Grade dummies
Fraction of male classmates with female names
Fraction of African-American male classmates with female names
Fraction of male classmates with female names x grade 6
Fraction of African-American male classmates with female names x
grade 6
Average third grade national percentile ranking of classmates
(coefficient x 10)
Fraction of classmates who are African-American
Fraction of classmates who are male
Fraction of classmates who are free-lunch eligible
Fraction of classmates who are immigrants
Partial r-squared of female names variables

Specification
(1)
(2)
YES
YES
YES
YES
0.003
0.000
(0.013) (0.011)
0.033
(0.026)
0.226 -0.270
(0.040) (0.026)
1.056
(0.066)
-0.003 -0.003
(0.000) (0.000)
0.036
0.034
(0.002) (0.002)
0.042
0.038
(0.004) (0.004)
0.013
0.010
(0.002) (0.002)
-0.017 -0.016
(0.002) (0.002)
0.03
0.08

Notes: Standard errors adjusted for clustering are in parentheses beneath coefficient
estimates. Data are for students in grades three through six.

18

Table 3
Instrumental variables estimates of
the effect of disruptive classmates on student outcomes

Child fixed effects
Grade dummies
Controls for
fraction Black,
third grade scores,
fraction males, low
income,
immigrants among
peers
Controls for
fraction of male
classmates with
female names
Controls for
fraction of Black
male classmates
with female names
Instruments
employed

DEPENDENT
VARIABLE
Mathematics test
score (national
percentile ranking)
Child suspended at
least once for 5+
days

Specification
(5)
YES
YES
YES

(3)
YES
YES
YES

(4)
YES
YES
YES

(6)
YES
YES
YES

NO

YES

NO

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

Fraction male
classmates
with female
names (F), F
x grade 6

Fraction
male
classmates
with female
names x
grade 6

0.94
(0.15)

0.84
(0.27)

Fraction male
Fraction male
classmates with classmates with
female names x
female names
(F), Fraction
grade 6, Fraction
Black male
Black male
classmates with classmates with
female names x
female names
(BF), F x grade grade 6
6, BF x grade 6
IV COEFFICIENT ESTIMATE ON FRACTION OF CLASSMATES
SUSPENDED AT LEAST ONCE FOR 5+ DAYS
-65.76
-57.55
-114.39
-124.19
(16.13)
(30.04)
(8.47)
(9.71)
0.98
(0.08)

1.01
(0.09)

Notes: Standard errors adjusted for clustering are in parentheses beneath coefficient
estimates. Data are for students in grades three through six.

19

Table 4
Sex differences in instrumental variables estimates of
the effect of disruptive classmates on student outcomes
First stage coefficient on fraction of
male classmates with female names x
grade 6
First stage coefficient on fraction of
African-American male classmates
with female names x grade 6
DEPENDENT VARIABLE

Mathematics test score (national
percentile ranking)
Child suspended at least once for 5+
days

Males
-0.289
(0.043)

Females
-0.262
(0.030)

1.085
(0.110)

1.036
(0.073)

IV COEFFICIENT ESTIMATE ON
FRACTION OF CLASSMATES
SUSPENDED AT LEAST ONCE FOR 5+
DAYS
-121.99
-126.73
(29.54)
(20.97)
1.185
0.781
(0.323)
(0.243)

Notes: Regressions are estimated separately for males and females. Standard errors
adjusted for clustering are in parentheses beneath coefficient estimates. Data are for
students in grades three through six.

20

