NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PORK FOR POLICY:
EXECUTIVE AND LEGISLATIVE EXCHANGE IN BRAZIL
Lee J. Alston
Bernardo Mueller
Working Paper 11273
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11273
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2005

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Lee J. Alston and Bernardo Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Pork for Policy: Executive and Legislative Exchange in Brazil
Lee J. Alston and Bernardo Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 11273
April 2005
JEL No. D73, D72, D23
ABSTRACT
The Brazilian Constitution of 1988 gave relatively strong powers to the President. We model and
test Executive-Legislative relations in Brazil and demonstrate that Presidents have used pork as a
political currency to exchange for votes on policy reforms. In particular Presidents Cardoso and Lula
have used pork to exchange for amendments to the Constitution. Without policy reforms Brazil
would have had greater difficulty meeting their debt obligations. The logic for the exchange of pork
for policy reform is that Presidents typically have greater electoral incentives than members of
Congress to care about economic growth, economic opportunity, income equality and price
stabilization. Members of Congress generally care more about redistributing gains to their
constituents. Given the differences in preferences and the relative powers of each, the Legislative
and Executive benefit by exploiting the gains from trade.
Lee J. Alston
Institute of Behavioral Sciences
University of Colorado Campus Box 483
1416 Broadway Ave
Boulder, CO 80309
and NBER
lee.alston@colorado.edu
Bernardo Mueller
Institute of Behavioral Sciences
University of Colorado Campus Box 483
1416 Broadway Ave
Boulder, CO 80309
bmueller@unb.br

Alston
-3Section 1 - Introduction

It is part of the folklore of the democratization process in many Latin American
countries that the power of the executive should be limited. No doubt this emerged because
of past abuses. Limiting executive power by giving power to a Congress is not costless. In a
utopian world representatives should vote for the “good of the country,” but in the real
world they vote for geographic redistribution, e.g., one member of Congress wants a road
while another wants an irrigation project. The incentive of the executive differs from that of
members of Congress; as head of the country the executive is in a position to internalize the
costs and benefits from policies affecting national interests more so than regional interests.
As a result of differing electoral connections between the President and members of
Congress, the President should care more about economic growth and inequality than
members of Congress. To better achieve these goals, it makes sense to give the executive
relatively strong powers provided the power is checked, e.g., by a veto in Congress, and a
free press. When Brazil returned to democracy in 1985 they structured their federal
institutions of governance in a way that retained strong powers for the President. The
transition from a military dictatorship to a civilian government in Brazil during the first half
of the 1980s was gradual and peaceful rather than revolutionary. As a result many
institutions continued from the military regime to democracy, most notably for our analysis
was the retention of strong presidential powers. Had there been a clean break between
regimes this might not have been the case. We argue that strong presidential powers are the
key component in the relationship between the president and Congress. It should be made
clear, however, that we are not claiming that strong presidential powers arose because they

Alston
-4facilitate gains to trade, rather they arose historically and have persisted and evolved
because they benefited those who had the power to change them.
Within the governance system of Brazil, seven parties currently play a significant
legislative role. With seven active parties and a weak committee structure one might
imagine that policy is highly unstable in Brazil. Policy stability is important for economic
development because it induces private investment, provided the policies are not punitive to
investors. There may be a fine line between the ability to reform when needed, and policy
stability. In short, policy stability should not be confused with policy gridlock. One of the
fundamental dilemmas in all representative democracies is how to induce stability in
governmental outcomes while maintaining the ability to reform. Governments need a
certain amount of elasticity in the policy space to adapt to changing domestic or
international conditions.
We propose to analyze the mechanism in Brazil for inducing policy reform, along
with expectations of policy stability. In Brazil parties and committees are far too weak to
induce stability. Our analysis rests on the existence of strong executive power that in turn
enables the President to mold a stable coalition in Congress. The coalition then functions as
a strong party, though with an important caveat: the President is necessarily the leader of
the coalition. Without the President at the helm of the coalition, it would be inherently
unstable. Like most cartels, some enforcement mechanism is necessary to ensure
compliance and prevent defections. Having the President as head of the coalition enables
him to capture a large part of the gains from trade between the executive and legislative
branches. Importantly, the electoral connection for the President rests on a strong economy
and one perceived as satisfying the goals of economic growth, economic opportunity, and
greater income inequality,

Alston
-5As is the case of its American counterpart, the Brazilian Congress presents great
potential for gains from trade, as well as similar kinds of problems concerning the
enforcement and durability of such trades. Although there is a committee system in the
Brazilian Congress it does not fulfill the same purpose as that suggested by Weingast and
Marshall (1988) for the case of the US Congress. Pereira and Mueller (2000, 2004) show
that party leaders routinely change deputies from one committee to another, even against
their will, so that having a committee seat does not guarantee property rights over the
agenda of the committee. Furthermore, bills can be (and are) routinely taken out of
committee by the College of Leaders.1 As a result committees are not in a position to
coordinate legislative exchanges.
Similarly parties cannot play the coordination role because there are too many
parties and no one party is large enough to ensure stability. Currently there are seven
effective parties in Brazil. It is conceivable that a Congressional institution could arise that
would enable a cartel arrangement (coalition) to act as a dominant party but so far this has
not happened and we will argue that it is unlikely to happen given the powers of the
executive.
For our purposes the most notable feature that emerged from the Constitution of
1988 was the extent of legislative powers conferred to the Executive.2 The powers of most
importance are: 1) the power to establish the status quo through provisional decrees; 2) the
sole authority to initiate certain types of legislation, e.g. budgetary and administrative
issues; 3) the execution of the budget; 4) the ability to appoint a cabinet (though like the
U.S. this is subject to the approval of the Senate); and 5) immense discretion over
patronage jobs. We will elaborate briefly on each of these powers.

Alston
-6Provisional Decrees
The President has the power to change the status quo policy by issuing decrees that
remain in force for 30 days unless overturned by a majority vote in a joint session of
Congress. After 30 days the President can reissue the decree. Provisional decrees have been
used extensively and increasingly since 1988. According to Figueiredo and Limongi
(2000a: 155), from 1989 to 1997, Presidents issued 446 provisional decrees (without
counting reissues) and Congress rejected only 3%.3 Monteiro (2000b) computed the
number of provisional decrees in effect every month (including reissues) for each bill
enacted through regular legislative procedures. During President Cardoso’s first and second
term that number oscillated from 1.8 decrees per regular bill in April 1995 to 6.5 in July
1999, with a clear increase in the trend over time. The average life of a provisional decree
over this period was approximately 20 months.4
Exclusive Initiation Rights
The executive has exclusive constitutional rights to initiate budgetary and
administrative legislation. Budgetary legislation involves the elaboration and subsequent
changes to the budget. Administrative legislation includes: laws that create new ministries,
agencies and even public corporations; new positions within the public sector; the mandates
of the public entities; and the determination of wages within public entities excluding
Congress and the Judiciary. Presidents use their exclusionary rights often and successfully:
from 1989 to 1994 the President initiated almost 70% of the 1,259 laws approved by
Congress from 1989 to 1994 - 41% were budgetary, 10% administrative and 18%
provisional decrees (Figueiredo and Limongi, 1996: 69).5 The President also initiated
successfully an additional 10% of the laws passed in areas over which he does not have

Alston
-7exclusive rights. Cardoso continued the same pattern: he initiated 80.5% of all enacted
legislation from 1995 to 1998 (Pereira and Mueller, 2000: 48).
Execution of the budget
The executive office not only initiates the budgetary process but also carries it out.
After the executive submits a bill to Congress, the legislature may amend it. Many of these
amendments entail pork barrel projects in a legislator’s district. After Congress as a whole
amends, the budget goes first through a Combined Budget Committee that prunes out some
pork.6 From Congress the bill goes back to the President who has line-item veto power.
Once a bill is passed the President decides which amendments get executed, based on
political and budgetary considerations. For example, the President can argue that he will
not implement an amendment because of insufficient tax receipts to cover the expenditure.
Discretion over execution gives the President enormous power to reward or punish
legislative behavior. Ames (1995a) first related budget amendments to roll call votes.
Pereira (1999) and Pereira and Mueller (2000) provide further evidence that the President
uses his discretion strategically.
Cabinet Appointments
One mechanism by which the President rewards legislative behavior is through
Cabinet appointments.7 This power is used throughout a President’s term to reward or
punish voting behavior in favor of or contrary to the President’s preferences. Cabinet
appointments are usually distributed to parties, whose leaders then have more means to
discipline their members. However, in some cases these appointments can go to particularly
influential individuals who are able to deliver the support of several congressmen.
Throughout his terms, Cardoso has been explicit about this mechanism in the media,

Alston
-8making it well known that the appointment remained contingent on continual support in
Congress.
Patronage
Patronage positions are numerous. Fleischer (1998) states that the executive
controls over 40,000 jobs throughout Brazil. These positions range from cabinet positions
to second and third rank jobs, which in most countries would be civil service appointments.
Rather than simply rewarding friends who got out the vote, some of these positions go to
standing members of Congress, suggesting that these positions can bring influence or
wealth. Indeed in many instances, time spent in Congress is an investment made to secure
an executive appointment.
As a result of these five powers the President has dominated the legislative agenda
both in timing and content. The legislature rarely defeats the proposals of the President.8
The preponderance of the Executive in legislative procedures accounts for the claim by
some scholars that the Brazilian Congress has abdicated its main constitutional authority to
the Executive.9 We will argue that this notion goes too far because Congress as a whole
has the power of veto to resist the Executive’s advances, or even to change the rules that are
the underpinning of the Executive’s powers. The fact that it has not done so suggests that a
majority of members of Congress benefit from the status quo as compared to a
counterfactual world of multiple parties facing a severe collection action problem in the
legislative arena. The College of Leaders has the potential to organize legislative exchanges
but it currently lacks any enforcement mechanisms for legislative exchanges. In short,
outside of the powers of Presidency, there is no apparent extant institution within Congress
that could improve on the status quo. The powers of the executive fill this void, enabling

Alston
-9members of and parties within the coalition to achieve many of the gains from trade that
arise through other mechanisms (e.g. committees) in other countries.
Our paper contributes to the literature that analyzes the effect of political institutions
on public policy and policy outcomes (North and Weingast 1989, North 1981 and 1990,
Levy and Spiller 1996, Haggard and McCubbins 2001, Dixit 1996, Moe 1990, Spiller and
Tommasi 2002). More specifically it is concerned with how countries’ political institutions
affect the trade-off between gridlock and instability that permeates all policy-making
(Shepsle and Weingast, 1981; Weingast and Marshall, 1988). The way in which the
political structure maps into the ability to reform and to commit has been a subject of
growing interest in the literature. Our paper relates closely to several recent strands in this
literature, particularly those concerned with institutions that determine legislative-executive
relations. Our focus on the strong powers of the Brazilian president and his ability to
bargain with a coalition with different preferences is directly related to the notion of
separation of power and separation of propose in Cox and McCubbins’ (2001) and Shugart
and Haggard (2001). In this regard we argue that Brazil is an example of political system
that provides both high levels of governability and responsiveness to the median voter
preferences. Our analysis can also be seen as a veto player model where the coalition must
agree with the President’s proposals for them to be realized, much in the spirit of the
models in Tsebelis (2002). Persson and Tabellini (2000; 239-246) and Persson, Roland and
Tabellini (1997) provide models that show conditions under which the separation of powers
between Congress and the president benefits voters by leading to policies that promote
general welfare rather than private benefits to individuals or groups. Our paper is also
related to the analysis in Epstein and O’Halloran (1999) regarding how the institutional
characteristics of legislative-executive relations, such as divided government and party

Alston
- 10 conflict affect the decision by Congress whether to delegate policymaking. Finally, our
analysis is perhaps most relevant to the comparative literature on the variation among
presidential systems (Haggard and McCubbins, 2001, Shugart and Carey 1992). We present
a case study of a coalition-based presidential system with strong presidential powers in a
context of multiple parties. Although this basic configuration may occur frequently in
developing countries, the specific details of the Brazilian case lead to a much less common
result; a divided government that can act decisively and where “pork” does not necessarily
have significant negative consequences. Understanding the conditions under which this
occurs is a contribution towards a better understanding of the relation between political
institutions and policy.
Our paper also contributes to the specific literature on Brazilian executivelegislative relations. For the particular case of Brazil there is considerable debate regarding
how the political institutions affect the costs of governability and consequently outcomes.
The traditional argument has been that electoral rules based on an open list system lead to
multiple, fragmented and undisciplined parties, where party leaders are unable to control
their members’ votes and presidents consequently face high costs in getting their proposals
approved (Ames; 1995a,b, 2001; Carey and Shugart, 1995; Shugart and Carey, 1992;
Lamounier 1994a,b; Mainwaring 1993, 1999; Mainwaring and Shugart, 1997). This view
has recently been disputed by scholars who argue that Brazilian Presidents since the 1988
Constitution have had remarkable success in enacting their legislative agendas, and that
parties are disciplined and able to control their members (Figueiredo and Limongi, 2000a,
2000b; Pereira 1999, Pereira and Mueller 2002; Santos 1997). According to this revisionist
view, incentives from the electoral arena that push towards individualistic behavior are
countered by the incentives within Congress that derive from the legislative powers of the

Alston
- 11 President. We argue that not only have Presidents achieved high levels of success in the
legislative arena but they have done so at relatively low cost. One of the contributions of
this paper is an explicit model of the micro-foundations of legislative-executive relations
that are consistent with the revisionist view.
In the following section we present a model in which a President uses his control
over the agenda and patronage to pursue his preferred policy. We stress the trade-off
between policy outcomes and patronage. In Section 3 derive several results about the gains
from trade and who receives the gains. In Section 4 we analyze pension reform from 1995
to 2004 and data from budget execution as a test of our model. In Section 5 we offer some
concluding remarks.

Section 2 – A Model of the Brazilian Congress
In this section we present a model that captures the main elements of the executivelegislative relationship in Brazil. The important feature of the relationship is the agenda
power held by the President. This does not mean, however, that the President can
unilaterally impose his preferences on Congress: a majority coalition can restrict the policy
preferences of the President. To the extent that the President has a greater electoral
connection associated with economic growth, stability and national public goods than
members of Congress it is desirable to give the President relatively strong legislative
powers. However, to the extent that the President has other goals in his objective function
or is incompetent, it is important that Congress be able to check the actions of the President.
Our model is largely driven by the trade-off between policy outcomes and
patronage, where the outcomes depend on both preferences and on the value of patronage
to both members of Congress and the President, that is, on the existence of gains to trade.

Alston
- 12 In our model we have five political parties, each of which negotiates directly with the
President. Although this is often a good representation of reality, as party leaders have
several instruments to reward and punish their members, in some cases the transactions are
with individual legislators. The model can be easily adapted to having each of the five
coalition parties being a legislator in a five member legislature. All legislators belong to a
political party and parties either belong to the government’s coalition or are part of the
opposition. Both of these groups interact in congressional proceedings, constrained by the
legislative institutions, and subject to the powers of the executive. We assume that the
parties are able to discipline their members.10 The coalition and the opposition, on the other
hand, face the usual coordination problems, however the coalition is able to overcome this
by having the executive at the lead.11
Figure 1 shows the preferences of the President (P) and five parties (Ki i=1…5) in a
two-dimensional space composed of a policy issue on the horizontal dimension and
patronage on the vertical dimension.12 The policy can be, for example, the minimum
retirement age, with the president preferring a higher age than that preferred by each of the
parties.13 The patronage dimension measures the value of patronage in the form of such
benefits as individual budget amendments, cabinet posts, jobs or cash provided by the
Executive to each party. Suppose that the number of legislators in each party are such that
the President needs support of any three parties to have a majority (and a 3/5 majority in the
case of constitutional amendments.) Thus in this example K3, K4 and K5 will form the
President’s coalition and K1 and K2 are in the opposition.
<<Place Figure 1 about here>>

Alston
- 13 The horizontal line shown in Figure 1 is the zero-patronage line. The points with
asterisks are the parties’ preferred policy points along the zero-patronage line. Whereas the
president’s bliss point is on the zero-patronage line, as he would rather not concede any
patronage, the parties prefer infinite amounts of patronage so their bliss points do not
appear in the figure. The points shown with asterisks are thus the projection of their bliss
points on the zero-patronage line. The ellipses show the indifference curves of each
legislator to the status quo point SQ. These are labeled as K iSQ (⋅) , i=1…5, where the
superscript indicates that the curve represents all the points for which the party is
indifferent to SQ. All points within the ellipse are preferred by the party to those on or
outside the ellipse. Thus if the president used his agenda power to propose a policy at his
preferred point P*, all parties would vote against the proposal.
The president anticipates this outcome and thus acts strategically proposing some
point more palatable to a majority of parties. In order to show which point exactly the
president would propose so as to improve on the status quo with the least cost in terms of
patronage, Figure 2 shows a close-up of the previous figure with the point where each
legislators’ indifference curve through SQ crosses the zero-patronage line labeled
as K iSQ ( 0 ) .14 Without the use of patronage, the best the President could do would be to
propose a policy at point K 3SQ ( 0 ) , as this would be preferred to the status quo by both K5 and
K4 and would be indifferent to K3 (so we assume she would vote in favor). Note, however,
that the President can do better than this by using patronage. By proposing a policy at point
B and offering a value in patronage to K3 valued at AB, the president gets favorable votes
from a majority composed of K3, K4 and K5, and reaches a higher indifference curve than
would be achieved without the use of patronage ( U P ( K 3SQ ( 0) ) > U P ( A) ). Point A is the best

Alston
- 14 the President can do with this configuration of preferences. Note that although the President
incurs a higher cost in terms of patronage by proposing A rather than K 3SQ ( 0 ) , he is better off
doing so as are K4 and K5. At the same time K3 is indifferent to both situations. Thus the
President and some parties realize gains from trade by having a policy-patronage point at A.
<<Place Figure 2 about here>>
In the example portrayed in Figure 2, the president only provided patronage to one
of the parties. This was a result of the specific preferences portrayed by the indifference
curves. In Figure 3 we slightly alter those preferences by moving K 4SQ ( 0 ) closer to K 3SQ ( 0 ) to
show a situation where more than one party receives patronage. In this case, the previous
solution, policy at B and AB patronage to K3, would no longer defeat the status quo. This is
because K4 prefers SQ to policy at B. Without giving patronage to K4 the best that the
President can do is to propose policy at K 4SQ ( 0 ) and give patronage to K3 worth the distance
from K 4SQ ( 0 ) to C. However, he can do better than this by giving patronage as well to K4. The
dark line labeled K 3SQ (⋅) + K 4SQ (⋅) is the vertical summation of the indifference curves of both

K3 and K4 and thus shows the amount of patronage that the President would have to
concede in total to compensate both K3 and K4. The most favorable indifference curve of
the President is tangent to this curve at point D. The equilibrium in this case would thus be
for the President to propose policy at point E and to give patronage worth DE in total to
both K3 and K4. The amount given to each is the vertical distance from E to their
indifference curve K iSQ (⋅) , the sum of which equals DE. In this situation K3, K4 and K5
would vote for the policy and the President’s utility would be UP(D). Note that if K5’s
policy prefference moved sufficiently to the left, that party too could receive patronage.
<<Place Figure 3 about here>>

Alston
- 15 The model presented above stylizes the main forces that we believe mold the
relationship between the executive and its coalition in Congress. There are several
characteristics of that relationship that are not explicitly addressed in the model that should
also considered. The first is that the analysis so far has been made in the context of a oneoff negotiation over a single bill; however the relationship is a recurring one involving a
series of bills and other procedures besides plenary voting. Therefore the exchange of
support for patronage may not be tallied on a bill-by-bill basis, but rather as the cumulative
support provided by the party during the legislative year. Only exceptionally is there
specific negotiation over individual bills that are particularly controversial and high profile
(some examples involving pension reform are given in section 4). The fact that the
executive and the coalition play a repeated game helps ensure cooperation, as a party will
be willing to forgo a chance to cheat on any given bill so as not to upset the relationship.
Repeated play also limits strategic behavior.
Another characteristic of the relationship between the executive and the coalition
during the two terms of President Cardoso is that the coalition held a supermajority of
seats, approximately 66% in 1994 and 74% in 1998. This means that it was often the case
that the executive would be able to pass several bills even without the support of some of
the parties in the coalition. This fact also mitigates the weight of our assumption that party
leaders are able to perfectly control their members. Even if some members of each party
vote against or abstain on any given proposal, the coalition will still be able to approve the
bill. This allows some parties or individuals to oppose, with the executive’s concurrence,
some bills that are particularly harmful to their constituencies, thus avoiding the electoral
cost of supporting the bill. Of course the leeway is less in the case of constitutional

Alston
- 16 amendments, which require a three-fifths majority (60%) and usually involve the more
important issues.

Section 3 – Gains from Trade in the Brazilian Congress
The gains from trade are most easily illustrated in Figure 2. If the legislative
institutions were such that the President still retained agenda power but did not have the
ability to offer patronage, then the best he could do would be to propose K 3SQ ( 0 ) . This
represents an improvement for all coalition members considered together (President plus
the coalition parties) compared to the status quo where utilities were the same for K3 but
lower for K4, K5 and the President. But it is an inferior situation compared to that of the
President offering patronage, because with patronage the President can improve his position
and the party are no worse of compared to the status quo.
The gains from trade, as always, arise from one actor having property rights to a
good that is more highly valued by another. That is, they arise when the President gains
more utility by giving patronage than the utility cost he incurs in doing so, and the parties
gain more utility from the patronage than they lose by having policy move away from their
preferred points. Clearly, some issues are sufficiently dear to the parties that it would
require more patronage than the President would be willing to offer. In such cases the
President would not even bring the proposal to a vote, which explains why some crucial
issues, such as political system reform and tax reform, are consistently being postponed.
Occasionally the President may miscalculate and propose a bill that will be rejected,
however such cases should be relatively rare.
Our model implies that all of the gains from trade go to the President, while the
coalition parties that receive patronage remain just as well off as they did at the status quo.

Alston
- 17 Coalition parties that do not receive patronage, such as K5 in the example in Figure 3, are
better off because the final policy improves their utility compared to the status quo. This
result derives from the agenda power held by the President.15 If the legislative rules were
such that the President could not influence the agenda, and assuming that the same coalition
were able to remain united, then the coalition could propose a bill at its median point and
have it approved, because it has a majority of the votes to pass the bill and override any
vetoes. If the legislative rules allowed the President to offer patronage, then he could still
pull policy towards P, but the final outcome would be further from his preferred point than
in the case where he had agenda power, as the reversal point would then be the coalition’s
median preference rather than SQ. It is the agenda power of the President that provides a
structure-induced equilibrium that prevents cycling problems and provides stability to the
coalition and policy decisions. If the President did not have agenda power and there were
no other institution that had this effect, such as a strong committee system, we expect that
the coalition would break and outcomes would become unpredictable. In short there is
currently no legislative institution that can solve the collective action problem within
Congress of monitoring and enforcing legislative exchanges.
In our model the President receives all the gains from trade but we stress that this
does not imply that he is unconstrained by the coalition. The further apart are the
President’s and the coalition members’ preferences, the less the President will be able to
accomplish of his reform agenda. Our analysis also demonstrates that if an incompetent or
ill intentioned President proposes extreme policies, Congress would check the policies.
The major conclusions from the discussion above are summarized in the following
results:

Alston
- 18 Result 1 – The Brazilian legislative rules are such that there are significant gains

from trade for the members of the coalition and the executive from the exchange of
support for patronage. The President’s agenda powers guarantee the stability of the
relationship and allow him to appropriate most of the gains.
The model can also be used to determine the effect of parametric changes in the cost
of patronage to the President. Providing patronage involves a series of costs that are
reflected in the inclination of the President’s indifference curves. These costs arise for two
reasons. The first is the opportunity cost to the President of depleting his capital, since the
patronage used to purchase support for a given set of causes cannot be used for other ends.
The second is the efficiency cost that arises from the fact that patronage, by transferring the
right over specific decisions to members of party Ki, implies that policies and resource use
in those areas may be distant from those that the President would prefer.16 The slope of the
President’s indifference curves measures the cost of providing patronage because by
definition those curves show how much patronage the President is willing to give in
exchange for having policy move one unit closer to his preferred point along the nopatronage line. The greater the slope of the President’s indifference curves at each point
(that is, the more vertically elongated his preference ellipses) the more he cares about
policy relative to patronage. Thus, the lower the cost of providing patronage, the greater the
slope (in absolute value) of the President’s indifference curves and consequently the closer
will be the equilibrium outcome to the President’s preferred point. In Figure 3 an increase
in the slope of UP(D) would imply a tangency point to K 3SQ (⋅) + K 4SQ (⋅) that would yield a
policy closer to P than E, with more patronage being given to K3 and K4 than DE.
The shape of the President’s utility curves are primarily determined by his
preferences for policy versus patronage. However, they are also determined by the

Alston
- 19 institutions in Congress and the Executive, which influence the level of costs that determine
the amount and quality of patronage a President has to offer, as well as the level of
transaction costs involved in doing so. In Section 1 we showed that in Brazil political
institutions endow the President with several means of providing patronage at low cost,
such as the control of the execution of individual budget amendments by the President. If
any of these institutions were altered, affecting the costs of providing patronage, the
President’s indifference curves would change which in turn would lead to a different
outcome. The effect of a parametric reduction in the cost of patronage to the President is to
move the policy outcome closer to the President’s preferred point. This happens because
greater gains from trade can then be realized from the exchange of each unit of patronage.

Result 2 – Changes that reduce the cost of patronage to the President and the cost of
transacting with the coalition parties, lead to greater gains from trade, and policy
outcomes more favorable to the President.
Policy outcomes can also be affected by parametric changes in the indifference
curves of the coalition parties. These curves measure how much patronage a party must
receive in order to vote for a policy further away from their preferred point and remain just
as well off. The steeper these curves, the lower the value of patronage to the party relative
to the value of the policy. Thus the less vertically elongated their preference ellipses, the
more the parties value patronage. In addition to the parties’ innate preferences for policy
and patronage, political institutions also influence the shapes of their indifference curves.
Changes in legislative or electoral rules, or changes in the voters’ preferences or behavior,
may alter those curves. In Figure 3, a parametric increase in the value of patronage to the
parties implies flatter indifference curves and consequently more favorable policy outcomes
to the President. For example, if the President is undergoing a period of intense popularity

Alston
- 20 it will be more valuable for a party or individual to hold or control a governmental post, as
this popularity may rub off onto those seen by the electorate as participating in the
government. As another example, the easier it is for the legislators to use patronage so as to
benefit themselves, the more highly it will be valued. If the country’s institutions make it
more acceptable for a legislator to derive rents from a pork barrel project taken home, then
the execution of a personal amendment to the budget is more valuable to a legislator.

Result 3 – The larger the benefit that the members of the coalition are able to derive
from a given amount of patronage, the greater the gains from trade and the more
favorable will be policy outcomes to the Executive.

Finally, a perhaps counterintuitive implication of our model is that the President
will have to offer more compensation to those coalition parties that are further from his
preferences. In Figure 3, for example, K3 is the furthest from P and received the majority of
patrontage, DE, the total amount of patronage that was given. K4 was more aligned with the
President than K3 but nevertheless received less patronage. And K5 , who was even closer to

P received no patronage at all.17 K1 and K2 who are not part of the coalition also received
no patronage. In this regard our model has a similar implication to the model in Snyder Jr.
(1991): “in order to obtain favorable legislation the president should allocate the
distributive benefits he has at his disposal to the congressmen who are slightly opposed to
his proposal.”18 In the following section we will test this implication with data on patronage
distribution.

Result 4 – The further the preference of a coalition party from that of the President,
the greater the patronage that party will receive. Therefore coalition parties that
have more divergent preferences from those of the President will receive, ceteris

Alston
- 21 -

paribus, more compensation than those parties closer to the President up to the
point where the President has the number of votes that he needs.

Section 4 – Evidence from Pension Reform
The success rate of the Brazilian Executive in getting its projects approved in
Congress has been impressive. Of the 1,881 bills presented by the various Presidents from
1989 to 1997, 77% were approved and only 1.3% were rejected, the remaining having been
withdrawn or still in progress (Figueiredo and Limongi 2000a; 155). The performance of
the Cardoso Presidency has been even stronger with an approval of 95.3% of its proposals
in the House during his second term (Jornal do Brasil, 2001). At first sight this record may
lead one to believe that the Executive is able to pursue its agenda with practically no
interference from Congress. However, the same outcome can also be explained by a
relationship between the Executive and the Legislature as modeled in the previous section.
The Executive achieves a high rate of success in getting its proposals approved through its
power to set the agenda together with the strategic use of patronage. Providing evidence to
support this model is not easy, because a high rate of approval is predicted by both
hypotheses.19
The percentage of Presidential bills approved per se does not provide much
information on the prior explicit and implicit bargaining between the Executive and
Congress in order to assure approval. For many proposals the preferences of the coalition
are close to the preference of the President and approval follows without bargaining. In
other cases preferences are further apart but the combination of patronage and compromise
in changing the policy leads to approval. In still other cases the preferences are so divergent

Alston
- 22 that no such compromise is feasible. When the President perceives preferences as widely
divergent, he most likely will withhold the proposal rather than face defeat.
According to our first result, there are significant gains from trade from the
exchange of support for patronage. Evidence of patronage should be particularly visible in
those instances where preferences diverged but not so much as to rule out exchanges. We
should expect to find that the voting behavior of members of the coalition are rewarded and
punished by the Executive in the following ways: (i) granting or removing the right to make
appointments to patronage positions and (ii) executing or failing to execute the amendments
in the budget related to specific legislators. Although there is systematic data available on
individual amendments (which we describe below), there is no systematic data on posts in
the federal government that have been assigned to deputies. It is usually quite clear which
political party, and sometimes even which individual within a party, has been given
property rights to appoint cabinet members and several other high-ranking positions. Even
with lower positions, such as the head and directors of local branches of many federal
companies, pundits and the press will often comment on which congressman choose the
appointee. However, given the huge number of posts available for negotiation (Fleischer
1998, estimates this number at 40,000), the unofficial nature of the link between patron and
appointee and transitory nature of appointments, it is very difficult to collect systematic
information.
To test the hypotheses from the previous section we will look at pension reform
during both Cardoso terms, 1995-2002. Our strategy is to associate the use of patronage
with specific instances when Congress voted on divisive issues. This will be done in two
ways; the first using evidence from the press and the second econometrically testing the
determinants of the execution by the President of the amendments to the budget proposed

Alston
- 23 by Congressmen. We choose pension reform because it is a key element in any plan for
economic growth and stabilization, and it has been by far the most contentious issue
discussed in Congress in the past ten years. Cardoso sent his first proposal on pension
reform to Congress in March 1995, shortly after he took office, and in eight years achieved
only limited reform. President Lula who took office in January 2003 chose pension reform
as the first major reform to be tackled. (See Table 1 for a chronology of activity.)
At first sight, the choice of focusing on pension reform may seem odd, as this is the
major reform where the President was able to approve less of his initial proposal.
Resistance by Congress not only forced compromises in terms of policy proposal changes,
but even those proposals that did get through did so with great difficulty. Given that we are
arguing that the Brazilian system provides high levels of governability at relatively low
cost, pension reform would seem to be proof of just the opposite. However, the advantage
of focusing of pension reform is that this is perhaps the issue over which the preferences of
President Cardoso and his coalition most differed, but where nevertheless the President
insisted in pushing forward. Whereas most other issues appeared to be routinely approved
without much scrutiny from Congress, resulting in the high success rates for the President
described above, in this issue conflicts are more visible and it becomes easier to analyze
how these are dealt with. Given the critical state of the Brazilian pension system, any
reform would necessarily involve diminishing benefits considered as an acquired right by
most of society. The upshot was that practically all voters, and especially several wellorganized groups such as civil servants, military and judges, strongly opposed. Therefore
congressmen were very reluctant to be seen as supporting the reform, and what ensued was
the negotiation between the President and Congress that is described below. That Cardoso
insisted in the reforms, and that President Lula has done the same, despite its electoral

Alston
- 24 unpopularity, is testimony to the internalization by the president of broader issues such as
monetary and fiscal stability.20
The Cardoso administration viewed pension reform as urgent because since 1997
contributions of workers no longer covered the expenditures on pensions. The fiscal
demand of funding pensions is in part reflected in the borrowing costs of the government
and has perverse consequences for price stability and continued economic growth. Outside
observers (economists in academia, the World Bank and IMF and the press) have noted the
lavish and unsustainable nature of Brazil’s pension system.
The Brazilian pension system has broken just about every rule known to actuaries. It
fixes no minimum retirement age, and allows a host of exceptions and special cases. It
allows retired people (called, wonderfully inaccurately, "inactive workers") not only to
draw more than one pension but also to go on getting a wage as well. Perhaps uniquely,
Brazil not only allows some pensioners to retire on a higher income than they had when
working, but also increases their pension every time their working colleagues get a wage
rise. (The Economist, June 7, 1997).

Although the need for change is not controversial, the devil is in the details. Those
who are already retired and those who are currently in the workforce have come to see the
benefits promised by the current rules as a property right. The courts have tended to agree.
Any solution necessarily implies redistribution and generates opposition, which is reflected
in Congress. In addition, many Congressmen have a direct stake in pension reform; 120
members of the 518-seat house collect pensions.21
<<Place Table 1 about here>>
The first defeat to the Executive’s pension reform occurred in March 1996. The
proposed bill addressed some of the more blatant distortions of the pension system. It
required 35 years of contributions for men and 30 years for women, rather than simply

Alston
- 25 years of service. In the private sector there was no age requirement for retirement but in the
public sector the bill imposed a minimum retirement age of 55 for men and 50 for women,
which would be increased to 60 and 55 in 2001. The bill would have capped pensions for
the private sector at 10 times the minimum wage (approximately US$1000). Civil servants
would continue to receive the same as their pre-retirement wage but the current 20% bonus
on retirement would be deleted. The bill also eliminated the accumulation of multiple
pensions. Elected politicians who retired from another job were allowed to continue to
receive a salary in addition to their pension.
Many issues in pension reform require a Constitutional amendment, which entails a
three-fifths majority of the House (308 of the 513 deputies) and the bill must be approved
in two separate votes in both the House and the Senate. After the first vote in the House the
government came up fourteen votes short. President Cardoso responded quickly and sent a
new bill to Congress in two weeks. This time Cardoso was very careful about his strategy.
He attenuated some of the more controversial parts of the reform and made intense use of
patronage, leading to passage in the House:
For the next two weeks, the President went to work. He held a meeting with 64 PPB
congressmen, hosted a gala luncheon with one leading critic in the PMDB, and made
telephone calls to state governors. Just what went on behind closed doors is anyone's guess,
though the evidence is mounting that it was plenty. By March 21st, order was restored. The
lower house backed the welfare reform.
So all's well? Not quite. The welfare reform has been weakened, to tinker with
encrusted privileges not dismantle them… Still, "we made the only advance that was
possible," said a relieved Mr Cardoso, thanking the legislators who supported him. And he
paid for it. ...
Pork was on the menu in several states. The first time round, all seven
congressmen from Rondonia, a small state in the Amazon, voted against the government's
welfare reform. After a cordial chat at the Planalto, all seven changed their minds. Soon
$16m in federal cash will go to improve an important road in Rondonia, and one of the
state's favourite sons will be heading the local arm of the federal telephone company. Pure
coincidence, say officials in Brasilia. The drought-parched north-eastern state of Paraiba
won money for an irrigation canal and reservoirs. A power plant was promised for Rio
Grande do Sul. The government was no less open-handed with jobs and promotions. (The
Economist, March 30, 1996)

Alston
- 26 The difficulties encountered in approving pension reform signaled to the
government that the successful completion of more of its reforms would be a more
demanding task than had been anticipated. In the following month Cardoso reshuffled the
cabinet so as to strengthen the government’s base of support in Congress. In addition
Cardoso created a Special Ministry for Political Coordination whose purpose was to
intermediate and facilitate the channeling of the demands of coalition members to the
Executive, and the distribution of patronage in return for political support (Fleischer, 1998,
pg. 91). Keeping track of each legislator’s demands and voting performance is a formidable
task so it is natural that means to do this more effectively would be sought. To better
monitor legislative behavior over time the Ministry of Political Coordination created the
System of Legislative Performance (SIAL) that centralized all requests by legislators to any
governmental agency or Ministry, thus preventing any double granting of patronage or any
omission (Pereira, 1999, pg. 107-108). In announcing the creation of the ministry President
Cardoso justified that “… when Congress wants to say yes and can’t manage to do so it is
necessary that we get together to create conditions to make the dialogue flow better” (O

Estado de São Paulo, April 30 1996).22
The second defeat to pension reform came in May 1998 when a proposal instituting
a minimum retirement age of 60 for men and 55 for women lost by one vote. The proposed
legislation would have significantly reduced the government’s pension bill. The bill was
defeated despite the Executive’s usual appeals and negotiation with its coalition in
Congress, a sign of how divisive this issue was, particularly in an election year. After the
upset the Executive announced that those deputies that had had their requests granted
before the vote and didn’t keep their part of the bargain risked having their individual

Alston
- 27 amendments to the budget shelved and their appointments to positions in the federal
government reexamined (Gazeta Mercantil, May 8 1998).
Two weeks later the President sent another bill to Congress.23 This time Cardoso
changed the minimum age for retirement to 53 for men and 48 for women, valid only for
those already in the social security system. In terms of our model this change can be seen as
a compromise in the policy proposed by the government. The defeat in the House showed
that the coalition’s preferences, which are for a much lower age, were more intense than
expected. Even the negotiation of patronage did not guarantee the approval of the bill.
Rather than simply offer more patronage to assure the next vote, the Executive opted to
mitigate the age requirements. The new bill was approved and finally sealed in a second
vote in November 1998. For this final vote the Executive took no risks:
President Cardoso dispensed with his trademark aloofness of his first term and openly
pushed for his program, meeting with party leaders and sending telegrams summoning
coalition members to vote. A bloc of 37 legislators representing agricultural businesses
was promised by the Government that it would delay repayment of more than $1 billion
in farmers' debt in return for their votes, said Hugo Biehl, leader of the farmers' bloc in
Congress. The Government also granted farm businesses $280 million in concessions in
exchange for their support. (The New York Times, November 6 1998.)

Having exhausted his options regarding age requirements, the President turned to
addressing two different margins of pension reform: the size of the tax on income for
pensions and the number of taxpayers. This was especially important to the President
because it would provide some immediate financial relief at a time of imminent monetary
crisis.24 In December 1998 the House voted to increase pension contributions of civil
servants from 11% to 20% of their wages, and also to start taxing the pensions of retired
civil servants. This measure would provide an added U$2.2 billion dollars to the
government’s coffers over the next year. This measure was bitterly opposed by civil
servants who already saw their contributions as too high, and by the retired who saw their
pensions as too low. The measure was defeated in the House:

Alston
- 28 As the vote on the pension approached, some coalition allies jostled for Cabinet posts.
Others fielded calls from opponents of the bill. One hundred legislators just stayed
away. … Political analysts say the pension bill failed because the Government, overly
confident, neglected the legwork to rally support. The administration also packed too
much into one measure, focusing on active and retired government workers along with
other groups because of time pressure. (The New York Times, December 12 1998.)

In the following month Congress called off its summer recess in an effort to vote a
series of backlogged bills. At the same time Cardoso changed several ministerial
appointments in order to adapt his Cabinet to changes in the newly elected Congress that
would commence in two months. In part, due to the failed pension reform the pressure on
the Real became overwhelming and Brazil set the Real afloat, resulting in a large
devaluation.
Under this scenario Cardoso sent to the House a new measure to increase the
pension contributions of active and retired civil servants. This time the Executive argued
that pension reform was necessary to pull the country out of the economic crisis arising
from the devaluation of the Real. In addition the heightened need for the measure made
Cardoso more willing to exchange pork for support. Congress approved the bill by a safe
margin and instituted the new contributions immediately. But, a few months later (October
1999) the Supreme Court declared the law unconstitutional, forcing the government to
revert to previous levels of contributions and return the additional revenue that it had
obtained. Cardoso threatened to change the Constitution so as to allow higher levels of
contributions but sensing the difficulty of getting these changes through Congress
attempted only minor changes to the pension system during the remainder of his term
In January 2003 the new Lula government stepped into office and immediately
announced that pensions would be the first major reform it would address. Lula hoped to
make the most of his high level of popularity and the momentum from his electoral victory
to tackle pension reform, taking advantage of the sense that a left wing government would

Alston
- 29 have greater legitimacy to impose the kinds of fiscal changes that are necessary
(Abranches, 2003:62). Interest groups immediately mobilized to pressure against losing
their so-called “acquired rights.” Federal judges, civil servants and the military were quick
to express their opposition to losing their privileges. By the end of 2003 the government
had succeeded in passing pension reform through Congress.25

Evidence on the Strategic use of Individual Budget Amendments
In this section we analyze the relationship between the voting behavior of the
Deputies and the execution of their budget amendments by the President. In Brazil the
Executive first proposes the yearly budget and then it passes through Congress where it can
be amended by legislators. The amendments generally consist of expenditures in the
Congressmen’s district, with the hope of yielding both votes and rents from constituents.26
Following passage of the budget in Congress, the bill goes back to the President who has
discretion over implementation. The process gives the President enormous leverage for
rewards and punishments. The President frequently shelves some amendments on the
grounds that tax receipts are insufficient to cover all expenditures, though in many
instances there appears to be little fiscal merit to his veto.
One of the implications of our model is that there should be a direct link between
the voting behavior of the members of Congress and the execution of their individual
budget amendments. In order to test this implication we focus on one particular instance
when the President had a proposal rejected and a couple of weeks later submitted a new
attenuated proposal that Congress approved. The specific case, already described above,
involved a second round defeat in the House of establishing a minimum age for retirement
of 60 for men and 55 for women (May 6, 1998), and the subsequent approval of a minimum

Alston
- 30 age of 53 for men and 48 for women (May 23, 1998). Our strategy is to regress the
percentage of the total value of each deputy’s amendments that were executed in 1998 on a
series of variables that should affect the President’s decision whether to execute those
amendments. The key explanatory variables will be two dummies: 1) those deputies who
switched their vote from no, against the President’s proposal to yes in favor of the
President’s proposal; and 2) those deputies who switched their vote from yes in favor of the
President’s proposal to no, against the President’s proposal. For pension reform a
supermajority is needed. The first vote tallied 307 in favor, 148 against and 11 abstentions,
missing the 308 approval mark by 1 vote. The second vote tallied 333 – 149 – 3, with 15
switching from no to yes and 9 from yes to no, the balance being explained by abstentions
and absences.27
The other explanatory variables are: (i) Votes - the percentage of times the deputy
voted favorable to the President’s position in the 1995-1998 period; (ii) Exec. Amend. 1997

- the percentage of the total value of individual budget amendments that were executed in
the previous year, 1997; (iii) Position - a dummy that equals 1 if the deputy held a powerful
position within Congress during that year, such as speaker, party leader, committee
president or rapporteur; (iv) N0 Amendments - the number of amendments submitted by the
deputy that year; and (v) Seniority – the number of terms served by the deputy.

Votes should capture the degree to which the President uses the execution of the
budget amendments to reward and punish those who vote for or against his proposals. To
control for the endogeneity of voting behavior we estimated Votes simultaneously using
instruments, including dummies identifying whether the deputy was a member of a party in
the core coalition, on the fringe of the coalition or in the opposition.28

Alston
- 31 -

Exec. Amend. 1997 should capture any persistent capacity to get amendments
executed. For example, a given deputy might have a more capable staff than others, which
can affect her chances of execution. The Position and Seniority variables should capture the
effect of influence and experience, and the N0 Amendments is primarily a control variable
and should measure whether those who propose more amendments have a greater or lesser
likelihood of having amendments executed.
<<Place Table 2 about here>>

<<Place Table 3 about here>>
We present descriptive statistics and results in Tables 1 and 2. Deputies who voted
in accord with the President received more pork in terms of budgetary amendments. A 10
percentage point increase in Votes (.4 of the standard deviation) increased the proportion of
the value of a deputy’s amendments that were executed by almost 3%. Not surprisingly
there appears to be considerable stasis in the reception of pork as indicated by the
coefficient on Exec. Amend. 1997. This may partially explain why the coefficients on

Position and Seniority are not reliably different from zero. Of course this does not rule out
that Position and Seniority have pay-offs other than budget amendment execution. The
coefficient on N0 Amendments is small; an additional amendment leads to an increase of
only 0.42% in the value of total amendments that are executed.29
The results of most importance for our model of exchange of pork for policy are the
coefficients No to Yes and Yes to No. Switching votes from opposition to the President’s
proposal for establishing a minimum age for retirement to support for a minimum age
increases the value of amendments by 11%. Changing votes from yes to no had less of an
impact but was still reasonably large: a 5% decrease in pork. Overall the results are

Alston
- 32 consistent with our expectations and when combined with the qualitative evidence indicate
a strong case in favor of our model of gains from trade between legislators and the
President.
Finally we test result 4 of our model: the President will deliver more benefits to
legislators who are in the coalition but further from his preferences than he will to those
who are closer. To do this we use the index created by Leoni (2000, 2002) as a measure of
the “ideological” position of each legislator and the President.30 This index is the first
dimension of a W-Nominate procedure (Poole and Rosenthal, 1985) which alone typically
explains over 90% of the variation of deputies’ votes in Brazil (Leoni, 2002). It can be
interpreted as the deputies’ position on a left-right spatial dimension. Our test consists of
explaining the value of each deputy’s congressionally approved amendments that the
President chose to execute in the 51nd legislature (1999-2002). For the test we fitted a
polynomial equation using the absolute value of the distance of each deputy to the
President.31 This strategy allows for a non-linear relationship between the distance of each
deputy to the President and the value of patronage received through amendments. Thus we
can see whether the President distributes benefits based on the ideological distance of the
deputy from the President. We are most interested in whether deputies who are slightly
further away receive more than those that are very close and very far. For 1999 and 2000
(Cardoso years) the predicted relationship between executed amendments and distance to
the President exhibited a pattern where the value of amendments first increased and then
decreased as the deputies became more divergent from the President’s preferences, see
figure 5.32 For 2001 and 2002 we found the same relationship but the statistical reliability
was weak.33
<<Place Figure 4 about here>>

Alston
- 33 Though this test is supportive of our model we stress that our statistical test only
controls for the value of amendments as pork whereas the President has several other forms
of patronage to trade, such as posts in government, as well as instruments to punish deviant
behavior. Nevertheless the results suggest that the “prodigal son” effect may hold.
Section 5 – Conclusion
The media in Brazil commonly laments the exchange of pork for policy. Such
complaints ignore the counterfactual: in the absence of exchanging pork for policy the
President would accomplish less of his policy agenda and policies would be either highly
unstable or in gridlock. One could conceive of some other Congressional institution, such
as strong committees, as stabilizing policy. But, because of a differing electoral connections
between votes and policies, Presidential power as the stabilizing factor has the advantage
that the President, more so than members of Congress, should place a higher weight in his
utility function on the national interests of economic growth, income equality, economic
opportunity and price stabilization. The concerns of Congressmen are more likely more
parochial because Congressmen are in less of a position to internalize the gains from
growth enhancing policies whereas they do internalize the benefits from pork. With the
extant Congressional institutions in place, if Congress curtailed the power of the President
we envision even more pork and less prudent developmental policies.
Prior to the new administration of Lula, the institutionally driven exchange model
that we present could not be separated from the administration of Cardoso. Fortunately for
us the new Lula government has behaved remarkably consistent with our model. After 8
years of fierce criticism and opposition to the policies of the Cardoso administration, Lula
in his first year in office has proposed objectives very similar to Cardoso, e.g., pension
reform and more independence for the Central Bank. Though the proposed policies have

Alston
- 34 surprised some analysts and irritated radicals within the Lula’s party, Lula’s agenda is
consistent with the extant incentives derived from the existence of strong Presidential
powers stipulated in the 1988 Constitution of Brazil.

Alston
- 35 -

References
Abranches, Sergio. 2003. “Lula e a Previdência.” Veja, ed. 1785, ano 36 n0 2:62.

Ames, Barry. 1995a. “Electoral Rules, Constituency Pressures, and Pork Barrel: Bases of
Voting in the Brazilian Congress.” Journal of Politics May(57:2): 324-343.

Ames, Barry. 1995b. “Electoral strategy under open-list proportional representation,”

American Journal of Political Science 39(2): 406-433.

Ames, Barry. 2001. The Deadlock of Democracy in Brazil. Ann Arbor, University of
Michigan Press.

Amorim Neto, Otavio. 1994. “Formação de Gabinetes Presidenciais no Brasil: Coalizão

versus Cooptação,” Nova Economia 4(1): 9 - 34.

Amorim Neto, Otavio. 2000. “Brazil: The Costs and Benefits of Coalition Governments,”

Latin American Legislatures. IAD-IDESP. Rio de Janeiro, Working Paper.

Amorim Neto, O., G.W. Cox and M. D. McCubbins (2000), “The Cartel Model in
Comparative Perspective: The Case of Brazil,” APSA, Washington DC.

Associated Press 1999 “Brazil's Congress to Vote on Key Economic Reform Measure.”

Business News, January 20.

Alston
- 36 Carey, John. and Matthew Shugart. 1995. “Incentives to Cultivate a Personal Vote: A Rank
Ordering of Electoral Formulas” Electoral Studies 14: 417-439.

Cox, Gary. W. and Matthew D. McCubbins. 1993. Legislative Leviathan: Party

Government in the House. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Cox, Gary and Matthew McCubbins. 2001. “The Institutional Determinants of Economic
Policy Outcomes” in Haggard and McCubbins Presidents, Parliaments and Policy,
Cambridge University Press.

Dixit, Avinash. 1996 The Making of Economic Policy. A Transaction-Cost Politics

Perspective. The MIT Press.

The Economist (1996) “Brazil. Physiology? Pork.” March 30, Pg. 45.

The Economist (1997) “Inactive Workers, Inactive Congress.” June 5, Pg. 37.

Epstein, David. and Sharyn O’Halloran. 1999. Delegating Powers: A Transaction Cost

Politics Approach to Policy Making Under Separate Powers. Cambridge University Press.

O Estado de S. Paulo. 1996. “FH pede ao Congresso que Acelere Reformas.” April 30.

Alston
- 37 Figueiredo, Argelina C. and Fernando Limongi. 1996. Congresso Nacional: Organização,

Processo Legislativo e Produção Legal. São Paulo, CEBRAP.

Figueiredo, Argelina C. and Fernando Limongi. 2000a. “Presidential Power. Legislative
Organization, and Party Behavior in Brazil.” Comparative Politics January: 151 - 170.

Figueiredo, Argelina C. And Fernando Limongi. 2000b “Executivo e Legislativo na
Formulação e Execução do Orçamento Federal,” II Encontro da Associação Brasileira de
Ciência Política.

Fleischer, David. 1998, “Brazilian Politics: Structures, Process, Elections, Parties and
Political Groups (1985-1995)”, Working paper, The Institute of Brazilian Issues,
Washington, WP95-2.

Gazeta Mercantil 1998ª. “FHC Ameaça Retaliar Infieis.” May 8.

Haggard, Stephan. 1995. The Reform of the State in Latin America. Annual Bank
Conference on Development in Latin America and Caribbean, Rio de Janeiro, World Bank.

Haggard, Stephan and Robert Kaufman. 1992. The Politics of Economic Adjustment:

International Shocks, Distributive Conflicts and the State. Princeton, Princeton University
Press.

Alston
- 38 Haggard, Stephan and Matthew McCubbins. 2001. Presidents, Parliaments and Policy.
New York: Cambridge University Press.

Jenkins, Jeffery A. 1998. "Property Rights and the Emergence of Standing Committee
Dominance in the Nineteenth-Century House." Legislative Studies Quarterly 23:493-519.

Jornal do Brasil. 2001. “Governo Faz Mais Leis que Congresso.” Política, April 7.

Lamounier, Bolivar. 1994a. “Brazil at Impasse.” Journal of Democracy 5(July): 72-87.

Lamounier, Bolivar. 1994b. A Democracia Brasileira de 1985 à Década de 90: A Síndrome

da Paralisia Hiperativa. Governabilidade, Sistema Político e Violência Urbana. J. P. R.
Velloso. Rio de Janeiro, José Olympio Editora.

Leoni, Eduardo L. 2000. Ideologia, Democracia e Comportamento Parlamentar: A

Câmara dos Deputados No Brasil Pós-Constituinte. Master Dissertation. Brasília,
Universidade de Brasília: 91.

Leoni, Eduardo L. 2002. Ideologia, Democracia e Comportamento Parlamentar: a Câmara

dos Deputados (1991-1998). Dados, vol.45, no.3, p.361-386.

Levy, Brian and Pablo T. Spiller. 1994. Regulations, Institutions and Commitment:

Comparative Studies of Telecommunications. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Alston
- 39 Mainwaring, Scott. 1993. “Brazilian Party Underdevelopment in Comparative Perspective.”

Political Science Quarterly 107(4): 677-708.

Mainwaring, Scott. 1999. Rethinking Party Systems in the Third Wave of Democratization:

The Case of Brazil. Stanford, Stanford University Press.

Mainwaring, Scott and Anibal P. Linan. 1997. “Party discipline in the Brazilian
Constitutional Congress” Legislative Studies Quarterly 4: 453-483.

Mainwaring, Scott. and Timothy R. Scully. 1995. Building Democratic Institutions: Party

Systems in Latin America. California, Stanford University Press.

Mainwaring, Scott and Matthew S. Shugart. 1997. Presidentialism and Democracy in Latin

America. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Moe, Terry. 1990b. “Political Institutions: The Neglected Side of the Story” Journal of

Law, Economics and Organization 6: 213-53

Monteiro, J.V. (1997). Economia e Política: Instituições de Estabilização Econômica no

Brasil. Rio de Janeiro, Fundação Getúlio Vargas.

Monteiro, Jorge.V. 2000a. As Regras do Jogo: O Plano Real 1997-2000. Rio de Janeiro,
Fundação Getulio Vargas.

Alston
- 40 Monteiro, Jorge V. 2000b. “Condicionamentos Institucionais das Medidas Provisórias.”

Revista de Administração Publica. Mar./Abr. 34(2):25-44.

The New York Times. 1998. “Brazil's Austerity Plan Clears Important Hurdle on Pension
Cost”, Nov. 6, Section A; Page 11; Column 1.

The New York Times. 1999. “Pressure Builds on Brazil to Reassure Investors.” Dec. 12,
Section A; Page 16; Column 3.

North, Douglass C. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York, Norton.

North, Douglass .C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance.
New York: Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment: The
Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth Century England.” The

Journal of Economic History, 49: 803-832.

Pereira, Carlos. 1999. “What are the Conditions for Presidential Success in the Legislative
Arena: The Brazilian Electoral Connection?” Ph.D dissertation, The New School for Social
Research.

Alston
- 41 Pereira Carlos and Bernardo Mueller. 2002. “Comportamento Estratégico em Coalizões
Presidencialistas: as Relações entre Executivo e Legislativo na Elaboração do Orçamento
Brasileiro”. Dados, Vol. 45, N0 2.

Pereira Carlos and Bernardo Mueller. 2004. “A Theory of Executive Dominance of
Congressional Politics: The Committee System in the Brazilian Chamber of Deputies” The

Journal of Legislative Studies, Vol.10, No.1, Spring 2004, pp.9–49.

Pereira, Carlos and Bernardo Mueller. 2000. “Uma Teoria da Preponderância do Executivo:
O Sistema de Comissões no Legislativo Brasileiro.” Revista Brasileira de Ciências Sociais
15: 45-67.

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 2000. Political Economics. Explaining Economic

Policy. MIT Press.

Persson, Torsten, Gerard Roland and Guido Tabellini. 1997. “Separation of Powers and
Political Accountability” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 1163-1202.

Pesanha, Charles. 1997. “O Decreto-Lei sob o Regime Autoritário Brasileiro” Anais do XXI

Encontro Anual da ANPOCS, Caxambu.

Pires Jr., Jose Antonio M. 2004. “Transferências Voluntárias na Caixa de Edgeworth – Sob
a Égide da Lei de Responsabilidade Fiscal” VIII Prêmio Tesouro Nacional Brasília, ESAF.

Alston
- 42 Poole, Keith and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll

Call Voting. New York, Oxford University Press.

Poole, Keith and Howard Rosenthal. 1985. “A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll Call
Analysis.” American Journal of Political Science 29: 357-384.

Samuels, David. 2002. “Pork Barreling is Not Credit-Claiming or Advertising: Campaign
Finance and the Sources of the Personal Vote in Brazil.” The Journal of Politics 64 (3):
845-863.

Santos, Fabiano. 1997. “Patronagem e Poder de Agenda na Política Brasileira.” Dados
40(3): 465 - 491.

Shepsle, Kenneth A. and Barry R. Weingast. 1981. “Structure-induced Equilibrium and
Legislative Choice.” Public Choice 37: 503-519.

Shugart, Matthew and John Carey. 1992. Presidents and Assemblies: Constitutional Design

and Electoral Dynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Shugart, Matthew and Stephan Haggard. 2001. “Institutions and Public Policy in
Presidential Systems” in Haggard and McCubbins Presidents, Parliaments and Policy,
Cambridge University Press.

Alston
- 43 Snyder Jr., James. 1991. “On Buying Legislatures.” Economics and Politics Vol. 3, No
2:93-109.

Spiller, Pablo T. and Mariano Tommasi. 2003. “The Institutional Foundations of Public
Policy: A Transactions Approach with Application to Argentina” Journal of Law

Economics and Organization, Oct., 19: 281 - 306.

Tsebelis, George. 2002. Veto Players: How Political Institutions Work. Princeton
University Press.

Weingast, Barry R. and William J. Marshall. 1988. “The Industrial Organization of
Congress; or, Why Legislatures, like Firms, are not Organized as Markets” Journal of

Political Economy 96(1): 163.

White, Halbert. 1980. “A heterskedastic consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct
test of heteroskedasticity” Econometrica 48, 817–838.

Alston
- 44 Figures
Figure 1 – Preferences of the President and Parties in the Policy-Patronage Space.
Figure 2 – Gains to Trade in Executive-Legislative Relations
Figure 3 – Patronage for Multiple Parties
Figure 4 – Execution of Individual Budget Amendments

Alston
- 45 Figure 1 – Preferences of the President and Parties in the Policy-Patronage Space
Patronage

K1SQ (⋅)

K 2SQ (⋅)

K 3SQ (⋅)

K 4SQ (⋅)

K 5SQ (⋅)

SQ
Policy

K

*
1

K 2* K 3* K 4*

K 5*

P*

Alston
- 46 Figure 2 – Gains to Trade in Executive-Legislative Relations
Patronage

K1SQ (⋅)

K 2SQ (⋅)
K 5SQ (⋅)
K 3SQ (⋅)

K 4SQ (⋅)

A

Policy SQ

K1SQ ( 0)

K 2SQ ( 0)

K 3SQ ( 0)

U P ( K 3SQ ( 0 ) )

BK SQ ( 0 )K SQ ( 0 ) P
4
5

U P (A)

Alston
- 47 Figure 3 – Patronage for Multiple Parties
K1SQ (⋅)

K 2SQ (⋅)
K 3SQ (⋅)

K 4SQ (⋅)

K 3SQ (⋅) + K 4SQ (⋅)
A
D

C
SQ

K1SQ( 0)

K 2SQ( 0)

K 3SQ( 0)

K 4SQ( 0) E B

U P ( D)

K 5SQ ( 0) P

U P (⋅)

K 5SQ (⋅)

Alston
- 48 Figure 4 – Execution of Individual Budget Amendments

1,000
900
800
600
1999
2000

500
400
300
200
100

Distance from President

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

R$(1000)

700

Alston
- 49 Tables
Table 1 – Chronology of Pension Reform
Date
1993
1995
Mar.1
1995
Mar.16
1995
April
1996
Mar.6
1996
Mar. 21
1996
April 12
1996
Apr.29
1996
May 8
1998
Feb.11
1998
May 6
1998
May 23
1998
Nov.5
1998
Dec.3
1998
Dec.12
1999
Jan. 4
1999
Jan. 14
1999
Jan. 20
1999
Oct. 1
1999
Oct 6.
2000
March
2001 2002

Event
Congress initiates constitutional reforms.
F.H. Cardoso took office on January 1 and sent the pension reform proposal to Congress three
months later.
Pension reform proposal sent to Congress.
Committee of Constitution and Justice approves pension reform proposal.
Pension reform proposal instituting minimum years of contribution to the pension system was
rejected in the House. The vote was 294 in favor 190 against and 8 abstentions (approval of
Constitutional amendments require 308 in favor.)
Pension reform proposal approved in the House after intense use of patronage.
(351 – 139 – 2).
Supreme Court judge accepts injunction by the opposition suspending the legislative
procedures on pension reform.
Cabinet reshuffled.
Extraordinary Ministry for Political Coordination created.
Supreme Court overrules injunction suspending pension reform deliberations.
Constitutional amendment approved in the House setting minimum age to retire at 60 for
men and 55 for women. (345 – 152 - 3) Previously there was no minimum age only the
requirement of having worked for 35 years for men and 30 for women.
Constitutional amendment establishing minimum age for retiring was rejected in its second
voting in the House. (307 – 148 – 11).
Minimum retirement age of 53 for men and 48 for women (for those already in the social
security system) approved in the House.
House approves minimum retirement ages of 53 for men and 48 for women in its second
passage through the House. (346 – 131 – 3)
A ceiling for public sector pensions was allowed.
Intense negotiations with deputies proceeded the vote.
House rejects Constitutional amendment increasing contributions of active civil servants from
11% to 20%, and of retired civil servants who receive above R$1,200 from 0% to 11%. (187 –
209 – 7; government need 200 votes to approve provisional decree.) Loss estimated at US$2.2
billion per year.
House approves a bill to increase pension contributions from charities, churches, hospitals,
schools and small businesses.
Ministerial reform is undertaken to help approve fiscal adjustment plan.
Real is allowed to float suffers large devaluation.
House approves law that increases contributions by active and retired civil servants. (335 –
147 – 4). Once again patronage was intensely negotiated.
The Supreme Court declares unconstitutional the previous law raising the contributions of
active and retired civil servants.
House approves a law that changes how private pensions are calculated. (301 – 157; simple
majority required)
Supreme Court ruled that law altering private pension calculations is constitutional.
Proposal to amend the Constitution so as to overcome the Supreme Court ruling against
increasing contributions of active and retired civil servants is stalled in Congress.

Alston
- 50 2003

Lula government takes office places pension reform at the top of the agenda. The reform that
is approved in this year is very similar to that which had been proposed by FHC

Alston
- 51 -

Table 2: Descriptive statistics
Variable
Exec. Amend.
1998
Votes
Exec. Amend.
1997
Position
N0 Amend.
Seniority
No to Yes
Yes to No

Mean
20.534

Stand. Dev.
21.054

Min
0.00

Max
98.450

0.766
52.019

0.258
33.128

0.048
0.00

1.00
100.00

0.310
3.149
1.936
0.248
0.015

0.463
4.009
1.289
0.155
0.121

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
27.00
8.00
1.00
1.00

Alston
- 52 -

Table 3: The Determinants of Cardoso’s Execution of Amendments of Deputies, 1998

Constant
Votes
Exec. Amen. 1997
Position
N0 Amendments
Seniority
No to Yes
Yes to No
R2
N

Dep. Var.: Executed
Amendments 1998
-4.822
(-1.17)
27.341 ***
(5.54)
0.106 ***
(3.15)
-0.458
(-0.22)
0.428 *
(1.61)
-0.189
(-0.22)
11.373 *
(1.78)
-5.479 *
(-1.63)
0.08
426

t-stat. in parenthesis. Significance: ***1%, **5%, *10%.
Two-stage least squares estimation.
Covariance matrix is White’s robust, heteroscedasticity
corrected matrix (White 1980).

Alston
- 53 Endnotes
€

For comments, we thank James Bang, William Bernhard, Aécio Cunha, David Fleischer,

Mark Kohl, Fernando Limongi, Marcus Melo, Kara Norlin, Carlos Pereira, David Samuels,
Emilson Silva, Douglass Stinnet, two anonymous reviewers the editor of the journal and
participants at the following conferences and seminars: Tulane University, University of
Paris X, “Neoliberalism and Its Consequences,” ANPEC 2001 and LACEA 2001. We
thank the Hewlett Foundation and CNPq for financial support.
1

The College of Leaders is composed of the President of the House, the leaders of all

parties, and a non-voting deputy appointed by the President. It arose informally during the
drafting of the 1988 Constitution in order to expedite deliberations. Party leaders met prior
to the constitutional sessions to negotiate the proposals that would be taken to the floor.
The College seemed to suit the preferences of the party leaders and it became
institutionalized in the House’s legislative regiment in 1989 (Figueiredo and Limongi 1996:
31-36). The College of Leaders has close control of the legislative agenda deciding which
bills are taken to the floor. One of its main instruments for this purpose is the use of
urgency petitions (discharge petition), which take a bill from a committee and put it in the
next day’s order of business to be voted on the floor. Decisions within the College of
Leaders are taken by majority vote weighted by the proportion of deputies in each party, so
that the majority coalition is able to control the decision making process.
2

For descriptions and analysis of the organization of the Brazilian Congress see:

Figueiredo and Limongi (1996, 2000a), Pereira and Mueller (2000), Pereira (1999).
3

Issuing provisional decrees may be a low cost way of establishing policy and should not

be interpreted as absolute power by the President. Given the veto power of Congress, the

Alston
- 54 President must be establishing decrees that make a majority of members of Congress better
off.
4

In 2002 Congress changed the rules governing the use of decree power were changed,

diminishing the president’s discretion. Nevertheless provisional decrees are still a key
policy instrument for the executive.
5

The provisional decrees are not necessarily in areas where the President has exclusive

rights of initiation.
6

Figueiredo and Limongi (2000b) argue that the members of the Combined Budget

Committee are part of the coalition within Congress that aligns itself to the President.
7

See Amorim Neto (1994 and 2000) for analysis of cabinet appointments in Brazil.

8

See Figueiredo and Limongi (1996 and 2000a) for descriptive statistics. Some of the

proposals may be strategically watered down or withheld by the president as suggested by
Ames (2001). Nevertheless the record for the Brazilian presidents since 1988 and for
Fernando Henrique Cardoso in particular are still impressive. The model presented in the
next section explicitly shows how and when these trade-offs occur.
9

This thesis is defended for example by Monteiro (1997) and Pessanha (1997), cited in

Amorim Neto (2000: pg.8) and by Monteiro (2000a,b).
10

This is a controversial issue among students of Brazilian politics. The existence of party

discipline within Congress has been strongly argued by Figueiredo and Limongi (1996,
2000a, pg.162). Examining the data for the period of 1989-98 they show that when a party
in the coalition supported the President, its individual members generally did too, and when
the party did not support the President on an issue, most members followed the party. The
lack of party discipline on the other hand has been argued by Ames (1995a,b, 2001),
Mainwaring (1993, 1999), Mainwaring and Shugart (1997) and Lamounier (1994a,b).

Alston
- 55 11

Leoni (2000 and 2002), applied the W-NOMINATE procedure (Poole and Rosenthal

1997) to the Brazilian Chamber of Deputies using roll call data from 1988 to 1998. His
results show that the first spatial dimension explains over 90% of the deputies’ individual
votes for the 50th legislature (F.H. Cardoso, 1995-98). This justifies the use of a single
dimensional policy issue in the model presented here. Also, the results show a clear spatial
divide between the government’s coalition (PMDB, PSDB, PPB, PTB and PFL) and the
opposition. Considering the first dimension the spatial location of the medians of the major
parties in the 50th legislature are as follows (range from –1 to1):
PT -0.826, PDT -0.514, PMDB 0.435, PSDB 0.457, PPB 0.518, PTB 0.546, PFL 0.682.
12

We thank an anonymous referee for suggestions on modifications to our original model.

13

The empirical section of this paper will use pension reform to test our model and

retirement age was one of the major policy concerns of Cardoso and now Lula. Both
Presidents preferred a higher minimum age than the median of each of the parties.
14

Note that this is different from K iSQ (⋅) .

15

If there were a coordinating mechanism within the coalition that would enable them to

credibly commit to a veto even when the President’s offer was in the interest of some
members then the coalition would be a position to extract the lion’s share of the gains from
trade.
16

There may also be a public opinion component to this cost given that the media tends to

denounce the use of patronage as if it were less than legitimate.
17

Clearly this creates an incentive for coalition members to falsify their preferences so as to

obtain more patronage and a disincentive for the like-minded parties to remain loyal.
Because our model is a one-shot game it cannot be used to address this issue, which is

Alston
- 56 inherently dynamic. However, we note once again that these perverse incentives are partly
checked by the recurring nature of the relationship as well as (when this is the case) by the
existence of a supramajority. Also, in a congressional setting it is not easy for a legislator to
falsify his/her preferences as their history, past behavior, constituency links etc. are
constantly scrutinized and are consequently well known by other players.
18

We thank an anonymous referee for bringing Synder’s article to our attention.

19

Other authors that have stressed the importance of patronage in executive-legislative

relations in Brazil include Ames (1995a,b), Amorim Neto (1994, 2000), Figueiredo and
Limongi (1996), Pereira (1999), Santos (1997).
20

Although the major objective of reforming the pension system should be to avoid the

bankruptcy of the social security system and to establish a system that is fair and feasible, it
is probable that the President may be primarily concerned with reducing the large deficits
generated by the system, which have important short term consequences on the economy’s
performance for which the president is seen as directly responsible by voters.
21

David Fleischer cited in Associated Press (1999).

22

The creation of the Special Ministry for Political Coordination is consistent with Result 2

from our model: changes that reduce the cost of transacting between the Executive and the
coalition, lead to greater gains from trade and policy outcomes more favorable to the
Executive. The purpose of the new ministry was to facilitate transactions and thereby
prevent future defeats in Congress.
23

Below we examine the impact of the votes on pension reform May 6 and May 23 of 1998

on the President’s approval of budgetary amendments.
24

By this time there was a widespread belief that the Brazilian Real was substantially

overvalued.

Alston
- 57 25

It is noteworthy that a left-wing government that strongly opposed the reform proposed

by its successor, adopted basically the same proposal and pursued it in Congress using the
same methods based on distribution of patronage, which it customarily criticized as
immoral and illegitimate. This behavior is consistent with our framework of executivelegislative relations in Brazil, as it postulates that the actors’ behavior is determined by
political institutions. Because these institutions did not change it is reassuring that political
behavior also remained the same.
26

Samuels (2002) argues that the relationship between pork and re-election is indirect. In

return for pork, e.g. a construction contract, a construction company will give money for
financing a campaign which in turn improves the probability of a Congressmen of being reelected.
27

Considering abstentions and absences as strategic did not significantly alter our results.

28

Our determination of which instruments to use was based on the assumption that being a

member of the coalition or not affects how a deputy votes, which in turn affects the
execution of the deputy’s amendments.
29

It could be argued that the choice of how many amendments to submit is affected by the

deputy’s expectation of having them approved and executed, in which case this variable is
endogenous. Treating N0 Amendments as endogenous reduced the size and significance of
the coefficient by did not affect the other results.
30

See footnote 12. We thank Eduardo Leoni for calculating the index for the 51st legislature

for us.
31

For this period we did not have the index for the President so we used instead the index

of the government’s leader in the House (Arnaldo Madeira), which was 0.74 on a scale

Alston
- 58 from –1 to 1. This would put the President in the 25th rightmost spot amongst
approximately 600 deputies.
32

The estimated relationships are:

1999 Value Executed = 722,453.14 + 412,215.91 Distance – 464,762.25 Distance2
(5.69)

(2.44)

(-4.64)

R2 = 0.31
2000 Value Executed = 854,654.89 + 566,766.21 Dist. – 1,252,438.89 Dist.2 + 447,512.19 Dist.3

(8.14)

(2.00)

(-2.92)

(2.52)

R2=0.35
Ordinary least squares. t-stats in parenthesis. Includes regional dummies and controls for
the number of amendments proposed by each deputy. Value is measured in 1,000 Reais,
data from Pires Jr. (2004).

33

This could be due to the use of other Presidential powers, e.g. the use of patronage. We

did find very similar results for the earlier 50st legislature. We chose not to report those
results because instead of value of amendments we only have data on the proportion of the
value of approved amendments that were appropriated.

