NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY IN THE LARGE OPEN ECONOMY

Michael

R. Darby

Working Paper No. 1121

NATIONAL BUREAU CF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

May 1983

The research reported here is *rt of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity in the World
Econonr. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1127
May 1983

Monetary Policy in the Large Open Economy

ABSTRACT

This paper discusses recent evidence on the imperfect international
substitutability of goods and assets and the implications for conduct of

monetary policy in a major

for

industrial country. A simple model is developed

analysis of the simultaneous determination of money growth and the

balance of payments under pegged exchange rates. Parallels are drawn to
the importance of expected depreciation in determination of floating

exchange rates. An assessment is made of the extent to which a central
bank can simultaneously pursue both exchange rate and money supply goals

through sterilized intervention. The paper concludes with the role of
saving rate differences in determining nonzero equilibrium trade balances.

Michael R. Darby
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California 90024

(213) 825—3343

1

For the Bank of Japan's Centenary
Conference on "Monetary Policy in Our
Time," Tokyo, Japan, June 22—24, 1983
D.3: April 16, 1983

MONETARY POLICY IN THE LARGE OPEN ECONOMY
Michael R. Darby*
University of California, Los Angeles
National Bureau of Economic Research

Economists are fond of downward sloping demand curves and upward sloping
supply curves except when describing a nation's international economic

relations. In that case these curves are generally assumed to be either
horizontal or vertical as required to describe a perfectly open or perfectly

closed economy. The reason for this exceptional behavior on the part of
economists is easy to see: Simple models can be used in either extreme case,
but the analysis becomes rather complex in the intermediate case in which

economies are open but far from perfectly so.' This paper will first report
on recent empirical research that rather conclusively rejects either extreme

model for the major (noncommunist) industrial nations. The implications of
imperfect openness for their central banks' monetary policies will then be

*The author acknowledges helpful comments from Sebastian Edwards, Maxwell
Fry, James Lothian, Maurice Obstfeld, and members of the UCLA Workshop in
Monetary Economics. The research reported here was supported partially by the
National Science Foundation and is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
'Microeconomists are accustomed to choosing either the competitive or
monopolistic model according to the problem at hand; they thus generally avoid
the numbing complexity and inconclusiveness of the various oligopolistic
models. Unfortunately, such a choice between the extren macroeconomic models
would preclude — as I attempt to demonstrate below — serious analysis of
monetary policy in the major industrial countries. Fortunately, the
complexity of the intermediate model appears less severe than in the case of
oligopoly.

2

analyzed. Finally the role of capital flows in determining the long—run
equilibrium values of the balance of trade and real exchange rate Is
discussed.

3

I. Goods and Assets as Imperfect Substitutes Internationally

Either or both of two major assumptions have been used to characterize

perfectly open economies: goods are perfect substitutes internationally or
securities are perfect substitutes internationally. This section reports on
recent empirical work which decisively rejects both hypotheses. Most of the
work summarized here was done as part of the NBER's International Transmission
Project and will be reported by my collaborators and self in Darby, Lothian,
Gandolfi, Schwartz, and Stockman (1983).

Goods Substitution
The "global monetarists" like Laffer (1975) argued that internationally
traded goods are, for all practical purposes, perfect substitutes across

borders with prices rigidly linked by arbitrage.2 Factor competition between
tradable and nontradable goods was used to extend this arbitrage relation to
the "law of one price level" which held that purchasing power parity

continuously attains — not just in the long—run as in the Huuiean
tradition.3 Previous empirical research, such as Isard (1977), Kravis and
Lipsey (1977, 1978),. and Richardson (1978), has concluded that goods are
substitutable internationally, but far from perfectly so.

2The term in quotation marks was introduced in Whitman's (1975) survey
article. In the relevant sense, price arbitrage requires that domestic prices
be strictly proportional (not necessarily equal) to the exchange rate
converted foreign prices. This implicitly assumes proportional shipping costs
and tariffs and that each good is always shipped in the same direction.

3Fausten (1979) persuasively distinguished the Humean tradition from the
law of one price level.

4

The International Transmission Project results support that conclusion.
In a medium—scale simultaneous equation model of Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the United States
estimated for 1957—1976, the relative—price effects on the balance of trade
implicit in export and import equations are small in the initial quarter

although they do increase over time.4 In bivariate Granger causality tests
between domestic and foreign inflation for the same eight countries, lagged

foreign inflation was generally insignificant. Furthermore, there was no
evidence that price changes led money changes in nonreserve countries under
pegged exchange rates as suggested by analyses based on the law of one price

level.5 Only weak and far from universal foreign—price effects were found in
reduced—form price equations estimated for the same eight countries.6 Thus
our results confirm the previous conclusion: Goods are imperfect substitutes
internationally.

Asset Substitution
The central bank's monetary policy may affect substantially and
immediately the balance of payments through asset flows even if the balance of

trade initially responds only weakly. Indeed in view of the previous
empirical rejection of perfect good substitution, perfect asset Bubstitution

4Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983, Chapters 5 and 6 by Darby and Stockmart).

5Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983, Chapter 4 by Cassese and Lothian). The
tests were run for periods ending 1971, 1973, and 1976.
6Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983, Chapter 14 by Gandolfi and Lothian).

5

has become the usual defining characteristic of a perfectly open economy.7 In
this context, perfect asset substitution means that the domestic interest rate
is equal to the foreign interest rate minus the expected appreciation (per
annum) of the domestic currency over the term to maturity of the securities.
In contrast, imperfect asset substitutability implies that there is a risk
premium between the two interest rates which varies with the relative stocks
of domestic and foreign assets and which hence responds to international

capital flows. Thus, lower domestic interest rates could induce finite
capital outflows which raise the risk premium on foreign assets enough that no
further flows are induced by the yields on domestic securities which are lower
than the expected yields on foreign securities.8
The International Transmission Project approached this question in a

number of ways. Cassese and Lothian found that lagged as well as current
American interest rates had significant effects on the other seven countries'
interest rates during the pegged period; indeed generally the lagged effects
were more important quantitatively in contradiction to perfect short—run asset

substitution.9 In the structural model the estimated interest—rate effects on
capital flows were small; simulations confirmed that monetary policy changes

7Asset substitution is used here to refer to various national interest—
bearing securities; there is little if any evidence for the large industrial
nations of direct substitution in demand of the national moneys ("currency
substitution"). See also Cuddington (1983).
8lmperfect asset substitution results in the portfolio—balance models
pioneered by Branson (1968, 1970) and discussed at length below.

9Darby, Lothian, et al (1983, Chapter 4 by Cassese and Lothian).

6

did not induce very large short—run balance of payments effects under
pegged
exchange rates.'°
An indirect approach provided

strong evidence against perfect asset

substitution for the seven nonreserve countries

under pegged exchange rates.

As demonstrated in Section II below, this condition is sufficient to render
their domestic monetary policy impotent under pegged exchange rates. It
was
shown that domestic policy goals were in fact significant determinants of
these countries' money supply growth.11
of a shift in the money supply reaction

Daniel Laskar estimated the fraction
function which would be reflected in

the domestic money supply given the induced capital flows and the

sterilization behavior of the central bank. For all seven nonreserve
countries under pegged exchange rates this fraction
but did not significantly differ from i.12

significantly exceeded 0

Thus the actual exercise of short—

run monetary control during the Bretton Woods era is inconsistent with the
usefulness of the perfect asset substitution hypothesis.
Moreover, the International Transmission Project's

strong results are

consistent with the best recent empirical work reported in the literature.
Geweke and Feige (1979), Hansen and Hodrick (1980, 1982), Bilson (1981), and
Cumby and Obstfeld (1981, 1983), for example, all reject the hypothesis that
the forward exchange rate is an unbiased predictor of the future spot rate as

'°Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983, Chapters 5 and 6 by Darby and Stockman,
Chapter 7 by Darby).

"Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983, Chapter 10 by Darby).
12Darby, Lothian, et al. (Chapter 11 by Laskar).

7

it would be under perfect asset substitution.'3 Dooley and Isard (1979) and
Frankel (1982) have in contrast reported an inability to relate risk premiums
to outstanding bond supplies, but these results may well be explained by the

rather low power of their tests.'4 Furthermore, these tests all examine the
floating period in which assets should be relatively better substitutes than

under pegged rates when capital controls — and the risk of their imposition

—

were more significant factors and international financial markets were less

well developed. The new evidence in Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983) appears
virtually to eliminate perfect asset substitution as a viable hypothesis.

'3Covered interest arbitrage imposes the condition that the domestic and
foreign interest rates will differ only by the discount or premium implicit in
the forward rate. Under imperfect asset substitution, the forward rate will
differ from the expected future spot rate by a risk premium that varies as
capital flows change outstanding holdings of bonds. This risk premium is
normally related to the role of exchange rate risk in the modern theory of
finance (Solnik 1973), but Dooley and Isard (1980) argue that political risk
of capital controls varies with the stock of outstanding debt. This factor
may well be the ire important.
'4Michael Melvin in Chapter 13 of Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983) was
rather more successful in applying Solnik's (1973) international asset pricing
model to explaining international capital flows.

8

II. Independent Monetary Policy under Pegged Exchange Rates

The fact that for large industrial countries such as Japan or Germany
neither goods nor assets are perfect substitutes internationally implies that

changes in the central bank's reserves will permit it —

discussed below —

to

within

limits

pursue simultaneously monetary and exchange—rate

goals. Indeed, even under pegged exchange rates independent monetary policy
is, to an extent, feasible in the short run. Although the floating—rate
regime is of most interest currently, it is helpful to first consider the
simpler case of pegged exchange rates.'5

In Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983, Chapter 10), I propose a simple
graphical device for analyzing the simultaneous determination of the balance
of payments and nominal money supply in a large, imperfectly open economy

maintaining a pegged exchange rate. The model combines the central bank's
reaction function with the semi—reduced form equation describing the economic
environment within which the bank operates.

The central bank's reaction function provides a formal statement of the

behavior of the monetary authorities working through the banking system. It
may be written compactly as

(1)

B

logM=a+X+u

'5it could well be argued that a number of major European nations are de
facto pursuing pegged exchange rates with the German mark which in turn floats
relative to the U.S. dollar, the yen, and other major currencies. The ndel
would apply directly to these countries.

9

where M is the nominal money supply, B/H is the current period balance of
payments surplus divided (or scaled) by nominal base (high—powered) money, X
is a vector of all other variables which systematically affect the central

bank's behavior, and u is a random disturbance. Note particularly that lagged
values of B/H or scaled reserves may appear in X. Here we are concerned with
monetary independence within the short period, but the short—period curves may

well shift in the next period in response to what happens this period. The
parameter cx measures the extent to which the central bank sterilizes reserve

flows within the period: If a is 1, there is no sterilization while if a is 0

sterilization is complete.16 In other words, a represents the fraction of
the current balance of payments which the central bank allows to be reflected
in base money. 17

Although a complete structural model of the economy will not be produced

here,18 it is useful to define parity money growth (log M) as that change

16lndependent estimates reported in Chapters 6 and 11 of Darby, Lothian,
et al. (1983) places a between 0 and 0.2 or 0.3 for all seven nonreserve
countries; only for Germany and perhaps Japan and the Netherlands
does a significantly exceed 0 for quarterly observations. Generally lagged
adjustments are found to be substantial, however. Examples of other authors
who report evidence of substantial short—run sterilization are Herring and
Marston (1977), Hilliard (1979), Connolly and Taylor (1979), and Obstfeld
(1980, 1982b). Laney and Willett (1982) present a tabular survey of estimated
sterilization coefficients reported through 1980.

7Some authors prefer to cast the central bank's reaction function in
terms of the scaled change in domestic credit:

(a1) +

+ u

However, in the presence of even partial sterilization (a<l) domestic credit
has no substantive role in either theoretical or empirical analysis and is
accordingly dropped. Its computation is straightforward for the interested
reader. Note that if a = 1, scaled growth in domestic credit is X ÷ u.
18See, however, Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983, Chapters 5 and 6) for
Stockman's and my attempt to do so.

10

consistent with substituting in the money demand equation the exchange—rate
converted foreign price level and foreign interest rate:19

(2)

(t1og M) = Z6 + c

Money growth faster than (ilog M) will be associated with domestic interest
rates lower and prices higher than their international parity values. Lower
interest rates will induce capital outflows while higher prices will reduce

the trade balance; thus money growth in excess of (Alog H) will reduce the

balance of payments surplus. Formally, we can write the semi—reduced form for
the scaled balance of payments as

(3)

where S is a vector of all other factors affecting the balance of payments
such as those contained in the trade supply and demand equations.

Specification of S is not of concern for the current analysis. Our primary
concern is the function e which determines the derivative of the scaled
balance of payments with respect to money supply growth.

19A minor complication arises if the nominal money supply has a
contemporaneous effect on real income. A considerable complication of the
analysis arises if we consider the following (second—order) effect which
arises when assets are imperfect substitutes: In that case a change in
central bank reserve holdings moves the equilibrium domestic interest rate
relative to the foreign interest rate. Then monetary policy could affect the
money stock and output without affecting prices. This point, which is due to
Maurice Obstfeld, suggests a way in which monetary policy would not be
entirely impotent (given imperfect asset substitution) even if goods were
perfect substitues. I assume here that the money demand effects of the
balance of payments through both the interest rate and output channels are
negligible in the short period being analyzed.

11

The scaled balance of payments is, by the accounting identities, the
difference between the scaled trade balance CT/H) and the scaled net private
capital outflows (C/H):2°

B_T C
HH
H
Scaled net private capital outflows will be a function of the current covered
interest differential (adjusted for expected exchange rate changes) and other
variables which may be taken as given for the current period:21

(5)

=f(R_p_RF)

where p is the expected depreciation of the exchange rate (p < 0 implies an

expected appreciation), R is the given foreign interest rate, and so ft is

negative. We find e' by differentiating equation (4):

20The variable C/H is here defined as minus the net cash flow from
international investment —— that is, as net foreign investment less net
securities income. However, we neglect within the short period the second
order effect oflower domestic interest rates increasing net securities income
and hence lowering C/H; portfolio adjustments are assumed to overwhelm this
effect.
21Among these other variables is, of course, the lagged covered interest
differential since changes in the differential will cause portfolio revisions
and hence net capital flows. These other variables are predetermined within
the period and so Implicit in the function f( ). As discussed in footnote 19,
the balance of payments will have a direct effect on the partiy value of the
domestic interest rate under imperfect asset substitution so that we might
prefer C/H = f(R+y[B/H]—p—R ). However, this nrely requires substitution of
dp/d(B/H) in equation (7). Since either term is
E(dp/d(B/H)) —
definitely negative, none of the qualitative results are affected whether we
think of the balance—of—payments effect on domestic interest rates as
reflecting only an expected depreciation factor or also a portfolio—balance
factor.

yl for

12

e' -

(6)

d (B/H)
d CT/H) —
d 1,log M d L.log M

1

=

(7)

The multiplier 11(1 —

'

d log M

d (-9y)

states

+ t

dp

d (B/H)

d (B7 d Llog N

dR

(d CT/H) —

dp
d (B/H)

—

dR
d tlog M

d E,1og M

that if the expected depreciation p

responds to the size of the balance of payments (as an indicator of the
probability and size of a revaluation), then the direct trade and capital flow

effects will be reinforced by induced "speculative" capital flows.22 These
induced speculative capital flows will be overwhelming unless

'

(8)

d (B/H) <

Thus expected depreciation, which plays such an important role in recent
analyses of floating exchange rates, is potentially important under pegged
exchange rates also.

Solving equation (3) for money growth yields

(9)

where

Llog M = 4(. — SX) + Z + c

is the inverse of the function •23 That is, increases in the balance

22Given the (predetermined) lagged value of scaled reserves, B/H tells us
the value of current scaled reserves which Bilson (1979) and Harberger and
Edwards (1982) argue is an important indicator of the probability of
devaluation. Bilson also proposes a monetary indicator which can be
interpreted as the integral of log N — Zô —
this is subsumed in the total
derivative dp/d(B/H).
231f goods are perfect substitutes internationally (and
[d log P/d(log H)] > 0) or if assets are (and Ed log R/d(Alog M)J < 0) or
both, then e would reduce to a constant coefficient — so that
would be the
constant 0 and 1og M
Z5 + e which is the standard "monetary approach"
result.

13

of payments relative to its parity value SX are associated with decreases in
morley growth relative to its parity value. Figure 1 plots equations (1) and
(9) on the same graph to illustrate the simultaneous determination of

equilibrium money growth (t,log )e and the balance of payments (/H)eq• The
equation (1) line would be vertical if the central bank completely sterilized
the contemporaneous balance of payments; its positive slope here indicates

partial sterilization is practiced. The (9) line would be vertical If
condition (8) was not met or under perfect international substitutability of
goods or assets;24 the line is drawn here as negatively sloping in the

relevant region.25 Unless the two lines happened to coincide, there would be
no equilibrium if both lines were vertical. The intersection of the (1) and
(9) lines gives the short—period equilibrium values of the scaled balance of
payments and money growth.26
Suppose that economic conditions characterized by X1 include higher
domestic unemployment than those in X0 and that this increases the money
growth desired by the central bank for any given value of the balance of

payments (X1 > X0). As illustrated in Figure 2, this shift in domestic
policy goals induces an increase in money growth and decrease in the balance

of payments. The more open is the economy, the steeper will be the downward
sloping line which represents the central bank's payments—balance/money—growth
tradeoff, and the greater will be the balance of payments effect and the

24See note 23 above.

25The multiplier of equation (7) is positive with condition (8) holding
> [f'dR/d(ilog M)] > 0 under
imperfect substitution. Therefore - < 8' < 0 which implies — < 4' < 0.

while — < [d(T/H)/d(log N)] < 0 and

261f this also corresponds to a long—period equilibrium, it should be
along a line from the origin with slope less than 1. In that case money
growth derives from growth in both reserves and domestic credit.

14

FIGURE 1
Simultaneous Determination of Balance of Payments and Nominal Money
under Pegged Exchange Rates

+z+
loM=4_SX)
lB

B

(B \ eq

\HJ

Llog M
(tlog M)

i1og H = a

B

+ X + u

15

FIGURE 2
Effect of Shift in Domestic Policy Goals

B
Llog N =

(B

— sx)

+Z + 6

ii.

(B/H) eq
(B/H) eq

L1og M

(i1og M)

(1og )e

txlog M =

tdog M =

a

ft

a

ft

+

+ x0 +

+ u
u

16

lesser the money growth effect of any given shift in the central bank's
reaction function. 27

The graphical analysis did not take account of the possibility that both
the probability and the size of a devaluation may increase with the absolute
value of B/H or its deviation from its parity value SX.

If this is so

dp/d(B/H) will approach the critical value 1/f' for large absolute values of

B/H and therefore the tradeoff will worsen as in Figure 3•28 This
possibility, as well as the implied effects on future tradeoffs, would limit
the range within which the central bank would choose to operate. The size of
this range remains unknown, but the evidence in Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983)

suggests that a ten percent deviation of the actual from the parity level of
nominal money is near the limit of monetary independence for large open

economies which maintain a pegged exchange rate. Furthermore, this deviation
cannot be maintained Indefinitely because of the cumulative effect on reserves
of continuing large balance—of—payments deficits or surpluses.

Ultimately

either monetary policy or the exchange—rate peg must be adjusted.

27However, in choosing a and p the central bank is aware of the
(expected) tradeoff which it faces, so generally alternatively shaped
tradeoffs would induce alternative reaction functions. Lucas's (1976)
critique implies that the shape of the tradeoff surface may also depend upon
the central bank's choice of a and p. Furthermore, a government pursuing a
nationalistic monetary policy may offset the balance—of—payments effects of
the policy by changes in, say, commercial policy which affect SX so as to
shift the (9) line upwards.
28Thjs analysis provides a rather simpler explanation of when balance—of—
payments crises occur than that suggested by Krugman (1979). As the central
bank moves money growth further from the parity value, the stability condition
(8) is finally violated and speculative capital flows become overwhelming. In
the medium scale model reported in Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983), dp/d(B/H)
does increase In absolute value with t(B/H)I, but the stability condition
appears to hold except at the time of actual balance—of—payments crises.

17

FIGURE 3
Simultaneous Determination of Balance of Payments and Money Where
Potentially Unstable Speculation Limits Monetary Control

B

AloM=(_SX) +z+e

if

log M =

+ X + u

(B eq
\HJ

L1og M

18

III. Monetary Policy, Floating Exchange Rates, and the Trade Balance

The theoretical and empirical analysis of the effects of monetary policy
under floating exchange rates has not progressed to the point that neat

summary diagrams can be produced to illustrate major results. Indeed we seem
to know disappointingly little despite the expenditure of much talent and
effort. If this section seems maddeningly tentative to the policyinaker, it
must be recalled that false knowledge is far more dangerous than an awareness
of ignorance.

Broadly speaking, economists' prior expectations of the results of

widespread floating among major currencies have been confirmed in two major
respects, but economists have been surprised in one important aspect.

Generally economists were correct in their expectations of long—run neutrality
and enhanced monetary independence but erred in predictions that exchange
rates would gradually move in reflection of relative inflation rates.
The long—run neutrality of the economy with respect to monetary policy is

perhaps our most secure result: That is, an increase in the level of money

will ——

in

the long run and with other things equal —— be reflected in an

equal increase in prices and the nominal exchange rate with no effect on real

output or the real exchange rate.29 Superneutrality is rather less

secure:3° First, as in any closed economy, higher money growth and hence

29The nominal exchange rate is measured as domestic currency units per
unit of foreign currency. The real exchange rate (also known as the
purchasing power ratio) is the nominal exchange rate times the ratio of the
foreign to the domestic price level.
30Superneutrality implies that the real variables in the economy (e.g.,
real output and the real exchange rate) are unaffected in long—run equilibrium
by changes in the trend growth rate of nominal money.

19

inflation may shift the aggregate production function downward, increase the
investment—income ratio, and decrease labor input;31 real output, the real
interest rate, and the real exchange rate may be changed in either direction
depending upon the relative importance of the various effects and upon

parameters describing the economy. Furthermore, if increased money growth is
accomplished through increased purchases of foreign reserves this will tend to
depreciate the real exchange rate.32
My colleague James Lothian (1983) has recently made some calculations

which demonstrate both the strength of the neutrality results and the relative

unimportance of any deviations from superneutrality. In this work he analyzed
for various variables the differences between their average growth rates for

1956—1973 and 1974—1980. Having obtained data on these "growth shifts" for
twenty OECD countries, Lothian showed that the growth shift in prices matched

that in money while there was essentially no correlation between growth shifts

31The aggregate production function shifts are discussed in the
traditional literature on the costs of inflation. Tobin (1965) inItiated
consideration of possible capital deepening, and Friedman (1977) introduced
the possibility that higher unemployment is caused by higher inflation rates.
32The argument is that increased government flow demand for foreign
securities will increase equilibrium net exports which can only be
accomplished (under imperfect long—run goods substitutability) at a higher
real exchange rate. Recent discussions of central—bank demand for foreign
reserves under floating exchange rates include Hailer and Khan (1978) and von
Furstenberg (1982). However, Obstfeld's (1982a) results would imply here that
equilibrium net exports would not increase if individuals viewed the
government's holdings of foreign securities as equivalent to their own. A
full steady—state analysis requires consideration of the service—account
effects of the government purchases (which would ultimately reduce net
exports) discussed by Obstfeld (1981). Further, long—run price elasticities
may be much larger than the short—run elasticities so that long—run perfect
goods substitutability may be a close approximation to the truth.

20

in output and money growth shifts. Figures 4 and 5 illustrate these striking
results.33 These results demonstrate that any shifts in levels of y and P due
to failure of superneutrality are negligible (when averaged over seven years)
in comparison to either random fluctuations in the growth rate of real output
or to the changes in the growth of prices induced by the growth shift in

money. Similarly, Lothian finds that the growth shifts in either relative
inflation or relative money growth have an effect on the growth shift in the

exchange rate which differs insignificantly from one. Having thus noted that
neutrality and even superneutrality hold to an acceptable degree of
approximation, we can concentrate on the independence of monetary policy and
the reasons why its exercise might have a short—run impact on real output and
the real exchange rate even in the absence of any long—run effects.
Although frequently reacting in the same way to international events,
those central banks which have not attempted to maintain pegs with other
currencies after the breakdown of the Bretton—Woods system have certainly

demonstrated their ability to pursue independent monetary policies.34 The
primary impact on real exchange rates of unexpected changes in monetary policy
has been associated with the liquidity (or real—interest—rate) effect of these

33The lines are drawn through the sample means with the theoretical
slopes (under neutrality and superneutrality) of 1 and 0, respectively.
Lothian's regression analysis indicates that we cannot reject at the 5%
significance level either that the coefficient of trM is 0 in a linear
regression explaining Ary or 1 in a similar regression for rP, where M' means
"the growth shift in" and where y, M, and P are real GNP (or GDP), narrow
money, and consumer prices, respectively. He also ran U.S. dollar exchange—

rate (E) equations of the forms tE a + b(rM—rM5),
a + b(til'M—trM5) + c(sry—try5), and M'E =

a + b(trP—FP); as reported

in the text, in each case b differed from 1 insignificantly at the 5% level.
34See, for example, Darby and Lothian (1983) for our analysis of British
monetary policy under Margaret Thatcher.

21

FIGURE 4
Growth Shift in Consumer Prices vs. Growth Shift in Money
Twenty OECD Countries
1956—1973, 1974—1980

0.22

Oil!

0.0!

—.09

—.09

Source: Lothian (1983)

0.01

0.11

0.2)

22

FIGURE 5
Growth Shift in Real Output vs. Growth Shift in Money
Twenty OECD Countries

1956—1973, 1974—1980

Ary

0.2!

0.01
20

.2. S

2

I

—.09

Source:

Lothian (1983)

_______________

15

37

_(0

6 .9 ______________
__—•_.--

oo

I

I

0.11

I

0.21

rM

23

monetary shocks.35 The basic idea is a simple one: An unexpected change in
the interest rate at home relative to abroad will induce incipient capital

flows. If a positive money shock lowers the domestic interest rate, for
example, a capital outflow would be induced, all other things equal. In order
for this capital outflow to be stanched, the exchange rate must rise
sufficiently that anticipations of later decreases in this variable reduce or

eliminate the decrease in the interest rate differential adjusted for expected

depreciation. If assets were perfect substitutes internationally, the
adjustment in expected depreciation would have to exactly offset the change in

the interest rate. A smaller adjustment is required if assets are imperfectly
substitutable internationally and some change in capital flows actually occurs
because of either contemporaneous adjustment in the trade balance or changes
in central bank reserve purchases.

Suppose that increased money growth were perfectly anticipated so that

equal contemporaneous changes occurred in the actual and expected inflation

rate and growth rate of the nominal exchange rate. Then there would be no

n1tal jump n the exchange rate along the lines just suggested. Thus it is
seen that the movements in the nominal and real exchange rates associated with

35A vast listerature has blossomed from Dornbusch's seminal contribution
(1976), but see also Dornbusch (1980, 1982). Home (1983) reviews the
empirical research to date and concludes that 'the evidence of the 1970s
supports the portfolio balance model" which is presented here.

unexpected changes in monetary policy are due to movements in the real

interest rate,36
This impact effect of monetary policy on the real (and nominal) exchange

rate might be quite large. For example, Goodhart and Temperton (1982)
attribute nearly all of the 30 percent fluctuation in the British real

exchange rate over 1979—1981 to monetary policy.37 This exchange—rate impact
adds a channel of influence for monetary policy not present under

pegged

exchange rates: Unexpected decreases in money growth immediately reduce the
demand for traded goods and hence aggregate demand.38 The immediate effect on
the trade balance of these movements in the real exchange rate is estimated to

be close to nil.39 It is the lagged effects which apparently influence the
adjustment process.

When we move from consideration of the initial impact of monetary shocks
to the subsequent adjustment process, our empirical base becomes weak, but

some suggestive comments can be made. First, the initial movement of the real

361f assets were perfect substitutes internationally, the home nominal
(real) interest rate would equal the foreign nominal (real) interest rate plus
the growth rate of the nominal (real) exchange rate. Thus a policy which
caused the domestic real interest rate to fall relative to the foreign real
interest rate by an average of 3% per annum for three years would induce an
immediate 9% real depreciation so that the real exhhange rate could be
expected to decrease (i.e., appreciate) by 3 percent per annum for the next
three years. Isard (1982) has in particular argued that the long—run value of
the real exchange rate is fixed by trade balance considerations (on which, see
Section V below) while Dooley and Isard (1981) extend the argument to apply
qualitatively in an imperfect—substitution or portfolio—balance model.
370i1 price movements (the prime alternative explanation) were found to
have had a negligible impact.
38Under pegged exchange rates, prices of traded and nontraded goods move
much more synchronously in the absence of a revaluation.
39That is, within the current quarter the changes in the quantities of
exports and imports are approximately offset by the changes in their domestic—
currency prices.

25

exchange rate is gradually eliminated over time, but whether this adjustment
is smooth or involves overshooting depends on the adjustment path of the real

interest rate. The trade balance increases over time in response to a
positive monetary shock, but then the price advantage of an increased

(depreciated) real exchange rate is eliminated over time. Note, however, that
the temporarily increased trade balance implies private (or government) net
accumulation of foreign securities in excess of what would otherwise be the

case. Once this accumulation becomes important, it implies a lower domestic
interest rate relative to the expected—depreciation—adjusted foreign interest

rate. Unfortunately the implications of this asset accumulation are far from
well understood, but apparently depend in part on whether they are ultimately
reversed for reasons discussed in Section V below. 40

Sterilized intervention in the foreign exchange market — a continuing
central—bank exchange of foreign for domestic securities — can be used to
moderate the required initial movement in the real exchange rate. This would
be attractive, for example, if the otherwise disproportionate share of the
costs

born by

the traded goods sector would make an antlinflationary policy

politically unacceptable.41 The same factors which

independence

permit a degree of

to monetary policy under pegged exchange rates permit the

simultaneous pursuit of monetary and exchange—rate goals under floating
exchange rates; in each case the reserve movements must be accepted as the

cost of the central bank's influence on the second variable. Again, the
effect of these flows on the expectation that the operations will be abandoned

40See, however, the pioneering effort by Henderson (1980).

41i am unaware of any attempt to compare the relative costs of sterilized
intervention with direct subsidies to traded—goods producers.

and the exchange rate change which would ensue would limit the central bank's
freedom to pursue the secondary goal.
In summary, floating the exchange rate eliminates the short— and
long—run
limits on monetary growth, but also changes the

impact of monetary policy by

speeding and increasing the impact on the traded—goods sector. This
difference can be ameliorated by sterilized intervention to sot extent. But
ultimately choice of a pegged exchange rate is a decision to restrict monetary

growth to a range — determined by the reserve country ——

within

traded—goods sector can be protected by sterilized intervention.

of that complete protection is the cost of monetary independence.

which the
Abandonment

27

IV.

Some Rational—Expectations Considerations

Thus far we have been concerned with the feasible set from which the
central bank can select combinations of money growth, reserve flows, and

exchange rates and with the results of that choice. Expectations have been
left largely in the background except for the expected rate of depreciation.
But much recent macroeconomic research has demonstrated the importance of
expectations in determining the point of departure relative to which we have

been comparing the effects of unanticipated policy changes. This research
cautions us that the short—run impacts of the policies considered depend

crucially upon the unexpected nature of these policies. Therefore the short—
run impacts on the real economy would not exist if the central bank
systematically attempted to exploit, say, the beneficent effects of
accelerated money growth on the traded—goods sector under floating exchange
rate system.

Some economists working in the strict rational—expectations tradition
associated with Robert Lucas and Thomas Sargent have gone beyond these well

known cautions against attempts to exploit effects associated with policy

innovations. In particular, they have attempted to analyze the variance of
output implied by simple nxdels under alternative exchange—rate/monetary—

policy regimes.42 These authors show that an optimal portfolio of foreign
disturbances may reduce the variance of output and thus stabilize the economy

relative to a policy regime which more effectively insultates the economy from

foreign disturbances. Some authors emphasize the private sector's adjustment

42See, for example, Saidi (1980), Weber (1981), Flood and Marion (1982),
Flood (1982), and Kimbrough (1983).

28

in the output—inflation tradeoff as the regime changes while others emphasize
potential informational content of exchange rate movements.
The rational—expectations models remain very simple and cannot yet

provide any practical guidance to policymakers. They do raise the issue,
however, of whether the relevant questions concern the feasibility and effect
of a particular money growth under a particular exchange rate regime or the
stochastic structure of the economy which would result from alternative rules
for choosing monetary growth.

29

V. Capital Flows, the Trade Balance, and the Real Exchange Rate
in Long-Run Equilibrium

The discussion so far has treated the trade balance as predetermined with
capital flows and depreciation—adjusted interest rates adjusting to maintain

equilibrium. The concept of an autonomous trade balance has little appeal
once we move beyond the initial short period. Indeed the long—run equilibrium
is better characterized by autonomous net capital outflows and passively
adjusting trade balance and real exchange rate.
This is seen most easily by noting that only one real exchange rate is

consistent with a given trade balance in long—run equilibrium.43 Therefore
expected real depreciation is inconsistent with long—run equilibrium, and
capital flows must be responding to actual differences in real interest

rates. Suppose Japan has a high saving—income ratio relative to the rest of
the world and the United States a relatively low one. If both economies
always maintained zero trade balances and capital flows, the real interest

rate would become low in capital—rich Japan and high in the U.S.44 Instead
capital outflows and trade surpluses for Japan and capital inflows and trade
deficits for the U.S. have achieved a more efficient world distribution of the

capital stock. However, these flows will not continue forever: As Japanese

431f goods are perfect substitutes internationally, an infinity of trade
balances will be associated with the single equilibrium real exchange rate.
If goods are imperfect substitutes internationally even in the long run, then
higher (more depreciated) real exchange rates will be associated with higher
trade balances. In a growing economy, the trade balance is best measured as a
ratio to GNP.
44To the extent that Japan specializes in highly capital—intensive goods
and the U.S. in less capital—intensive goods, this tendency is ameliorated.
An alternative, complementary basis for net capital inflows to the U.S. is the
political security of private investments there.

30

wealth rises, its growth rate (saving/wealth) will fall until it converges to

the growth rate of output in the world economy.45 Eventually, assuming this
growth rate is less than the real return on capital, Japan's foreign
investment income will exceed its net foreign investments and the difference

will finance — indeed force — a trade deficit. Throughout the adjustment
process and in very long—run equilibrium, the excess saving in Japan (or
saving shortage in the U.S.) determines the equilibrium net capital outflows

and hence the trade balance and real exchange rate. Commercial policy can
only alter the composition of the trade balance by affecting relative
delivered prices and hence apparent comparative advantage.46
If then we adopt the view that in the long run national capital stocks
and wealth will be unaffected by unexpected money growth, we must conclude as
suggested in Section III that the adjustment process to a monetary shock

cannot be characterized by smooth adjustment. The abnormal capital flows
induced by initial movements in the real exchange rate must ultimately be

undone by offsetting movements. We conclude that it will be some time before
a full understanding of the intermediate effects of monetary shocks is
achieved.47

45Japanese wealth was abnormally low in the early postwar period both
because of wartime devastation and because of the rapid growth in Japanese
human capital.
461t is curious that U.S. labor unions would focus on the "jobs lost" due
to the excess of imports over exports rather than the corresponding gain in
employment and real wages due to the capital inflows financed by the trade
deficit.
exploratory effort integrating trade and capital flows in a full
adjustment analysis is reported in Darby, Lothian, et al. (1983, Chapter 12 by
Dan Lee).

31

VI. Conclusions

The Bretton Woods System afforded the major nonreserve central banks a
range for independent monetary policy which was neither negligible nor

unlimited. The banks' resistance to accelerating American inflation in the
late 1960s ultimately broke down and the resulting burst of inflation in the

early 1970s led to the collapse of the Bretton Woods System.48 The ensuing
decade of generalized floating among major currencies (or currency blocs) has
presented some surprises and so engendered much theoretical and empirical
research.

The work to date suggests that the major source of instability in real

exchange rates has been instability In monetary policy. The Federal Reserve
System has long been infamous for accelerating money growth to reduce
unemployment and then causing a recession to control the resultant

inflation.49 The high inflation legacy of the Bretton Woods System has left
the other major central banks with a similar dilemma and unfortunately similar

results. One aspect of the exercise of independent monetary policy is the
major impact on the traded—goods sector which is both quicker and stronger
than that associated with the sorts of unexpected money growth which could
occur under the Bretton Woods System.

48A detailed discussion is provided by Darby and Lothian in Darby,
Lothian, et al. (1983, Chapter 17).
49Wlether this reflects a defect in the Federal Reserve System or in the
American political system is not addressed here.

32

REFERENCE S

Bilson, John F. 0., "Leading Indicators of Currency Devaluation," Columbia
Journal of World Business, Winter 1979, pp. 62—76.

__________________ "The Speculative Efficiency Hypothesis," Journal of
Business, July 1981, 54: 435—52.
Branson, William H., Financial Capital Flows in the U.S. Balance of Payments,

Amsterdam: North—Holland Publishing Co., 1968.
____________________ "Monetary Policy and the New View of International

Capital Movements," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1970 (2):
235—262.

Connolly, Michael, and Taylor, Dean, "Exchange Rate Changes and

Neutralization: A Test of the Monetary Approach Applied to Developed and
Developing Countries," Economica, August 1979, 46: 281—294,
Cuddington, John T., "Currency Substitution, Capital Mobility, and Money
Demand," Journal of International Money and Finance, August 1983, 2: in
press.

Cumby, Robert E., and Obstfeld, Maurice, "A Note on Exchange—Rate Expectations

and Nominal Interest Differentials: A Test o the Fisher Hypothesis,"
Journal of Finance, June 1981, 36: 697—703.
"International Interest—Rate and

Price—Level Linkages under Flexible Exchange Rates: A Review of Recent
Evidence," in 3. F. 0. Bilson and R. C. Marston, eds., Exchange Rates:

Theory and Practice, NBER Conference Report, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1983, in press.

Darby, Michael R., and Lothian, James R., "British Economic Policy under

Margaret Thatcher: A Midterm Examination," Carnegie—Rochester Conference

33

Series on Public Policy, Spring 1983, 18: in press.
Darby, Michael R., Lothian, James R., Gandolfi, Arthur E., Schwartz, Anna J.,

and Stockman, Alan C., The International Transmission of Inflation, A

National Bureau of Economic Research Monograph, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1983.

[in press]

Dooley, Michael P., and Isard, Peter, "The Portfolio—Balance Model of Exchange
Rates," International Finance Discussion Papers No. 141, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 1979.

____________________________________ "Capital Controls, Political Risk, and
Deviations from Interest—Rate Parity," Journal of Political Economy,

April 1980, 88: 370—384.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
Political Economy, December 1976, 84: 1161—1176.

________________ Open Economy Macroeconomics, New York: Basic Books, Inc.,
1980.

"Flexible Exchange Rates and Interdependence," National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1035, November 1982.

Fausten, Dietrich K., "The Humean Origin of the Contemporary Monetary Approach
to the Balance of Payments," Quarterly Journal of Economics, November

1979, 93: 655—673.
Flood, Robert P., "Activist Policy in the Open Economy," American Economic

Review, Papers and Proceedings, May 1982, 72: 51—55.
and Marion, Nancy Peregrim, "The Transmission of

Disturbances under Alternative Exchange—Rate Regimes with Optimal

Indexing," Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1982, 97: 43—66.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., "In Search of the Exchange Risk Premium: A Six—Currency
Test Assuming Mean—Variance Optimization," Journal of International Money

34

and Finance, December 1982, 1: 255—274.
Friedman, Milton, "Nobel Lecture: Inflation and Unemployment," Journal of

Political Economy, June 1977, 84: 451—72.
Geweke, John, and Feige, Edgar, "Some Joint Tests of the Efficiency of Markets
for Forward Foreign Exchange," Review of Economics and Statistics, August

1979, 61: 334—341.
Goodhart, C. A. E., and Temperton, P. V., "The U.K. Exchange Rate, 1979—81: A
Test of the Overshooting Hypothesis?," Bank of England, Xeroxed 1982.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Hodrick, Robert J., "Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal

Predictors of Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis," Journal of
Political Economy, October. 1980, 88: 829—853.
__________________________________________,

"Risk Averse Speculation in the

Forward Foreign Exchange Market: An Econometric Analysis of Linear
Models," in J. Frenkel, ed., Exchange Rates and International

Macroeconomics, NBER Conference Report, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1982.

Harberger, Arnold C., and Edwards, Sebastian, "Lessons of Experience under
Fixed Exchange Rates," in M. Gersovitz, C. Diaz—Alejandro, C. Ranis, and
M. R. Rosenzweig, eds., The Theory and Experience of Economic

Development: Essays in Honor of Sir W. Arthur Lewis, London: George
Allen and Unwin, 1982.

Heller, H. R., and Khan, M. S., "The Demand for International Reserves under
Fixed and Floating Exchange Rates," International Monetary Fund Staff

Papers, December 1978, 25: 623—649.
Henderson, Dale W., "The Dynamic Effects of Exchange Market Intervention
Policy," in H. Frisch and C. Schwodiauer, eds., The Economics of Flexible
Exchange Rates, supplement to Kredit und Kapltal, 1980.

35

Herring, Richard J., and Marston, Richard C., National Monetary Policies and

International Financial Markets, Amsterdam: North—Holland Publishing
Co., 1977.

Hilliard, Brian C., "Exchange Flows and the Gilt—Edged Security Market: A
Causality Study," Bank of England, Discussion Paper No. 2, February 1979.

Home, Jocelyn, "The Asset Market Model of the Balance of Payments and the
Exchange Rate: A Survey of Empirical Evidence," Journal of International
Money and Finance, August 1983, 2: in press.
Isard, Peter, "How Far Can We Push the 'Law of One Price?'," American Economic

Review, December 1977, 67: 942—948.
"An Accounting Framework and Some Issues for Modelling How
Exchange Rates Respond to the News," International Finance Discussion
Paper No. 200, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January
1982.

Kimbrough, Kent P., "The Information Content of the Exchange Rate and

the

Stability of the Real Output under Alternative Exchange—Rate Regimes,"
Journal of International Money and Finance, April 1983, 2: in press.

Kravis, Irving B., and Lipsey, Robert E., "Export Prices and the Transmission
of Inflation," American Economic Review, February 1977, 67: 155—163.
___________________________________________

"Price Behavior in the Light of

Balance of Payments Theories," Journal of International Economics, May

1978, 8: 193—246.
Krugman, Paul, "A Model of Balance—of—Payments Crises," Journal of Money,

Credit, and Banking, August 1979, 11: 311—325.

Laffer, Arthur B., "The Phenomenon of Worldwide Inflation: A Study in
International Market Integration," in David I. Meiselman and Arthur B.
Laffer, eds., The Phenomenon of Worldwide Inflation, Washington:

36

American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, 1975.
Laney, Leroy 0., and Willett, Thomas D., "The International Liquidity

Explosion and Worldwide Inflation: The Evidence from Sterilization
Coefficient Estimates," Journal of International Money and Finance,

August 1982, 1: 141—152.
Lothian, James R., "International Tests of the Neutrality of Money," Citibank,
N.A., processed, April 1983.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," Carnegie—
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1976, 1: 19—46.
Obstfeld, Maurice, "Sterilization and the Offsetting Capital Movements:
Evidence from West Germany1 1960—1970," National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 494, June 1980.

_________________

"MacrQeconomic Policy, Exchange—Rate Dynamics, and Optimal

Asset Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy, December 1981, 89:
1142—1161.
___________________

"The Capitalization of Income Streams and the Effects of

Open—Market Policy under Fixed Exchange Rates," Journal of Monetary

Economics, January 1982, 9: 87—98. (1982a)
_________________

"Can We Sterilize? Theory and Evidence," American Economic

Review, Papers and Proceedings, May

1982, 72: 45—50. (1982b)

Richardson, J. David, "Some Empirical Evidence on Commodity Arbitrage and the

Law of One Price," Journal of International Economics, May 1978, 8: 341—
351.

Saidi, Nasser H., "Fluctuating Exchange Rates and the International
Transmission of Economic Disturbances," Journal of Money, Credit, and

Banking, November 1980, 12: 575—591.
Solnik, Bruno H., European Capital Markets: Towards a General Theory of

37

International Investment, Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1973.
Tobin, James, "Money and Economic Growth," Econometrica, October 1965, 33:
671—84.

von Furstenberg, George M., "New Estimates of the Demand for Non—Gold Reserves
under Floating Exchange Rates," Journal of International Money and

Finance, April 1982, 1: 81—95.
Weber, Warren E., "Output Variability under Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate
Rules," Journal of Political Economy, August 1981, 89: 733—751.
Whitman, Marina v.n., "Global Monetarism and the Monetary Approach to the
Balance of Payments," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1975 (3):
491—536.

