NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WORK AND LEISURE IN THE U.S. AND EUROPE:
WHY SO DIFFERENT?
Alberto Alesina
Edward Glaeser
Bruce Sacerdote
Working Paper 11278
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11278
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2005

Prepared for the NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2005. We thank Olivier Blanchard and Ken Rogoff for
useful comments and Steve Davis and Giuseppe Nicoletti for generous help with data. We thank Francesco
Trebbi and Ariel Stern-Markovitz for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Alberto Alesina, Edward Glaeser, and Bruce Sacerdote. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Work and Leisure in the U.S. and Europe: Why So Different?
Alberto Alesina, Edward Glaeser, and Bruce Sacerdote
NBER Working Paper No. 11278
April 2005
JEL No. J3, E0
ABSTRACT
Americans average 25.1 working hours per person in working age per week, but the Germans
average 18.6 hours. The average American works 46.2 weeks per year, while the French average 40
weeks per year. Why do western Europeans work so much less than Americans? Recent work argues
that these differences result from higher European tax rates, but the vast empirical labor supply
literature suggests that tax rates can explain only a small amount of the differences in hours between
the U.S. and Europe. Another popular view is that these differences are explained by long-standing
European "culture," but Europeans worked more than Americans as late as the 1960s. In this paper,
we argue that European labor market regulations, advocated by unions in declining European
industries who argued "work less, work all" explain the bulk of the difference between the U.S. and
Europe. These policies do not seem to have increased employment, but they may have had a more
society-wide influence on leisure patterns because of a social multiplier where the returns to leisure
increase as more people are taking longer vacations.
Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu

Edward Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Bruce Sacerdote
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
bruce.i.sacerdote@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
In the early seventies hours worked per person were about the same in the U.S. and in
Western Europe (Europe in short). Today they are almost 50 per cent less in Europe than
in the U.S. (Figure 1). Americans average 25.1 working hours per person in working age,
Italians 16.7, French 18.0 and German 18.7. The average employed American works 46.2
weeks per year; the average French 40.5 the average Swede 35.4. While Americans
work today just about as much as in 1970, Europeans work much less. Why?
Both academics and policymakers have recently focused on the decline in work hours in
Europe. The former have been attracted by the remarkable size of this phenomenon and
its relevance to long standing controversies in macroeconomics and public finance. The
latter are particularly interested in whether the decline in European hours worked is
causing a slowdown in growth. Figure 2 compares income per capita in U.S. and
Germany versus hours worked in the U.S. and Germany and shows that the gap between
U.S. and German GDP per capita appears to have widened after 1990 as the gap between
U.S. and German hours worked has grown. However this paper is NOT, we repeat NOT
about the cause of the differential in growth between U.S. and Europe, or whether hours
worked is fully responsible for it. Our goal is to understand the evolution of working
hours.2 It should also be clear that when we say that Europeans work less we mean they
work less for pay in the market place; unpaid home production is part of “non working
time.”
In a recent, provocative paper Prescott (2004) argues that “virtually all of the large
differences between U.S. labor supply and those of Germany and France are due to
differences in tax systems.” Prescott calibrates a dynamic model of investment and labor
supply; and shows that under what appear to be reasonable assumptions about parameter
values, all of the difference between the U.S. and the major European countries can be
explained by different marginal tax rates. Indeed the marginal income tax rate
differences between the U.S. and Europe were much smaller in the 1970s, when labor
supply differences were much smaller. Prescott’s view is supported by the statistical
evidence of Davis and Henreksson (2004) who use a panel of richer countries and find
large labor supply responses to higher tax rates.
But Prescott's argument that taxes explain U.S./Europe differences relies critically on
assumptions that ensure an elasticity of labor supply that is hard to reconcile with most
standard estimates of labor supply elasticities. In the case of male labor supply, we are
not aware of any within-country estimates of labor supply elasticities that are even in the
same ball park as those used in the Prescott’s calibration. For women, estimated labor
supply elasticities are much closer to those used by Prescott (his assumptions still veer
toward the upper limit of available estimates); however the reduction of hours worked is
by no means a women-only phenomenon. Female labor force participation shows an
increasing trend in most European countries since 1973 even though the U.S. shows an
2

See Blanchard (2004) for a recent discussion of the European economy with a special emphasis on
France. For a long term perspective on growth in Europe versus the US see Gordon (2004)

2

even faster growth of female participation; this is a case where the effect of marginal tax
rates may indeed be very important. Prescott himself is well aware of this discrepancy
between the traditionally estimated elasticities from “micro” evidence and the “macro”
elasticity needed for his calibration exercise to work, but he offers little explanation of
why the “micro” elasticities are wrong.
This paper examines two different hypotheses for the mismatch between macro and
micro labor supply estimates. The same hypotheses also offer us different theories of the
differences in hours worked between the U.S. and Europe. First, we consider the
possibility that the macro-estimates are right in this context and the micro-estimates are
misleading. Micro-estimates may be statistically correct, but they are inappropriate
because they consider only the direct impact of taxation. One indirect effect of taxation
is the government transfers that it funds. These transfers create an income effect that
might induce lower work hours. This is one reason why Prescott’s elasticities are so
high, but there is little evidence suggesting income elasticities of the level that his work
assumes.
A potentially more important reason why macro elasticities would be much higher than
micro elasticities is that the presence of positive complementarities either in production,
consumption or leisure would imply the existence of a social multiplier (Glaeser,
Sacerdote and Scheinkman, 2003). For example, if the utility from not working is
increasing in the number of people who do not work, macro-elasticities will both be
greater than micro-elasticities and that macro-elasticities will be more appropriate for
understanding the impact of policy differences.
The social multiplier is one way of making sense of the hypothesis that Europeans have a
cultural predilection for leisure. Blanchard (2004) and others have noted that Europeans
seem to have taken a good portion of their secular increase in income in less work while
Americans have instead taken it in more consumption. Simply invoking different
cultures to explain this fact is unconvincing: why did “culture” start diverging in the early
seventies across the Atlantic so dramatically? Up to the First World War work hours per
employee were actually lower in the U.S. than in most European countries including
France and Germany (Huberman (2004)). Work hours per employee started to fall a bit
more rapidly in Europe than in the U.S. but up until the late sixties work hours per
employee were about the same in the U.S., and Europe including Germany and France
(Huberman (2003)). Unless one invokes a “reversal of cultures,” the purely cultural
argument seems weak. A more convincing story is that as hours worked started to decline
in Europe (perhaps because of taxation), people’s utility from leisure increased and the
social multiplier reinforced the decline created a “desire” for Europeans to vacation en
masse.
Our second hypothesis is that the cross-sectional relationship between taxes and hours
worked is just the result of omitted variables that are correlated with the tax rate and that
also impact hours worked. In particular, unionization and labor market regulations are
strongly correlated with both hours worked across countries and marginal tax rates. The
importance of unionization and labor market regulation is not constant over time; on the

3

contrary it sharply increased with the structural shocks of the 1970s and 1980s,
(Blanchard (2004) and Blanchard and Wolfers (2003)). It may also be related with the
leftist surge of the late sixties, from the “May 68” in France to the “Autunno Caldo” (hot
fall) of 1969 in Italy. Hunt (1998, 1999) documents how German and French unions
pursued a policy of work sharing, demanding a reduction in hours worked as a response
to raising unemployment, with slogans like “work less -- work all.”3
Work sharing may make little sense as a national response to a negative economic shock,
but at a single firm, a membership maximizing union may indeed find work sharing to be
an attractive policy. Unions also demanded higher hourly wages to keep total income
from falling, making it hard to support the same level of employment, thus creating a
multiplicative effect on total hours worked per person. Large declines of hours worked in
unionized sectors (the large majority of sectors in Europe) may also have triggered
reduction in hours worked in other sectors for a social multiplier effect.
To distinguish between these two hypotheses, we begin in Section II of this paper with
the basic facts on labor supply across countries. In Section III of the paper, we review the
evidence on taxes and labor supply. The primary finding of this section is that if taxes
were the only difference between the U.S. and Europe then labor supply elasticities
would need to be much greater than those found in the micro literature. In Section IV, we
consider the possibility that factors other than tax rates explain the differences between
the U.S. and Europe. We begin with a simple model that suggests that the impact of
unionization should increase after sectoral shocks, such as those that hit the U.S. and
Europe in the 1970s and 1980s.4 In an economy with free mobility, mean zero shocks
that increase productivity in some sectors and decrease productivity in others will tend to
increase average productivity; if the labor supply curve slopes up, this will increase hours
worked. In a unionized economy, when unions in a declining industry try to keep their
membership constant, this will lead to a decrease in hours worked. Under reasonable
parameter values, the same shock that increases hours worked in a non-unionized
economy will decrease hours worked in a unionized economy.
We examine these predictions empirically in several ways. First, we show that using a
cross-section of countries without using any panel information, it is impossible to
disentangle the impact of taxes, regulation and unions. Second, using a panel of
countries and following Davis and Henreksson (2004), we find that the impact of taxes
on labor supply disappears once we control for unionization or labor market regulation.5
Third, using U.S. data, we show that the impact of union status on vacation and hours
worked across states seems to be at least as large as the impact of tax rates across states.
Fourth, we show, in an accounting sense, that legally mandated holidays can explain 80
percent of the difference in weeks worked between the U.S. and Europe and 30 percent of
3

Genre, Salvador and Lamo argue that recent reductions in unionization in Europe (the last ten years) and
in changes in unemployment benefits can explain the rising labor force participation of European women.
4
Bertola and Ichino (1995) discuss the effects of unions in a model with sectoral shocks. More generally
Ljungqvist and Sargent (2004) show how large firing costs generate high unemployment in the presence of
negative shocks.
5
Olovsson(2004) argues that income taxes can explain roughly ten percent of the difference in hours
worked between the US and Sweden.

4

the difference in total labor supply between the two regions (See Table 4). On net, we
think that this data strongly suggests that labor regulation and unionization appear to be
the dominant factors in explaining the differences between the U.S. and Europe. We
suspect that the effect of generous pension systems which reduced participation rates
amongst elderly for older workers is also strong; a case in point is Italy.6
In Section V, we discuss whether the macro-elasticities are more appropriate than the
micro-elasticities. Can a social multiplier explain the difference between the micro and
macro labor supply estimates? Is it possible that income effects from higher tax rates act
to make these tax elasticities much larger than standard labor supply elasticities? We
believe that most so-called micro-elasticities already include some effect of the social
multiplier. Moreover, what little available evidence suggests that the social multiplier
can at most double the estimate labor supply elasticities. Thus, this section leaves us with
the view that labor regulations and union policies are the dominant causes of hour’s
differences between the U.S. and Europe.
We conclude with an intriguing question. Are all these regulations and union policies
(and taxation) suboptimal because they distort labor leisure decisions, or do they help
solve a coordination problem? If a social multiplier exists because of complementarities
in the consumption of leisure, then national policies that enforce higher levels of
relaxation can, at least in theory, increase welfare. Perhaps everybody, on both sides of
the Atlantic would like to work less but it is difficult to coordinate on a fewer hour’s
equilibrium in competitive market where all workers act individually. According to this
view, all would like more vacation if their friends, spouses and relatives also had them,
but no coordination device is readily available.
In Section VI we make an attempt at shedding some light on this question using data on
life satisfaction. The individual level evidence shows a tight link between self-reported
happiness and weeks of vacation. But these results are difficult to interpret because of
omitted variables and reverse causality. Perhaps people who are more balanced in their
approach to life are both happier and take more vacations. A more satisfying approach is
to use the legislation on vacations that differs across countries and over time. Using a
panel of countries we are able to use these mandated holiday differences as an instrument
for weeks of vacation. We find that indeed places with more mandated vacations do
seem to be a bit happier. The gap between this finding and any sort of policy
recommendation remains vast.

2. The Data7
Table 1 illustrates the basic data on work hours for several European countries and the
U.S., the source is OECD. The U.S. has the highest value for working hours per person
per week: 25.1. The lowest is Italy with 16.7. Germany has 18.7 and France 18.0. The
6

Davis and Henreksson interpret their tax rate estimates as including direct and indirect effects of taxation
including effects that come through government spending.
7
A detailed description of data sources is given in Appendix

5

UK has the second highest value with 21.4, and Ireland the fourth with 20.1, making it
clear that the starkest comparison is between continental Europe and the U.S.
Differences in working hours per person can result from a combination of 3 factors:
participation in the labor force and unemployment rates, number of days of vacation, and
number of hours worked in a normal week (i.e. without holidays). Reduction in the hours
worked per person related to the third effect may arise because full time workers work
less or the share of part time workers increases. Notice how the U.S. has by far the
longest number of weeks of work per year (46.2). It is second after Greece for numbers
of hours worked in the normal week and it is sixth in terms of employment over
population. These very rough data already highlight the importance of the amount of
vacation time as an explanation of U.S. exceptionalism.
Table 2 splits the difference between U.S. versus France, Germany and Italy into the
three components. A comparison of U.S. versus Germany and U.S. versus France shows
that roughly one quarter of the total difference is explained by differences in working
hours in a normal week. Part of the reduction in hours worked in a normal week is
explained by increase in part time work, a point also raised by Bell and Freeman (1995)
and Hunt (1998). Hunt (1998) reports that between the early seventies and the mid
nineties part time workers increased as a share of all workers from 5.9 to 9.6 in France.
Over the same period, the share of workers who worked part time increased from 10.1 to
12.6 percent in Germany.
The remaining three quarters of the difference is explained by a lower number of weeks
worked and labor force participation. The former is slightly more important in both
countries; it explains 44 per cent of the total difference in Germany and 39 per cent in
France. Overall, the picture for France and Germany looks pretty similar, while Italy is
different. For this country more than half of the difference is explained by employment
rates, one third by vacation time and only a bit more than 10 per cent by hours worked in
a normal week; this observation is also explained by the relatively small fraction of part
time work in Italy.
Given the importance of vacation time, Table 3 provides a breakdown of weeks in a year
spent at work and not at work in several countries. Germany and Italy have the two
highest number of vacation weeks with 7.8 and 7.9 respectively. The U.S. has 3.9. In
fact even though the U.S. is on the low side on all the categories of time spent not at work
in this table, the difference in vacation time is especially striking. According to OECD
data the U.S. has 20 fewer days of vacation and holiday than Italy and Germany and 15
fewer than France. Table 4 shows holidays and federally mandated vacation days in
several countries. Table 5 displays the statutory and collectively agreed minimum paid
leave in many countries. In the U.S. there is no statutory minimum. In France both
statutory and agreed are 25 days while in Germany there are 20 statutory and almost 30
agreed. Italy has 20 and 28, respectively. Clearly the increase in mandatory vacation
time in Europe relative to the U.S. is a major factor in explaining work hours.

6

We now turn to labor force participation. Figures 3 and 4 illustrate labor force
participation for men and women since the early seventies in the same four countries.
Men’s participation dropped in all countries but less so in the U.S. Female participation
increased tremendously in the U.S. but significantly less so in Germany and France.
Female participation in Italy is much lower than in the other countries and in fact is an
outlier in Europe. Recall from above that in Italy much more so than in Germany or
France, the difference with the U.S. in hours worked per capita was due to employment
participation; this chart shows that the effect comes primarily from women. 8
Figure 5 shows participation rates for older workers, 55- 64. In the U.S., participation
rates today are pretty similar to what they were in 1970. Participation rates are much
lower in France and Italy where generous pension systems and early retirement age play a
key role for individuals in this age group. The effect is less marked for Germany simply
because the participation rate for this category in Germany was already quite low in the
seventies. It is pretty clear that the effect on hours worked derived from lower
participation in the labor force in Europe comes from mandatory retirement ages and
pension systems. A case in point is Italy which has a particularly low participation of
older workers. As noted by Giavazzi and Dornbusch (2000), Italy also has a very low
participation of younger workers, who find entry barriers in the labor market and prolong
their stay in school; the average completion rate of college in Italy is 27.8 years of age!

3. Taxation and hours worked
Given that hours worked fell so much from 1970 onward in Europe but not in the U.S.,
the explanation most likely has to do with some large change that occurred in Europe and
not in the U.S. An obvious candidate is the large increase in the income tax rate in
Europe compared with a much smaller increase in the U.S. There is probably little doubt
that increasing marginal tax rates have reduced hours worked, especially through an
effect on female participation in the labor force. But the question is whether the tax
effect is enough to explain the current very large difference between Europe and U.S.
both for men and women. The answer to this question obviously hinges on the elasticity
of the labor supply to after tax salaries. 9

3.1 Labor Supply Elasticities
Prescott (2004) argues that the entire difference between U.S. and Europe is due to taxes.
He evaluates what elasticity of labor supply would be needed to explain the entire
difference between hours worked in the G7 countries, and he shows that the differences
8

The main reason for this is probably a very generous pension system with early retirement especially for
women and even more so for women in the public sector (all teachers are in the public sector). Only recent
reforms have partly corrected for that. Another explanation is the short supply of day care and cultural
variables as well.
9
Note that the tax increases which occurred in Europe were certainly expected to be permanent when
introduced and we are looking at the steady state effect on the aggregate labor supply not at intertemporal
labor elasticity.

7

between the U.S. and Europe can be explained by tax rate if he assumes a log-log utility
function on consumption and leisure. Obviously leisure is used here in the broad sense of
the term, that is any non market (and not taxed) activity such as home production, work
in the black economy or, indeed, having fun.
The core element of the model is that it delivers a high labor supply elasticity with
respect to the tax rate. This high labor supply elasticity, if true, also implies that reducing
taxes in Europe would lead to very large gains in hours worked and welfare. Prescott also
uses this evidence to suggest that indeed the elasticity of the labor supply must be much
higher than what normally thought.10 The key to his calibration is choosing a functional
form where the average levels of hours works delivers a labor supply elasticity on its
own, and that this functional form—which has little basis in the empirical labor supply
literature—essentially drives his calibration.
Our discussion (and that of Prescott, 2004) treats hours of work as a continuous measure
and ignores the important participation discussion. This is most appropriate for middleaged males, and less appropriate for married women and either older or younger men. As
such, since both our discussion and the original Prescott (2004) formulation avoid the
added complexities of a participation decision, these equations should be seen as being
primarily focused on the labor supply decisions of men who are in the labor force.
Prescott’s model is a dynamic version of a classic separable utility labor supply model,
where individuals choose “l” (the amount of labor supplied) to maximize:
U (C ) + V (1 − l ) , where C (or consumption) equals (1-t)wl+z, where t is the tax rate, w is
the wage and z reflects unearned income. The term V(1-l) reflects the enjoyment from
leisure, and the first order condition sets the marginal utility of leisure equal to the
marginal benefits from extra income or (1 − t ) wU ' (C ) = V ' (1 − l ) . The dynamic elements
of the model are not critical for delivering the high labor supply elasticities in his
calibration, so we will omit them in our analysis and focus on the more standard labor
supply case.

Prescott (2004) assumes that some taxes are returned to consumers in the form of
transfers or government services. This effect, which is included by Prescott, will tend to
increase the labor response to higher taxes because it reduces the income effect of raising
taxes. We can reflect this effect in the model by making unearned income a function of
government revenues and assuming that z = z 0 + δt wl , where δ ranges between zero
and one and reflects the fact that some revenues make it back to consumers. The value of
wl represents national labor earnings. With this assumption, using the fact that in
equilibrium wl = wl , it follows that:

10

For an analysis of the Great Depression in a similar spirit see Chari Keohe and Mc Grattan (2003); they
argue that the can explain the unemployment of the American Great Depression with the tax wedge on
labor. In their analysis the intertemporal elasticity of substitution plays a big role.

8

(1)

∂Log (l )
1  ∂Log (l )
(1 − t ) wl ∂Log (l ) 
 −

=
+δ
∂t
1 − t  ∂Log ( w)
z
∂Log ( z ) 

(1 − t ) wl ∂Log (l )
is often called the “marginal propensity to earn” (Pencavel,
z
∂Log ( z )
∂Log (l )
is the uncompensated labor supply elasticity and
1986). The term
∂Log ( w)
∂Log (l ) (1 − t ) wl ∂Log (l )
is the compensated labor supply elasticity.
−
∂Log ( w)
z
∂Log ( z )

The term

Equation (1) tells us that the size of δ is important because it determines whether
compensated or uncompensated labor supply elasticities should be used when thinking
about the impact of taxes on labor supply. If δ = 1 , then the tax elasticity is -1/(1-t) times
the pure “compensated” labor supply elasticity, because in this case tax dollars are
completely returned to consumers. In this case, taxation only changes the returns to
labor; it does not reduce income. If δ = 0 , then the tax elasticity is -1/(1-t) times the
uncompensated labor supply elasticity because in this case tax dollars are completely lost
to consumers.
In the Prescott formulation δ = 1 and government spending is valued by consumers just
like income. This assumption helps to ensure a high labor supply elasticity. A second,
ultimately less important, adjustment that Prescott (2004) makes to the standard model is
to assume that wages are not fixed, but are determined also by labor demand. We can
incorporate this effect into our model by allowing wages, w, to equal w(l) where w’(l)<0
to take into account downward-sloping labor demand. This effect will generally mute
the impact of taxes on hours worked because as taxes reduce hours worked, wages will
rise and keep some people in the labor market.11
The most critical aspect of the Prescott (2004) model is that individuals maximize a loglog (or in a static setting Cobb-Douglas) utility function: Log (C ) + αLog (1 − l ) . In this
case when w’(l)=0 and δ = 0 , the elasticity of hours worked with respect to the wage is
αz
. The most striking feature of the Cobb-Douglas utility is that one
(1 + α )(1 − t ) wl
parameter, “ α ”, determines down both the level of hours worked and the elasticity of
hours worked with respect to the tax rate. With this functional form, Prescott’s quite
reasonable parameter assumptions, α = 1.54 , wl = .6776 • Y , and and t=.5 (both midway
between the U.S. and Germany), delivers a labor supply elasticity of .77. Since this
elasticity excludes any general equilibrium effects it can be directly compared with usual
estimates of labor supply elasticities. The Cobb-Douglas functional form is so powerful
that without any assumptions directly related to labor supply elasticity, this function form

11

Of course, if w’(l)>0 as in the case of some agglomeration economies, then this will cause the tax impact
on hours worked to rise.

9

delivers a strikingly high labor supply elasticity. This high labor supply elasticity is the
first prediction of the model.
Prescott himself uses the equation l =

1

αC
1+
(1 − θ )(1 − t )Y

, for his calculations and if C/Y

is held constant (changes in this variable do not drive his results), the elasticity of labor
t
(1 − l ) . No knowledge of α is actually
supply with respect to the tax rate equals −
1− t
needed to determine the response of labor supply to taxes, which will generally be around
.8 (a reasonable value of 1-l).

A second prediction of the model is that the labor supply will respond sharply to
increases in unearned income. The Prescott assumptions suggest that the elasticity of
− αz
∂Log (l )
labor supply with respect to unearned income,
, equals
, which
∂Log ( z )
(1 + α )(1 − t ) wl
will also equal -.77. This elasticity can also be checked against the available income
elasticity estimates.
A third prediction of the model is that labor supply elasticities should be quite different
for individuals with large unearned income and small unearned income. For example, in
Prescott’s model, if C=(1-t)wl, the functional form predicts that there will be no impact
of either taxes or wages on the supply of hours worked, because the price effect of higher
wages or lower taxes is completely offset by the income effect making workers richer or
poorer. As such, a third test of the model is to look at whether labor supply elasticities
change significantly with unearned income.
We will begin the next section by asking whether the available information about labor
supply elasticities is compatible with the Prescott (2004). Is there evidence that wage or
tax rate elasticities are as high as his model suggests, or high enough to explain
U.S./Europe differences? Is there evidence that elasticity of labor supply with respect to
unearned income is close to one? Is there evidence that individuals with significant
unearned income have much more elastic labor supply levels than individuals with little
unearned income? While some of these tests do take us away from U.S./Europe
differences, the heart of the Prescott explanation is that labor supply elasticities are
extremely large with respect to the tax rate. It seems reasonable to ask whether the
available evidence on labor supply elasticities supports this claim.

3.2 The basic evidence
At this point, we ask whether the available evidence supports the view that differences in
hours worked between the U.S. and Europe can be explained by differences in tax rates.
As discussed above, the OECD numbers tell us that average weekly hours worked are
25.1 in the U.S. and 18.3 (on average) in Germany and France. The Prescott numbers of
10

marginal tax rates suggests a difference .2 between the U.S. and those European
countries. To explain this difference, there would have to be a tax rate elasticity of over
1.5 or since the wage elasticity is one minus the tax rate times the tax rate elasticity, this
would require a labor supply elasticity of .75 (which is, of course, the labor supply
elasticity implied by Prescott’s simulation).
In Table 6, we repeat this calculation using our own data. Here, we compute the implied
elasticity of the labor supply in the entire difference of hours worked in Europe (average
of the 4 largest European economies) and U.S. were explained by the marginal tax rate.
This elasticity to the tax rate is about -1.63 for hours worked per person, which implies an
elasticity of the labor supply of about 0.92 (if 1/(1-t) equals .564). Our estimates suggest
that a slightly higher elasticity is needed to explain the U.S./Europe difference primarily
because of tax rate numbers are slightly different from those used by Prescott (2004).
As we have discussed above, using estimated labor supply elasticities with respect to the
wage to understand labor supply elasticities with respect to the tax rate depends on two
things: the labor demand elasticity, which will mute the impact of high taxes on hours
worked, and the income effect of the government spending funded by the high taxes. As
the first effect makes it harder for tax rate differences to explain hours of work
differences, we will simply ignore this effect. However, we will focus on the potential
income effects from higher tax-funded government spending. If taxes are spent on
commodities that are highly valued by consumers, then compensated labor supply
elasticities are appropriate, since taxes in this case have only price effects, and do not
have a negative income effect. If government spending is essentially wasteful, then
uncompensated demand elasticities are appropriate because higher taxes have both a
price and an income effect. As such, we will present evidence on both elasticities.
We will also briefly consider two other predictions of the Cobb-Douglas functional form
assumption that drives the Prescott calibration. One implication of this function form is
∂Log (l )
that the elasticity of labor supply with respect to unearned income, or
equals
∂Log ( z )
− αz
, or -.77. This elasticity can also be checked against the available
(1 + α )(1 − t ) wl
income elasticity estimates. The Cobb-Douglas functional form also implies that labor
supply elasticity should be wildly different for individuals with large unearned income
and small unearned income. For example, in Prescott’s model, if C=(1-t)wl, the
functional form predicts that there will be no impact of either taxes or wages on the
supply of hours worked, because the price effect of higher wages or lower taxes is
completely offset by the income effect making workers richer or poorer. As such, another
piece of evidence on whether the Cobb-Douglas functional form is a reasonable basis for
calibration is whether labor supply elasticities change significantly with unearned
income.
In the next section, we ask whether the available information about labor supply
elasticities supports the view that labor supply differences between the U.S. and Europe
can be explained by differences in tax rates. Specifically, we ask whether there is a
11

consensus that either compensated or uncompensated labor supply elasticities lie between
.75 and .92. We will also ask whether the available evidence supports other predictions
of the Cobb-Douglas utility function that drives Prescott’s high labor supply elasticities.
Is the elasticity of labor supply with respect to unearned income is close to one? Is there
evidence that individuals with significant unearned income have much more elastic labor
supply levels than individuals with little unearned income?
The Labor Supply Elasticity Literature
We begin in Table 7 by collecting a wide range of estimates (mostly from various issues
of the Handbook of Labor Economics) of labor supply elasticities from different sources
over the past 70 years. Pencavel (1986) reports labor supply elasticities (compensated
and uncompensated) and the marginal propensity to earn. Blundell and Macurdy (1999)
report uncompensated elasticities and the labor supply elasticity with respect to unearned
income. To make these numbers comparable we have followed the assumption contained
in Prescott (2004) and assumed a ratio of unearned income to earned after-tax income of
1.28.
This follows from Prescott’s assumptions that wl = .6776 • Y and if C/Y=.77,
C=z+(1-t)wl, and t=.5 (midway between the U.S. and Germany), then z/(1-t)wl equals
1.28, so non-labor income is greater than labor income in his formulation.
This assumption means that we can multiply all marginal propensity to earn figures by
1.28 to find the elasticity of labor supply with respect to unearned income. We can also
use the 1.28 ratio to the compensated income elasticity from the uncompensated labor
supply elasticities and the income elasticities provided by Blundell and Macurdy (1999).
Obviously, this procedure eliminates all sample specific variation in the ratio of unearned
earnings to labor income, but it provides us with a convenient means of comparing a wide
number of papers. Our use of the 1.28 ratio will lead to high estimates of income
elasticities and low estimates of compensated demand elasticities. However, in only one
case (Hausman and Ruud, 1984) will the choice of this parameter significantly change the
compensated demand elasticity.
The first estimates at the top of the paper Douglas (1934), Winston (1962) and Finegan
(1962) are done using aggregate data and provide us only with uncompensated
elasticities. These three numbers are best seen as a reminder of the number of decades
that economists have tried to estimate labor supply elasticities and that even the oldest
estimates of these elasticities are quite modest. These early estimates of uncompensated
elasticities range from -.07 to -.35. Somewhat strikingly, most of the later work on
uncompensated labor supply elasticities for men falls within this range.
More modern work has relied on individual level data and has occasionally used the
variation created by changed in the tax schedule. As the table shows, the majority of
estimates of uncompensated labor supply elasticities are negative (labor supply declines
as wages rise), but there are a minority of estimates that are weakly positive. If anything,
these estimates seem to suggest a consensus estimate of zero as an uncompensated labor
supply elasticity. The highest labor supply elasticity, .16, is found by Flood and Macurdy

12

∂Log (l )
, equal -1/(1-t) times labor supply
∂t
elasticities, then this labor supply elasticity translates into a tax elasticity of .32
(assuming a 50 percent tax rate), which is still about one-half of the labor elasticity
implied by the Prescott (2004) and less than one-half of the elasticity needed to explain
the differences in labor supply between the U.S. and either France or Germany. The
median uncompensated labor supply elasticity is closer to zero.

(1992).

Since tax rate elasticities, i.e.

The second page of the table shows estimates of labor supply elasticities for women.
While there appears to be an empirical consensus that uncompensated labor supply
elasticities for men are quite low, there is no such consensus for estimates of elasticities
among women. The median estimate among those reporters is about one. These
assumptions are closer in line with Prescott’s predictions. Furthermore, for this group,
labor supply elasticities appear to be high enough so that differences in hours worked
between the U.S. and Europe can indeed by explained by differences in the tax rate. As
such, if there is a puzzle to labor supply differences between the U.S. and Europe, this
puzzle really pertains mostly to men.
As we discussed above, since higher taxes are spent on transfers and services and since
these transfers may be valued by consumers, uncompensated elasticities are not
necessarily appropriate. As such, in the third column, we turn to compensated demand
elasticities. In most cases, these compensated demand elasticities range from -.16 to .24.
The experimental estimates from the Negative Income Tax experiments and from British
experimental data also suggest an upper bound of .24 for compensated labor supply
elasticities for men. Since .24 is the upper bound of the estimates, and since using
compensated supply elasticities implies that government spending is all valued like
income by workers, it seems reasonable to think that a somewhat lower number, like .18,
is a more sensible benchmark elasticity. In that case, the elasticity estimate is about one
half of the labor supply elasticity implied by Prescott’s calibration and one-half of the
elasticity needed to explain the differences between the U.S. and Europe.
It is worth pointing out that there are three studies in the table (Wales and Woodland
(1979), Hausman (1981) and Hausman and Ruud (1984)) that deliver much higher
compensated labor supply elasticities. In these cases, the high elasticities are produced
by extremely high elasticities of labor supply with respect to income relative to almost
any other work in this area. The income elasticity of labor supply estimated in these
papers range from .81 to 1.03 while almost everyone else’s estimates are below .5.
Heckman (1993) presents a more detailed discussion of problems with these estimates.
We also tend to discount these estimates partially because they are so different than the
other standard estimates and partially because they differ greatly from income elasticities
estimated using exogenous income shocks. In the last panel of Table 6 we report the
income elasticities of labor supply estimated by Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote (2001) and
Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and Rosen (1993). Unlike the other papers reported in the table,
these two papers focus exclusively on income elasticities and more importantly, they both
use plausibly exogenous income shocks for identification. Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote

13

(2001) look at the impact of winning modestly sized lotteries on hours worked. HoltzEakin, Joulfaian and Rosen (1993) use variation coming from family inheritance. While
neither study is perfect, both have far more compelling sources of exogenous income
shocks than any of the other papers cited in the table.
Both papers find quite modest elasticities of labor supply with respect to income (-.03
and -.11). These findings are important for two reasons. First, these papers cast doubt on
the empirical validity of the high compensated labor supply elasticities, which were high
only because of income elasticities close to one. Second, these papers also cast doubt on
the Cobb-Douglas utility function used by Prescott (2004). After all, one of the core
implications of that functional form is that labor supply elasticities with respect to income
will be extremely high.
A final implication of the Cobb-Douglas utility function is that labor supply elasticities
will be very different for people with different levels of unearned income. While we are
not aware of studies that solidly confirm this prediction, we are also unaware of studies
that solidly reject this prediction. As such, it remains a topic for future research.
Overall, the empirical literature on labor supply elasticities suggests three things. First,
for men uncompensated labor supply elasticities are close to zero. Second, given
reasonable estimates of labor supply elasticities with respect to income, compensated
labor supply elasticities are also relatively modest. Reasonable elasticity estimates
suggest that at best one-half of the hours worked difference between the U.S. and Europe
can be explained by differences in tax rates. Third, labor supply elasticities are much
higher for women and as a result, tax rate differences can potentially explain all of the
differences in hours worked between American and European married women.
Cross Country Evidence on Labor Supply and Taxes
At this point, we turn from the within-country evidence to the cross-country evidence on
the connection between tax rates and hours worked. Figure 6 plots the marginal income
tax rate versus hours worked for OECD countries and displays a significant and negative
relationship between the two. Our tax variable is the OECD estimate for 2001 of the
marginal tax rate on labor income. The appendix includes details on the construction of
this variable. This finding is similar to recent results reported by Davis and Herenkson
(2004) which use different tax variables.
In Table 8, for the sake of comparison with prior research, we report regressions of hours
worked and taxes on two regressions from Davis and Herenkson (2004). In order to
facilitate comparisons, we have regressed hours on tax rates. These figures are not
directly comparable to the elasticities discussed above. In order to make these into
comparable elasticities, we have divided these coefficient estimates by average hours
worked in the sample and reported these implied elasticity estimates in brackets.12 The
12

The estimates of elasticities found by regressing the logarithm of hours worked on the tax rate are almost
the same as the estimates found by regressing the level of hours worked on the tax rate and then dividing by
average hours worked.

14

tax variables are obtained from Nickell and Nunciata (2001) and Schneider (2002). The
details about these two tax series are given in Appendix 1.
For two of the three tax series used, the OECD one and the Schneider data, the
correlation is significant; for the third one, the Nickel and Nunciata series the correlation
is insignificant. The tax rate elasticity estimates in this table range from -.184 to -.865,
which are somewhat higher than the elasticities that would be implied by within-country
estimates, but still too low to explain all of the differences in hours worked between the
U.S. and Europe. For example, using the -7.5 coefficient on the marginal tax rate in
column one of this table, which is also reflected in Figure 6, we find that we can explain
about 36 percent of the difference in hours worked between France and the U.S., 34
percent of the Italy-U.S. difference and 65 percent of the Germany-U.S. difference.
While this cross country evidence is suggestive, time series evidence is more mixed. As
Davis and Herenkson (2004) also point out the decline of hours worked in Europe is
pretty much monotonic from the mid seventies to today, while the increase in marginal
tax rates were concentrated almost exclusively in the first part of the period, say up to the
late eighties. 13 The famous 35 hours week in France implemented in 2000 is a case in
point. This reform pushed by the union and agreed by a socialist government did not
occur in a period of increasing tax rates.
Even though the data are scant, the time series or panel evidence seems much weaker
than cross section evidence. Davis and Henreksson report that the coefficient on the
marginal tax rate in a panel with country fixed effects is insignificant. In regression (1)
and (2) of Table 9, we find that when we use a panel of countries and control for countryspecific fixed effects, the impact of tax rates on hours works declines -7.5 to -1.9. The
estimated tax rate elasticity declines from -.50 to -.18. This panel estimate is more in line
with the within country estimates discussed above.
The punch line is pretty clear. If one looks at within country microeconomic evidence on
the individual labor supply, one does not come even close to explaining the U.S. versus
Europe differences in hours worked. However using cross country evidence the
correlation between aggregate hours worked and tax rates is strong and if taken as a
causal relationship explains a good portion (roughly one third to one half) of the
difference in working hours per person. Time series panel evidence however, raises
some red flags about this cross section evidence.
There are roughly two explanations for the divergence between within country and across
country estimates of the labor supply estimates. One explanation (emphasized also by
Davis and Herenkson (2004)) stresses omitted variables. High marginal labor tax rates
are correlated with generous welfare systems, workplace regulations, unemployment
compensation programs, powerful unions, generous pay as you go social security
systems, etc. All of the above may depress working hours. Therefore the tax regressions
reported above do not capture the real impact of taxes on labor supply and using macroregressions significantly overstates the true impact of taxes.
13

An exception is Italy where significant tax increases occurred in the nineties.

15

A second explanation is that within country and across country effects of taxes are
different because of the existence of a social multiplier or because higher taxes provide
services that are valued by consumers. A social multiplier in this context would exist if
the marginal productivity of work (or leisure) increases with the number of one’s
compatriots who are also working (or relaxing). Those who argue that European culture
explains high levels of European leisure are perhaps also suggesting a role for a social
multiplier. This type of spillover predicts radically different micro and macro elasticities
of labor supply (Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman, 2003) and suggests that macro
estimates are indeed appropriate for considering the degree to which difference in tax
rates explain differences in labor supply across space.

4. Unionization and Regulation
At this point, we turn to our first significant omitted variable—the level of unionization.
Europe is far more unionized than the U.S. The share of the labor force that is covered
by collective bargaining agreements is listed in Table 16 across countries. This ranges
from less than 20 percent in the U.S. to more than 80 percent in Sweden, France and
Germany. The strength of unions owes much to laws and politics. Even within the U.S.,
the 1936 Wagner Act invigorated U.S. unions and the average unionization rate in states
with right-to-work laws is 8 percent while the unionization rate in states without these
laws is 16 percent. Note how union strength reached a peak in most European countries
in the late seventies/early eighties, precisely when the reduction in hours worked took off.
Afterwards, union membership show small decline in Europe and a much faster decline
in the U.S. (Boeri et al (2001)).
The large differences in unionization rates between the U.S. and Europe also reflect
political differences between the U.S. and Europe that have made European politics far
friendlier to unions than the U.S. Alesina and Glaeser (2004) argue that because of
American racial fractionalization and European political instability (which is ultimately
the result of two world wars), American politics is far less friendly to the left than
European politics. Institutions such as proportional representation have been quite prone
to favor the growth of communist parties and social democratic parties that championed
unions. The correlation is clear: Figure 12 shows the strong positive correlation between
proportional representation and the share of the labor force that is covered by collective
bargaining agreements. By contrast, American federalism, a majoritarian system which
makes it very hard for third parties to enter, separation of powers (especially the Senate
and the Supreme Court) have all acted to limit the strength of private sector unions. For
these political reasons, European Union density is much higher than union density within
the U.S.
Most classic models of unions and wage setting suggest that unions will artificially
restrict labor supply in order to raise wages. We might expect unions to impact labor
supply in two ways. First, labor unions may keep wages artificially high and restrict
employment. Second, labor unions might actively pursue policies of reduction in hours
worked, like recently the (in) famous 35 hours week in France or increased vacation time.

16

We will address the role of labor market regulations in the next section. Before
addressing labor market regulations, we will focus on the role that unions have through
higher wages.

4.1 Unions, Work Sharing and Demand Shocks
As above, workers maximize U (Y ) + V (1 − l ) , where Y denotes income and they have
one unit of time to divide between work and leisure. We now abstract from consideration
of taxes. There is a measure one of firms, all of which have dollar denominated output
denoted Af (ng (l )) , where A is productivity, f(.) is a concave function where f(0)=0, n
reflects the number of workers and g(.) is a concave function of the number of hours
worked by each worker, which equals l, and g(0)=0.
In a free market without unions, a firm will offer workers a (Y, l) pair that maximizes
profits and ensures that workers will receive the reservation utility, which is denoted U .
g ' (l )Y V ′(1 − l )
This
implies
the
first
order
conditions
=
and
g (l )
U ' (Y )
U (Y ) + V (1 − l ) = U > U (0 ) + V (1) , which together determine both hours worked and
salary. Note that “A” does not enter into either of these two equations: changes in
industry specific productivity, if this does not impact the reservation wage, will not
impact hours worked. The first order condition for the number of workers hired is
g (l ) Af ′(ng (l )) = Y . In equilibrium, if N is the total population, and there is measure one
of identical firms with identical production technologies, then symmetry ensures that
n=N. U is determined endogenously so that everyone will work.
We let l* denote number of hours worked that satisfy the firm’s first order conditions so
that n=N. To consider labor market regulations, we assume that there exists a binding
hours worked constraint, denoted l :
Proposition 1: Output per worker rises with l , and output per hour falls with l . When
l is sufficiently close to l*, worker utility falls with l , but for some higher levels of l
worker utility is rising with l . Firm profits fall with l .
Regulations that limit work hours will decrease total productivity per worker, but will
raise productivity per hour. This follows from the concavity of the production functions.
Small impositions of hour’s regulations will essentially redistribute from firms to workers
and will raise worker utility. Large impositions of hour’s regulations will eventually
harm both workers and firms.
Following Blanchard and Wolfers (2003), we now turn to the impact of a sectoral shock
to the economy. We do this by assuming that for one-half of the firms, productivity
equals A + ∆ and for the other half of the firms productivity equals A − ∆ . As discussed
above, hours and wages will continue to be equal across firms, but the more productive

17

firms will have more workers. We let n + denote the employment of the more productive
firms and let n − denote the employment of the two sectors, and 2 − n + = n − .

∂n +
∂Y
> 0,
> 0 and per worker
∂∆
∂∆
YU ′′(Y )
∂l
productivity also rises with ∆ .
> 0 if and only if −
< 1.
∂∆
U ′(Y )

Proposition 2:

If

f (ng (l )) = (ng (l ))α , then

This proposition implies that in a free market where labor is mobile between sectors, a
shock that increases the productivity of one sector and decreases the productivity of a
second sector by an equal amount will increase total income and per worker productivity.
This result is not surprising; it is the standard LeChatelier principle in action showing the
due to optimizing responses productivity will rise with variance.
This dislocation increases productivity, but it only increases hours worked
YU ′′(Y )
< 1 . This condition is necessary because it guarantees that the labor supply
if −
U ′(Y )
curve slopes up so that increases in productivity will lead to increased hours worked. If
this condition doesn’t hold, then workers will work shorter hours because of the income
effect. The core implication of this model is that shocks will lead to a new allocation of
workers, but if these shocks are mean zero, then this will lead to greater productivity and
greater hours worked.
We now introduce unions into the model and first assume that productivity is everywhere
equal to A. We assume that unions have the ability to set both l and Y, but the firm will
then optimally choose the number of workers. This also ensures that the firm will always
earn nonnegative profits, since setting n to zero and earning zero profits is always
feasible.
While there are many possible methods of determining the union’s maximization
problem, we assume that the union has been allocated initially N members and its goal to
first ensure that all N members continue to be employed by the firm and that the welfare
of these N members are maximized. If the union maximizes U (Y ) + V (l ) , subject to the
constraint that Ag (1 − l ) f ′(ng (1 − l )) = Y , and n=N, then:

Proposition 3: Hours worked under unionization will be lower than hours worked under
the free market. Productivity per worker will be lower and productivity per hours will be
higher. Worker utility will be higher under unionization and firm profits will be lower
under unionization.14
This result nicely fits with Blanchard’s (2004) comparison of France (which he calls
“Europe”) and the U.S. In France, productivity per worker went up less than in the U.S.,
while productivity growth per hour rose much more in France. (This resulted in France
14

Marimon and Zilibotti's [2000] union model delivers a similar result

18

reaching the US productivity per hour level by 2000). These results are unsurprising and
serve mainly to remind us that unionization is an important omitted variable, which might
also explain low work hours in European economies.
One question is whether unions in this case would also lobby for hours restraints. In this
model, there would be little reason to do so. However, in a richer model where industries
might compete in the product market or where unions might have trouble enforcing labor
rules on new entrants, unions would have an incentive to ensure that the rules that come
out of collective bargaining applied everywhere throughout the economy.
Finally, we turn to the impact of unions on hours worked in response to sectoral shocks.
The core element in our model is that union objectives ensure that the number of workers
in each firm will remain fixed at N. To achieve this, unions will treat the firms’ first
and
order
conditions
for
hiring
workers
( ( A + ∆) g (l + ) f ′(ng (l + )) = Y +
−
−
−
( A − ∆) g (l ) f ′( Ng (l )) = Y ) as constraints.
Unions will ensure there is no
unemployment of adults within the union. If there are new workers (from new
generations) this will generate unemployment among the young, which is after all a
feature of the unionized European economies. These assumptions imply:

Proposition 4: Hours worked will fall in the declining industry and rise in the growing
∂l −
∂l +
YU ′′(Y )
industry (i.e.
< 0 and
> 0 ) if and only if −
< 1 . If f (ng (l )) = (ng (l ))α ,
∂∆
∂∆
U ′(Y )
∂l + ∂l −
+
g (l ) = l , U (Y ) = Y , V(l)=v(1-l), and 1 > σ (1 + γα ) , then
< 0 so that
∂∆ ∂∆
average hours of work declines with ∆ .
γ

σ

This proposition gives us the general result that a union that is trying to maintain
membership will cut hours when its sector receives a negative shock. While there is no
sense that restricting the number of hours raises employment at the economy level, at the
firm level there is a truth to “work less; work all.” Unions that want to keep the firm
from firing workers will indeed reduce the number of hours worked per employee.
YU ′′(Y )
< 1 , which ensures that the labor
Again, this result requires the condition, −
U ′(Y )
supply curve slopes up. This stands in contrast to the non-unionized result where sectoral
shocks lead to a re-allocation of labor, more efficiency and generally more hours.
To derive a result on average hours worked in the economy, the proposition assumes
specific functional forms for the key functions, and then finds that as long as
1 > σ (1 + γα ) , overall hours worked will decline with the size of sectoral shock. This
condition ensures that labor supply, in the unionized world, is convex with respect to
productivity, which in turn implies that the increase of hours worked in the successful
sector is smaller than the decrease in hours worked in the unsuccessful sector.

19

These results do not characterize all unionized economies. Rather it shows that under
reasonable parameter values, the impact of a sectoral shock on hours worked can be
completely opposite in unionized and non-unionized economies. In a non-unionized
economy, a sectoral shock that helps one sector and hurts another will generally lead to
higher average productivity and greater hours worked. In a unionized economy, where
labor movements across sectors are much more limited, a sectoral shock can easily lead
to a decrease in hours worked because the negative impact on the hurt sector is greater
than the positive impact on the strong sector.

4.2 Union Density, Regulations and Hours across Countries
As our first piece of evidence we turn to the connection between unionization and hours
worked across countries. Figure 7 shows the strong negative correlation between hours
worked and the percentage of the labor force that is covered by collective bargaining
agreements. The raw correlation between these two variables is -54 percent. In fact, this
correlation is at least as strong as the one described above for marginal tax rates, and in
fact the two variables, marginal tax rates and unionization, are highly correlated 0.72.
The high level of correlation between unionization and tax rates supports the contention
that the aggregate estimates of tax rate may be overestimating the true effect of tax rates
because of omitted variables problems.
Table 10 shows regressions where we show the difficulties of separately identifying a
union effect and an hours effect. In the first regression, we repeat the basic finding of a
negative connection between tax rates and hours worked. This correlation is significant.
In regression (2), we show that there is also a robust negative relationship between
unionization and hours worked across countries. The correlation between unionization
and hours worked is somewhat higher than the correlation between the marginal tax rates
and hours worked. Regression (3) shows that neither variable is significant when both
variables are included in the regression. The coefficient on marginal tax rates plummets,
but the standard errors are quite high and we feel that these regressions ultimately tell us
little about what the true impact of either unionization or tax rates is on hours worked.
In order to shed more light, we follow Davis and Henrekson (2004) and use both time
series and cross sectional information. In Table 9, we present some suggestive panel
regressions. The left hand side is hours worked per years per country. The years
covered are 1960-1995 for up to 18 OECD countries. (The panel is not balanced).
Column 1 includes the Nickell and Nunciata measure of the tax rate, plus country and
year dummies; column 2 adds year and countries dummies. We believe that both
controls are appropriate. In column 3, we include a measure of union density. This
union density variable is significantly negative and including this variable causes the tax
rate variable to become insignificant. Prescott (2004) emphasizes that the timing of tax
rate changes in Europe seems to correspond with the relative decline in hours worked.
However, the same can be said for changes in unionization and changes in labor market
regulation. In regression (4), we include the Blanchard and Wolfers measure of
employment protection. This variable also enters significantly and now the impact of the

20

tax variable becomes even smaller. If these results are taken at face value, it seems that
either unions or labor market regulation is better at explaining U.S./Europe differences
than the tax rate.
Two important caveats are in order. First, the variable “union density” is different from
the more appropriate one that we used above which is union coverage, that is the portion
of the employed that are covered by union agreements. Union density reflects union
membership and it is less relevant here but we do not have time series on union coverage.
However cross country evidence on recent data show that union coverage is more closely
correlated with hours worked than union density; therefore we hypothesize that union
coverage would have worked even better than union density in the panel regression. The
second caveat is that we have panel data on marginal tax rates only from Nickel and
Nunciata. Of the three marginal tax rate variables used above in cross sections, this is the
one that works least well in terms of correlation with hours worked. Therefore we
hypothesize that had we had the time varying measures of marginal tax rates the latter
might have performed better in our panel regression.
In order to bring more evidence on this point we turn to evidence across the U.S. states.
Figure 8 shows the number of weeks of vacation reported by respondent of the PSID
versus the state income tax.15 There is no correlation between the two. Figure 9 displays
the correlation between the average days of vacation and the unionization rate. The
correlation is positive.16 In summary, the cross state evidence points in the direction of
unionization more strongly than in the direction of marginal tax rates.
Table 11 shows the impact of different variables on weeks of vacation across the U.S. in
the PSID. In the first regression, we show the impact of state income tax on weeks of
vacation. The effect is significant and negative. In the second regression, we control for
union membership. This has a comparably large effect. When both variables are
included in the third regression, both are significant.

4.3 Institutional history
A few notes on the institutional history of hours worked and labor regulation may help.
In France, up to the early seventies, hours worked of employed people where regulated
by law (statutory rules) and not subject to negotiation between employers organizations
and labor unions.17 The key piece of legislation was the 1936 Law that fixed the 40 hours
week. From the Second World War until the mid sixties the relatively weak unions
focused on improving labor conditions. Starting in the mid sixties and especially from the
mid seventies onward the reinforced union movement focused heavily of reduction of
hours worked. In the late seventies lengthy rounds of negotiation on hours reduction
between unions and employers organization finally came to a January 1981 agreement
that reduced the working week to 39 hours. Until then the government had been relatively
15

Note that hours worked per capita at the state level are not available
Boal and Pencavel (1994) in a careful study of the mining industry in West Virginia conclude that in the
1920’s days of work were 25 per cent higher in the non union sector relative to the union sector.
17
For a discussion of the institutional history of hours worked in France see Gauvin (1993)
16

21

neutral with respect to these negotiations, but the new Socialist Government in 1982
clearly took the side of the unions. In a series of laws (1982, 1986 1987) the government
issued regulations that either forced or created strong incentives for employers to reduce
working hours by increasing mandatory vacations, making it harder to use overtime, etc.
Note how Figure 1 shows a sharp drop of work hours per person around 1982. At the
same time the pressure for a 35 hour week was mounting. The 35 hour week was indeed
introduced in 2000.
In Germany the reduction in hours worked started right after the Second World War and
continued with a pretty stable trend. Hours worked fell from 2315 per person in 1950 to
about 1750 in 1975 (Bosch (1993)). Note however how the starting point was higher
than in France; in Germany the 1938 statutory law fixed at 48 the maximum number of
weekly hours. Up until 1975 the reduction in working hours was accompanied by rapid
increase in productivity per hour but this changed with the first oil shock. At the time of
the large increase in unemployment which followed the first oil crisis of 1973, unions
pursued a policy of “work less work all,” that is a policy of reduced work hours at the
same total wage or even higher wage per hour to compensate for lower total hours
worked. An aggressive union movement (more than 11,000 million days of strikes in the
ten years following 1975) focused very heavily on reduction of work hours holding total
pay constant. (Hunt (1998, 1999)) The unions’ stated policies were based on the
assumption that the total amount of work to be performed was somehow fixed, and
therefore sharing it amongst more individuals would increase employment.
The slogan “work less work all” in different languages echoed in the unions’ marches in
most of Europe. Hunt (1998) reviews in detail the labor literature that examined the
effects of a reduction of standard hours and actual working hours and concludes that the
effect was basically one for one in Germany and France, that is the reduction in standard
hours did not translate in more overtime. She also presents evidence that suggests that
reduction in the hours worked of the male worker reduced the hours actually worked by
the spouse, even after controlling for the standard hours of the spouse, an indication of a
family multiplier effect. 18 A “household production” model would instead imply an
inverse relationship between hours worked in the market and at home between the two
members of the family.
Reduced work hours at given total wages obviously increases the cost of labor input per
hour, leading to input substitution. The result has been a reduction of employment in
hours sharing sectors. The same author (Hunt (1999)) studies wage settlements in
Germany after 1985 and she concludes that “the union claim of full wage compensation”
was justified, namely the hourly wage [increased] enough to offset the actual decline in
working hours.
In Italy the working hours regulations that lead to an increase in vacation days were the
result of negotiation between Confindustria (the association of manufacturers), the unions
and the Government in an active role of mediator. Following the Autunno Caldo (hot fall)
18

Interestingly she finds that this effect is smaller for women with a university degree, consistent with the
view that in these cases the woman’s career goal may take precedence over the family multiplier effect.

22

of 1969, unions were galvanized and reached their maximum strength in the post war
period. At the same time a surge in the vote share of socialist and communist parties lead
to a shift of the political balance toward the left. The 15 years that followed 1969 saw a
constant reduction of working time through a series of labor agreements (Garonna and
Reboni (1993)).
Contrary to these European experiences, no significant regulations in the U.S. dictate
anything about work hours for individuals older than 16 and, as discussed above, the
coverage of labor union agreement is much less than in Europe.
The effect of unions on working hours goes above and beyond the direct negotiations on
the work week and vacations. In Europe, labor unions have a major political role in
promoting and defending the welfare state in general and public pension systems in
particular (Alesina and Glaeser (2004)). Because of the large influence of older workers
in the union movements, the latter have been especially keen if promoting more and more
generous pensions schemes from the sixties onward and more recently have strenuously
defended them against reform geared toward reestablishing fiscal balance. In 1995 in
both France and Italy, union opposition to pension reforms lead to a withdrawal of the
reform in the former and the collapse of the government in the latter. Recently France
went through a month of heavy social unrest in opposition to a relatively minor pension
reform geared toward eliminating privileges for public employees. There is indeed a
strong correlation between welfare spending in general and pension spending as a share
of GDP and measure of union density (Boeri et al. (2001)). In many European countries
unions are directly involved in the management of pension systems and unemployment
compensation schemes. This role often creates obstacles to policy reforms towards
restraints, and favors a benefit creep.
The generosity of the retirement system obviously affects labor participation of the
elderly, which is one factor that explains lower work hours per person on the two sides of
the Atlantic. As Boeri et al. (2001) put it “today more than every second older man
between the age of 54 and 65 has already retired from the labor force.”
A related factor is the unions’ tendency to favor pre retirement schemes to avoid
unemployment; if a large plant has to close often unions negotiate pre retirement for older
workers. Management and unions often find this agreement easy to achieve since those
paying the bills (the taxpayers) are not sitting at the negotiating table.19
The preference of unions for generous publicly provided pension schemes has to do with
the political bias in union organization toward the older members of the unions; a bias
that also makes unions relatively uninterested in the problem of youth unemployment.
Boeri et al (2001) present a strong correlation between union density and youth
unemployment. In Italy households composed of relatively young retirees and
unemployed youth in their late twenties are common. The presence of youth
unemployment also leads to an extension of time spent in school.
19

One of the latest examples of this in Italy was the negotiations leading to a bailout of Alitalia.

23

Other union policies might have indirectly affected hours worked. For instance, think of
rigidity in the use of manpower and use of overtime. Firing costs may have lead
entrepreneurs to switch to capital intensive technologies. The use of early retirement to
allow for plant closings are polices that may directly or indirectly reduce work hours
and/or employment. 20
Labor unions have also fought hard for increasing unemployment compensation, which in
turn raise wage pressure and may reduce employment. (Nickell (1998)). We cannot even
begin to review the literature of the employment effect of unemployment insurance, the
magnitude and even the sign of it is debated and politically charged.
Finally note that the unionization story may also encompass the argument put forward by
Bell and Freeman (1995). They argue that Americans work more because wages are less
compressed in the U.S. relative to Europe and therefore the incentive to work harder and
being promoted are stronger. One of the key explanations of different degrees of wage
compression is certainly union polices and the degree of unionization.21 More generally
Bell and Freeman (1995, 1999) highlight the role of inequality as an explanation of work
hours. In Figure 11 we plot a correlation between inequality and work hours; we
emphasize correlation because causality could go either way if longer hours are
associated with more variance of working time across families.
This correlation highlights once gain one basic theme of this paper. Hours worked have
fallen especially in continental European countries characterized by strong unions,
extensive welfare coverage, high taxation and prevalence of social democratic
governments, all factors that also reduce inequality (see Alesina and Glaeser (2004)).
Hours worked have not fallen in the U.S. and (to a lesser extent in the UK and Ireland)
because these are countries with less extensive welfare, less intrusive regulations, less
powerful union movements and more inequality. The bottom line is that hours worked
fell in countries that can be characterized by the Continental European model and did not
fall in the countries with the American model (with Britain and Ireland in between) The
point here is the fact that a host of variables move together in the two types of countries.

4.4 But Why?
Why did unions in Europe choose to fight for lower work hours? Our model implies that
when faced with sectoral shocks, unions that are interested in maintaining their
membership will cut hours worked. The heart of this explanation is that unions either
care about maintaining size because size drives their political power, or because union
dues are a function of the number of workers, or because unions are under political
20

An enormous literature that we cannot even begin to summarize discusses the effect on European
employment level of various labor market rigidities. This is of course a heavily politically charged topic,
but it would be hard to find a mainstream economist who would argue that labor market rigidity has no
effect on employment levels in Europe.
21
For a broad review of the literature on unions in general and on the effect of unions on wage compression
see Boeri et al (2001) and also Card (2001)

24

pressure from their members not to let individual members get laid off. The explanation
given by the model fits well with the openly stated policy of work sharing. In a period of
reduction of employment, the idea of “work less work all” was everywhere in union
pamphlets and was chanted in union marches. Had the unions accepted a constant hourly
wage that might have worked, but union members tried to have their cake and eat it too,
as Hunt (1998, 1999) convincingly has documented. That is unions in Germany and
France managed to impose lower hours with equal or increasing pay, leading to an
increase in salary per hour. That led to a reduction in employment.
There are certainly other explanations for the unions' policies that are also worth
addressing here. One answer in line with the taxation story is that union members
pressed the union to lower work hours in response to the increase in marginal tax rates,
an argument in line with Prescott (2004). Even though in the union rhetoric it is hard to
find any reference for this motivation to demands for reduction in hours worked, certainly
increases in taxes and reduction of take home pay may affect wage demands (Alesina and
Perotti (1997), Daveri and Tabellini (1997), Boeri et al (2001)) leading to higher pre tax
wages and lower employment levels.
Another explanation is that the unions helped coordinate a demand for lower hours due to
an income effect, an argument in line with Blanchard (2004). That is, the unions simply
responded to the increasing income level of their members who demanded more leisure.
In this sense the unions served the purpose of overcoming the transaction costs associated
with individual bargaining and provided a voice for workers, an argument in line with the
view of unions’ role by Freeman and Medoff (1984)). This role particularly makes sense
if there are positive complementarities in the enjoyment of leisure activity. In that case,
private decisions about work and leisure will lead to too much work.
A final explanation is that in a period of inflation (the seventies and eighties) and
increasing unemployment, demands for increases in real wages might have been
politically unpalatable. Given the heavy government intervention and politically salient
nature of union negotiations in Europe, political packaging of union’s demand is very
important. Asking for large wage increases with unemployment and inflation might have
been impossible, but asking for higher hourly wages by holding constant total wages and
reducing hours worked was more politically feasible especially using the powerful
rhetoric of “work less work all since there are so many unemployed who want to work”.
Given the potential adverse effects of shorter work hours on employment, Booth and
Schiantarelli (1986) concluded that it is a “puzzle” why in the seventies and eighties labor
unions pushed for lower hours.

5. Social Multipliers and Culture
In this section, we review the possibility that the macro-estimates are more appropriate
than the micro-estimates. There are two principal reasons why this might be true. First,
higher taxes might not have the negative income effects that we would normally associate
with lower wages. As we have discussed above, even the supposedly compensated labor

25

supply estimates are not large enough for this to explain the U.S./Europe differences.
Second, there might be complementarities across people in leisure or production that
create a social multiplier.

5.1 The Social Multiplier
In this section, we present a simple social multiplier argument and discuss whether the
available evidence on the magnitude of the social multiplier in the context of labor supply
could explain the discrepancy between micro and macro estimates of labor supply.
The basic starting point of a social multiplier model is to assume that the marginal
productivity of either work or leisure is increasing in the amount of leisure consumed by
one’s peers. We will assume that utility is separable between income and leisure, so that
individuals maximize U ((1 − l )(1 − t ) w) + V 1 − l ,1 − lˆ where the notation is as above,
except that lˆ is the average amount of hours worked within the community. The
presence of a social multiplier implies that V 1 − l ,1 − lˆ > 0 . This cross-partial might

(

)

12

(

)

reflect social interactions during leisure activities, or it might reflect a decreased stigma
from relaxing. We assume that U(.) is concave and V11 1 − l ,1 − lˆ < 0 .

(

)

If the wage rate is common to the entire community and if the community is
homogeneous, then the impact of a wage change on the labor supply of the entire
− (1 − t ) 2 wU ′′((1 − l )(1 − t ) w) ) − V11 1 − l ,1 − lˆ
community will equal
times
− (1 − t ) 2 wU ′′((1 − l )(1 − t ) w) ) − V11 1 − l ,1 − lˆ − V12 1 − l ,1 − lˆ
the impact of a wage change on the labor supply of the individual. If U(.) is linear and
V 1 − l ,1 − lˆ = v0 (1 − l ) − v1 (1 − l ) 2 + v 2 (1 − l )(1 − lˆ) , then this social multiplier equals

(

(

(

)

(

)

)

)

2v1
. For an interior solution to be a social optimum, v1 > v 2 so in this case, the
2v1 − v 2
social multiplier must be less than two.

There are two issues raised by the existence of a social multiplier. First, it can potentially
justify the use of macro rather than micro elasticities. Of course, the micro-elasticities
are themselves often produced by the use of aggregate variables, such as changes in the
tax rates. Estimates based on national tax supply changes will include some impact of the
social multiplier. To get from the estimated micro-elasticities of .2 to the macroelasticity of .8, the social multiplier would have to be about 4. Second, the existence of a
social multiplier might mean that government regulations (or higher taxes) that reduced
working hours are socially efficient. If V2 1 − l ,1 − lˆ > 0 , then private labor supply
decisions will lead to too much work relative to the social optimum.

(

)

We present two forms of evidence on the social multiplier in labor supply decisions.
First, we present anecdotal evidence on social interactions in leisure and relate these to
debates about culture in Europe vs. the U.S. Second, we present limited evidence on the
actual size of the social multiplier in labor supply.
26

5.2 The Social Multiplier and the Culture of Leisure in the U.S. and
Europe
Some observers of the U.S. and European situations have suggested that differences in
hours of works reflect the difference between a European culture of leisure and American
workaholism. One variant of this view is that these differences reflect long-standing
cultural differences, which are perhaps rooted in America’s puritan Calvinist heritage. It
is certainly true that New England’s Puritan settlers avidly struck long-standing religious
holidays off the calendar (including Christmas) and thereby increased their total work
days significantly.
But while this theory has a certain charm, it has much trouble with the labor histories of
the U.S. and Europe as shown in Figure 1. As this figure clearly shows, as late as the
1960s, Europeans worked longer hours than Americans. Working Saturdays was more
common in Europe, and even long summer vacations were not particularly more common
in Europe than in the U.S. Indeed, the August vacation cannot be a long-standing part of
mainstream European culture, because after all August is a prime working month in every
agricultural community in the northern hemisphere. Figure 10 shows the lack of
correlation between percent Protestant and hours of work across countries. While it may
seem today that differences in work patterns are eternal aspects of European and
American lifestyles, these differences are modern in vintage.
Using data from the PSID we tested whether cultural measures (being Protestant) were
important within the U.S. Table 11 shows that being Protestant does not influence hours
worked, while being a union member does. The state maximum income tax rate is
insignificant. Data from Germany, shown in Table 12, using the GSOEP are similar:
while being protestant is irrelevant, being a union member is very important in explaining
weeks of vacation.
But although it is a mistake to think that Europe/U.S. labor supply differences reflect
long-standing cultural differences, there may be some truth to those who argue for the
importance of a culture of leisure in Europe. The essence of the cultural view is that
because everyone takes long vacations in Europe, it is more pleasurable to take those
vacations. In part, this is because one's friends and relatives are also on vacation and it is
enjoyable to relax with one’s friends. In part, increasing returns to provide leisure
infrastructure may mean that Europe has developed better infrastructure for enjoying a
month-long August holiday.
Of course, these arguments are essentially variants on the social multiplier view—one
person’s leisure increases the returns to other people’s leisure. The European anecdote is
hardly unique; there is a great deal of anecdotal evidence supporting the idea that there
are positive complementarities across people in the enjoyment of leisure time. At this
point, we consider three different examples of these complementarities which support the
idea of a significant social multiplier: the weekend and work timing more generally, the

27

literature on agglomeration economies and labor force participation decisions among
subgroups of the population.
One of the strongest pieces of evidence in favor of complementarities across either
leisure or work is the extent that an overwhelming share of the population takes its two
days of leisure during Saturday and Sunday. There are extremely good reasons—saving
commuting for example or spreading capital over more workers—why there would be
advantages from spreading staggering work so different people take different days off
during the week. Nonetheless, in both Europe and the U.S. there is a remarkable
consensus on taking Saturday and Sunday off. While taking Sunday off may be seen as
part of a long-standing Christian religious observance, as rising incomes lead to more
leisure time, it was not obvious what the second day would be and for a while it seemed
just as likely that Monday would represent the second day of vacation (Rybczynski,
1992). Surely, it would have been quite possible for one-half of the population to take
Monday and Sunday off and one-half of the population to take Saturday and Sunday off.
Nonetheless, there was a strong convergence to a common two day weekend despite the
many disadvantages of crowding commutes and infrastructure usage more generally
during five days and leaving this infrastructure underutilized during the other two days.
In European countries with small amounts of religious observance, it is hard to think that
Sunday remains as a leisure day except for its role as a focal point, and it would not have
power as a focal unless there were complementarities in leisure (or work) across
individuals.
Similar comments could be made about work hours and vacation days more generally.
The share of the population that works between 9 and 5 in the U.S. is extremely high
relative to the benefits that would be gains from staggering commuting more evenly over
the day. Likewise, people tend to group holiday times together both during the winter
and summer holidays. These anecdotes do suggest that people like to rest at the same
time that others are resting, or conversely to work when others are working. This is
certainly one form of evidence supporting the existence of a social multiplier either in
work or in leisure.
A second form of evidence is the work that has been done on agglomeration economies
in productivity (e.g. Ciccone and Hall, 1996). This work has tried to document that
productivity increases when people are surrounded by others who are productive. This
sort of effect has been used by Hall and others to explain business cycle fluctuations. In
the previous framework, this type of effect would be included by assuming that W(.) is a
function of aggregate labor supply and this would also produce a social multiplier,
without any complementarities in leisure.
A third piece of evidence which appears to support the significance of social multipliers
is the remarkable difference on labor force participation rates across demographic
subgroups within areas. For example, Table 13 shows the labor force participation rates
for adult males (aged 30-50), adult females (30-50) and young males (20-30) in a set of
15 different countries. The differences across these populations are quite striking.
Among young males, the labor force participation rate ranges from .37 in Belgium to .72

28

in the Netherlands and UK. Among adult females, the labor force participation rate
ranges from .48 in Italy to .77 in Sweden.
Tax rates and labor market regulations explain some of these differences, but another
possible reason is the complementarities across work or leisure within these subgroups.
One fact that suggests that labor market regulation is not the only explanation of these
differences is the lack of correlation across the subgroups. For example, the correlation
between labor force participation rates of young men and adult women is only 74 percent.
Leisure complementarities are also a plausible explanation. It is less unpleasant to be an
unemployed youth, if your friends are similarly unemployed. Adult women working
outside the formal labor market find it easier to function when they have peers who are in
a similar situation. Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman (1996), show that excess
variance is one piece of evidence that supports the existence of positive
complementarities across people. There is indeed high variance across subgroups across
space in labor force participation, which also supports the existence of such
complementarities in the labor supply decision.
A fourth piece of evidence is shown in Table 11. Here we compare non-union workers in
right-to-work states and non right-to-work states. Right-to-work states have much lower
unionizations and as a result fewer union workers who take longer vacations. If the
social multiplier view is right, then non-unionized workers in right-to-work states will
take shorter vacations because they work around more non-unionized workers who are
taking shorter vacations. This is exactly what the table shows. Even non-union workers
in right-to-work states take shorter vacations.
Thus, there is a small body of evidence that shows that there may well be social
multipliers in the context of taxes. This may mean that macro-elasticities are appropriate.
However, the cross-national evidence given above still suggests elasticities that are too
small to explain the U.S./Europe differences. Our preferred specifications which
examine a country panel and control for unions and labor market regulation show very
modest effects. These estimated elasticities, which should presumably include any social
multiplier effects, still explain only a small amount of the U.S./Europe differences.

6. Aren’t vacations a great thing?
Assume for a moment that unionization and regulation were indeed a major cause of the
drop in hours worked in Europe. As economists, we tend to view departure from perfect
competition as producing inferior equilibria, and generally we are right. Thus, we should
see unions and regulations as infringing on the ability of people to work more and
enforcing a sub optimal low hour’s equilibrium. However, it may be the case that these
regulations serve as a coordination device to achieve a low work hour’s equilibrium that
is desirable because of social multipliers effect but difficult to reach individually. It is
hard to obtain more vacation for yourself from your employer and even harder, if you do,
to coordinate with all your friends to get the same deal and go on vacation together.

29

Needless to say it is very difficult to assess which of the two is right. As a first pass we
looked at measures of life satisfaction and hours worked for European countries.22
Table 14 uses data from GSOEP a German survey in which the left hand side is a
measure of life satisfaction. Column 1 shows a significant effect of hours worked on
happiness in the 1990 survey: fewer hours worked more life satisfaction. Note that in this
regression we DO NOT include a measure of income of the respondent; everybody
should be happier working less holding income constant! Column 2 shows very similar
results for 2000. In column 3 we include individual fixed effects. The value of the
parameter on hours worked drop to about ¾ of what it was in 1990 and it is borderline
insignificant (t stat about 1.7). This evidence taken together is at least suggestive that
working less makes Germans happier even NOT holding income constant.
In Table 15 we use data from Eurobarometer on country members of the European
Union. The first regression shows a negative relationship between hours worked across
countries and life satisfaction. This shows the same negative effect as seen in the country
data. Of course, reverse causality might still be at work. To address this possibility, in
regression (2), we instrument for hours worked using collective bargaining agreements.
In this regression, we continue to find a negative relationship between hours worked and
life satisfaction across countries. In the third regression, we repeat this procedure for a
panel of countries and find a similar negative relationship even with country and year
fixed effects.
This evidence at least suggests that Europeans seem to be happy to work less and less.
Whether they internalize the macroeconomic effect of working less, like relative
shrinking of the size of their economies relative to emerging countries, decadence in the
relative prominence of Europe as an economic superpower, is of course a different
matter.

7. Conclusions
Our punch line is that Europeans today work much less than Americans because of the
policies of the unions in the seventies, eighties and part of the nineties and because of
labor market regulations. Marginal tax rates may have also played a role, especially for
women's labor force participation, but our view is that in a hypothetical competitive labor
market without unions and with limited regulation, these tax increases would not have
affected hours worked as much. Certainly micro evidence on the elasticity of labor supply
is inconsistent with a mainly tax based explanation of this phenomenon, even though
“social multiplier effects” may “help” in this respect.
A very hard question to answer is whether labor unions and labor regulation introduce
distortions that reduce welfare or whether they are a way of coordinating on a more
desirable equilibrium with fewer hours worked. Since answering this question is difficult
22

The pros and cons of using data on life satisfaction have been widely debated in the literature; see for
instance Blanchflower and Oswald (2004). We do not address these issues here.

30

and the question is heavily politically charged, we won’t be surprised if the debate will
continue for a long time with heated tones.

31

Appendix 1: Data Sources
1) Labor Force Participation and Hours and Weeks Worked Statistics
Our data on hours worked, usual weekly hours, and vacation days come from the OECD
database available at:
http://www1.oecd.org/scripts/cde/members/LFSDATAAuthenticate.asp
These statistics are by country and year. Full documentation is also available at this site.
The data are reported by individual member countries and are drawn from the standard
labor force surveys in place for each country (e.g. the CPS for the United States.)
Dr. Giuseppe Nicoletti at the OECD statistical office (Giuseppe.NICOLETTI@oecd.org)
generously provided us with detailed breakdowns of labor force participation by countryyear-age cells. He also provided us with the decomposition of 52 weeks per year into
weeks worked, holiday and vacation weeks, absences due to non-holiday/ vacation,
absences due to sickness and maternity leave. (See Table 3.)
Data on federally mandated and collectively agreed days of vacation are from the
European Industrial Relations Observatory On-Line and their report called Working Time
Developments. This report is available at
http://www.eiro.eurofound.ie/2004/03/feature/tn0403108f.html

Lastly, it is worthwhile noting that most of the data shown in Chapter 1 can also be found
in the yearly edition of the OECD Labour Force Statistics and the Statistical Annex of the
OECD Employment Outlook.

2) The tax data
Our OECD tax data come from the OECD Tax Database available at
http://www.oecd.org/document/60/0,2340,en_2649_34533_1942460_1_1_1_1,00.html
Full documentation is available at this site. The data are described by the OECD as
follows. "This is the income tax and social security contribution rates for a single person
without dependent, at various multiples (67%, 100%, 133%, and 167%) of the APW
[average production wage].
The results, derived from the OECD Taxing Wages
framework (elaborated in the annual publication Taxing Wages), use tax rates applicable
to the tax year beginning in calendar year 2001. The results take into account
32

basic/standard income tax allowances and tax credits, but exclude universal family cash
transfers (included in Taxing Wages). The Marginal tax rates are derived on the basis of
a unit increase in gross wages, with the exception of the marginal Total tax wedge
calculation which considers an increase in gross labor costs (gross wages + employer
SSC) resulting from a unit increase in gross wage earnings. The sub-central personal tax
rates used in this table correspond to those used in Taxing Wages (rates applicable in a
typical manufacturing area or a weighted average of sub-central rates for the country as a
whole).".
We used the marginal tax rate at 100% of the average production wage.
We obtained the Schneider (2002) and Nickell and Nunciata (2001) tax data from Davis
and Herenkson (2004). Nickell and Nunciata (2001) tax rate is computed using the
London School of Economics CEP-OECD data base, which draws on OECD and other
sources. Their tax wedge number is the sum of three component: 1) an “employment tax
wedge” which is equal to employer contributions to social security welfare plans and
private pensions divided by total employers’ compensations; 2) a direct tax wedge”
which is equal to employees’ contribution to social security plus households income taxes
divided by current receipts of households; 3) and an “indirect tax rate” equal to indirect
taxes less subsidies divided by private final consumption expenditures”. Nickell and
Nunciata have a panel of 20 OECD countries and cover the years 1960-1995. Their data
are available in the Labor Market Institutions Database (Nickell and Nunciata [2001]).
The Schneider (2002) tax data are the sum of household income tax rates, sales/VAT tax
rates, and employer plus employee social security tax rates. The data appendix in Davis
and Henrekson (2004) provides extensive discussion of both data sources.

3) Other Data Items
The proportional representation measure comes from Milesi, Perotti and Rostagno (2000)
and was generously provided by the authors.
Union coverage by country is from the OECD Employment Outlook, chapter 5.
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/3/52/2409993.pdf
Data for the Blanchard Wolfers (2000) employment protection measure is contained in
the Nickell Nunziata Labor Market Insitutions Database. Percent protestant by country
is calculated from the World Values Survey Data.
U.S. State unionization rates are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) website.
Right to work states are coded from the data at http://www.nrtw.org/rtws.htm. State tax
rates are from the states joint tax center at http://www.taxadmin.org/ and cross checked
with data from the Tax Policy Center run by The Brookings Institution and the Urban
Institute. Data are available at
http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/TaxFacts/tfdb/TFTemplate.cfm?topic2id=90

33

Individual level regressions use data from the German Socio-Economic Panel and the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics. GSOEP data are from the 1984-2002 data assembled
by the Department of Policy Analysis and Management at Cornell University. Data for
the PSID are pulled from their online data site at http://simba.isr.umich.edu/. For both
data sets we use data for male heads of household ages 18-64 for the most recent year
available.

34

Appendix 2

Proof of Proposition 1: If l is fixed at l , then the relevant first order conditions is
Ag (l ) f ′( Ng (l )) = Y . Per worker productivity equals Af ( Ng (l )) / N and the derivative
of this with respect to l is positive. Per hour productivity equals Af ( Ng (l )) / l N and the
derivative of this with respect to l equals: A(l Ng ' (l ) f ' ( Ng (l )) − f ( Ng (l )) / l N which is
l g ' (l ) Ng (l ) f ' ( Ng (l ))
negative if and only if 1 >
, which follows from concavity of g(.)
g (l )
f ( Ng (l ))
and f(.), and that g(0)=0 and f(0)=0. The derivative of total worker utility with respect to
l is Ag ′(l )( f ′( Ng (l )) + g (l ) Nf ′′( Ng (l )) )U ′(Y ) − V ′(1 − l ) . When l = l * , this expression
simplifies to Ag ′(l ) g (l ) Nf ′′( Ng (l ))U ′(Y ) which is strictly negative. So in a region
around l*, the derivative will remain negative. For l = 0 , utility equals U(0)+V(1) which
is worse than the no regulation outcome, so at some point, utility must rise with l . The
derivative of profits with respect to l is − N 2 Ag ′(l ) g (l ) Nf ′′( Ng (l )) > 0 .
2

Proposition 2: If f (ng (1 − l )) = (ng (1 − l ))α , then
only if −

∂n +
∂l
∂Y
> 0,
> 0 and
< 0 if and
∂∆
∂∆
∂∆

YU ′′(Y )
< 1 . Per worker productivity also rises with ∆ .
U ′(Y )

Proof of Proposition 2:
The following conditions specify the economy
g ' (l )Y V ′(1 − l )
If
=
and ( A + ∆) g (l ) f ′(n + g (l )) = ( A − ∆) g (l ) f ′(n − g (l )) = Y .
g (l )
U ' (Y )
f (ng (l )) = (ng (l ))α , then the two first order conditions for labor imply that
1

2( A + ∆ )1−α

+

n =

1
1−α

(A + ∆)

∂n +
=
∂∆

1
1−α

+ (A − ∆)
α

and differentiating this with respect to ∆ yields
α

4 A( A + ∆ )1−α ( A − ∆ )1−α

> 0 . Using this result, differentiation then
2
1
1


(1 − α ) ( A + ∆ )1−α + ( A − ∆ )1−α 


′
′
∂Y g (l )V (1 − l ) − g (l )V ′′(1 − l ) − g ′′(l )YU ' (Y ) ∂l
produces
=
.
Differentiation of
∂∆
g ' (l )(U ' (Y ) + YU ′′(Y ))
∂∆

35

1
1


2α  ( A + ∆ )1−α + ( A − ∆ )1−α 



α

1−α

= Y ( g (l )) −α ,

implies

α

( A + ∆ )1−α − ( A − ∆ )1−α + αg ′(l ) ∂l = 1 ∂Y .
1
1
( A + ∆ )1−α + ( A − ∆ )1−α g (l ) ∂∆ Y ∂∆
Substituting this in:
α

α

α

α

∂l ( A + ∆ )1−α − ( A − ∆ )1−α
g ' (l )Y (U ' (Y ) + YU ′′(Y ))
=
, which is positive if
1
1
∂∆ ( A + ∆ )1−α + ( A − ∆ )1−α  g ′(l )(1 − α )V ′(1 − l ) − g (l )V ′′(1 − l ) − 


 g ′′(l )YU ' (Y ) − αg ' (l ) V ′(1 − l )YU ′′(Y ) 


U ' (Y )


′
′
YU (Y )
and only if −
> 1 and
U ′(Y )
∂Y ( A + ∆ )1−α − ( A − ∆ )1−α Y ( g ′(l )V ′(1 − l ) − g (l )V ′′(1 − l ) − g ′′(l )YU ' (Y ))
=
∂∆ ( A + ∆ )1−1α + ( A − ∆ )1−1α
 g ′(l )(1 − α )V ′(1 − l ) − g (l )V ′′(1 − l ) − 


 g ′′(l )YU ' (Y ) − αg ' (l ) V ′(1 − l )YU ′′(Y ) 


U ' (Y )


which is always positive. .
Per worker productivity is equal to Y / α so that is rising with ∆ as Y is rising with ∆ .
Proof of Proposition 3: The hours worked under the free market is characterized by the
V ′(1 − l )
equation: φ (l ) =
= 1 , and the hours worked under
U ' ( Ag (l ) f ′( Ng (l )) )Af ′( Ng (l )) g ' (l )
the
unionized
scenario
is
characterized
by
V ′(1 − l )
f ′′(ng (l ) )
φ (l ) =
= 1 − ng (l )
> 1.
Differentiation
Af ′( Ng (l )) g ' (l )U ' ( Ag (l ) f ′( Ng (l )) )
f ′(ng (l ) )
gives us that: φ ′(l ) < 0 , so l must be lower in the unionized economy than in the nonunionized economy. If l is lower, then it must be true that productivity per worker is
Af ( Ng (l ))
and we have
lower in the unionized economy. Productivity per hour is
N (l )
already shown that concavity ensures that this is rising with l. Worker utility must be
higher since the union could have chosen the (Y, l) combination chosen by the free
market, but in maximizing worker utility, it chose not to. Firm profits must be lower
since the firm could have chosen the (Y, l) combination chosen by the union but it
preferred not to. .

36

∂l −
∂l +
YU ′′(Y )
> 0 and
< 0 if and only if −
< 1.
∂∆
∂∆
U ′(Y )

If f (ng (1 − l )) = (ng (1 − l ))α ,

g (1 − l ) = (1 − l ) γ , U (Y ) = Y σ and V(l)=vl, then 1 > σ (1 + γα ) ,
average hours of work declines with ∆ .

∂l + ∂l −
+
> 0 so that
∂∆ ∂∆

Proof of Proposition 4:
Define the unions objective function as
W (l , ∆) = V (1 − l ) + U (( A − ∆) g (l ) f ( Ng (l ))) . Differentiation and using the implicit
function theorem to define l (∆) then yields: Wl (l (∆), ∆) = 0 , and differentiating again
gives us that:
∂l − − g ′(l − ) f ( Ng (l − )) + Ng (l − ) f ′( Ng (l − )) U ' (Y − ) + YU ′′(Y − )
which is negative if
=
∂∆
− Wll
and only if U ' (Y − ) + YU ′′(Y − ) > 0 , since Wll < 0 for second order conditions to hold.

(

)(

)

∂l +
>0.
∂∆
and V(l)=v(1-l), then the unions first order

The situation is exactly symmetric for the case of
If f (ng (l )) = (ng (l ))α , g (l ) = l γ , U (Y ) = Y σ

condition becomes: v = α 1+σ γσAσ l αγσ −1 N σα −σ , or l = (v −1α 1+σ γσAσ N σα −σ )1−αγσ . In this
case,
average
leisure
in
the
economy
equals
σ
σ
1 

1 − v −1α 1+σ γσN σα −σ 1−αγσ  ( A + ∆) 1−αγσ + ( A − ∆) 1−αγσ  and the derivative of this with




σ
σ
1 
−1
−1 
σ
−1 1+σ
σα −σ 1−αγσ 
1−αγσ
1−αγσ

− ( A + ∆)
v α γσN
( A − ∆)
respect to ∆ equals


1 − αγσ


1

(

)

(

which is positive because ( A + ∆)

1−

)

σ
1−αγσ

> ( A − ∆)

37

1−

σ
1−αγσ

when 1 > σ (1 + γα ) .

References

Aaron, H. & Pechman, J.(), Washington D.C: Brookings Institution.
Alesina, A., and E. Glaeser (2004), Fighting Poverty in the U.S. and Europe: A World of
Difference, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Alesina, A., and E. Perotti (1997), “The Welfare State and Competitiveness,” American
Economics Review, 87.
Arellano, M. and C. Meghir, (1992) "Female Labour Supply and On-the-Job Search: An
Empirical Model Estimated Using Complementary Data Sets," Review of Economic
Studies, vol. 59(3), pages 537-59.
Arrufat, J.L. and A. Zabalza (1986): Female Labor supply with Taxation, Random
Preferences and Optimization Errors. Econometrica, 54, 47-63.
Ashenfelter, O. (1978) “The Labor Supply Response of Wage Earners”, in: J. L. Palmer
and J.A. Pechman (eds.), Welfare in Rural Areas: the North Carolina-Iowa Income
Maintenance Experiment, Washington D.C. Brookings Institute, pp. 109-138
Ashenfelter, O. and J. Heckman. 1973. “Estimating Labor-Supply Functions,” In G. Cain
and H. Watts, editors, Income Maintenance and Labor Supply. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Ashworth, J and Ulph, D. (1981), Household Models in C.Brown (ed) Taxation and
Atkinson, A.B. and N.H. Stern (1980) “On the Switch from Direct to Indirect Taxation”,
Journal of Public Economics, 14(2), pp.195-224
Bell, L. and R. Freeman (1995), "Why Do Americans and Germans Work Different
Hours?" in F. Buttler, W. Franz, R. Schettkat, and D. Soskice (eds) Institutional
Frameworks and Labor Market Performance: Comparative Views on the U.S. and
German Economies (NY: Routledge, 1995) pp 101-131.
Bell, L. and R. Freeman (1999) “Does Inequality Induce Us to Work More?”
Unpublished manuscript, presented at the MacArthur Social Interactions and Economic
Inequality Network Meeting.
Bertola, Giuseppe and Andrea Ichino, "Wage Inequality and Unemployment: United
States vs. Europe," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1995, pp. 13-54.
Blanchard, O. (2004) “The Economic Future of Europe” Forthcoming, Journal of
Economic Perspectives

38

Blanchard, O. and J. Wolfers, "The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of
European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence," Economic Journal, Vol. 110
(March 2000): 1-33.
Blomquist, N.S. (1983), “The effect of income taxation on the labor supply of married
men in Sweden'”, Journal of Public Economics 22: 169-197.
Blomquist, N.S. and U. Hansson-Brusewitz. (1990). "The Effect of Taxes on Male and
Female Labor Supply in Sweden." Journal of Human Resources 25(3):317-357.
Blundell, R. and I. Walker (1982) “‘Modelling the Joint Determination of Household
Labour Supplies and Commodity Demands’, Economic Journal, 351-364.
Blundell, R. and T. MaCurdy (1999) “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches" Handbook of Labor Economics 3, North-Holland Publishing Co.
Blundell, R.W., C. Meghir, E. Symons and I. Walker (1988) “Labor Supply Specification
and the Evaluation of Tax Reforms” Journal of Public Economics, 36, pp.23-52
Boal, W. and J. Pencavel (1994) “The Effects of Labor Unions on Employment, Wages
and Days of Operation: Coal mining in West Virginia” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
170-298
Boeri, T., A. Brugiavini, and L. Calmfors (eds.) (2001), The Role of Unions in the
Twenty-First Century, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Booth, A. and F. Schiantarelli (1986) “ Employment Effects of a Shorter Work Week”
Economica, 54, 237-48
Bosch (1993) ???
Card, D. (2001), ”The Effects of Unions on Wage Inequality in the US Labor Market”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 296-315
Chari, V.V., P. Kehoe and E. McGrattan (2003) ???
Ciccone A. and R. Hall (1996) "Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity,"
American Economic Review, vol. 86(1), pp. 54-70.
Daveri, F. and G. Tabellini, (1997) "Unemployment, Growth and Taxation in Industrial
Countries," CEPR Discussion Papers 1681.
Davis, S. J. and Henrekson, M. (2004) “Tax effects on work activity, industry mix and
shadow economy size : evidence from rich-country comparisons” NBER working paper
series no. 10509.; National Bureau of Economic Research.

39

Douglas, P. H., (1934) The Theory of Wages, New York: Macmillan.
Ebbinghaus, B. (2000), “When Labour and Capital Collude: The Varieties of Welfare
Capitalism and Early Retirement in Europe, Japan and the USA,” Working Paper PSGE
no. 00.4, Center for European Studies, Harvard University, July.
Ebbinghaus, B. and J. Visser (2000), Trade Unions in Western Europe since 1945,
London/New York: MacMillan/Grove.
Finegan, T.A. (1962) “Hours of Work in the United States - a Cross-sectional Analysis”
Journal of Political Economy, 70(5), pp. 452-70
Flood L. R. and T. MaCurdy (1992) "Work Disincentive Effects of Taxes: An Emperical
Analysis of Swedish Men". Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.
Freeman, R. and J. Medoff (1984) What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic Books.
Garonna and Reboni (1993) ???
Gauvin, A. (1994), “France” in Times Are Changing: Working Time in Fourteen
Industrial Countries, Geneva, International Institute for Labor Studies.
Genre, Véronique, Ramón Gómez Salvador and Ana Lamo, "European Women Why
Do(N’t) They Work?" European Central Bank Working Paper Series, No 454 / March
2005.
Giavazzi, F. and R. Dornbusch (2000) “Italian Labor Force Participation: Disguised
Unemployment on Campus” IGIER Working paper, unpublished
Glaeser, E., B. Sacerdote and J. Scheinkman (1996) "Crime and Social Interactions,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, No 2, May.
Glaeser, E., B. Sacerdote and J. Scheinkman (2003) "The Social Multiplier," with.
Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 1(2-3) May-June.
Gordon, (2004), ???
Hausman J. and P. Ruud (1984) "Family Labor Supply with Taxes," American Economic
Review P&P, May, 242-248
Hausman, J. and D. Wise, (1977) "Social Experimentation, Truncated Distributions, and
Efficient Estimation," Econometrica, vol. 45(4), pp. 919-38
Hausman, J. A. (1981), "Labor Supply" in How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior, (eds.

40

Heckman, J. (1993) "What Has Been Learned About Labor Supply in the Past Twenty
Years?" American Economic Review, May, pp. 116-131.
Holtz-Eakin, D., D. Joulfaian, and H. Rosen (1993) "The Carnegie Conjecture: Some
Empirical Evidence," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 108(2), pp. 413-35.
Huberman, M. (2003), “Working Hours of the World Unite? New International Evidence
on Worktime, 1870-2000,” unpublished.
Huberman, M. (2004), “Working Hours of the World Unite? New International Evidence
on Worktime, 1870-1913,” Journal of Economic History, forthcoming.
Hunt, J. (1998), "Hours Reductions as Work-Sharing", Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1.
Hunt, J. (1999), “Has Work-sharing Worked in Germany?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 117-42.
Imbens, G., D. Rubin, and B. Sacerdote (2001) “Estimating the Effect of Unearned
Income on Labor Supply, Earnings, Savings and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey
of Lottery Players Published”, American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 4, 778-794
Johnson, T. R. and J. H. Pencavel (1984). "Dynamic Hours of Work Functions for
Husbands, Wives, and Single Females." Econometrica 52: 363–89.
Kaiser, H., U. van Essen and P.B. Spahn (1992), “Income taxation and the supply of
labour in West Germany”, Jahrbucher fur Nationalokonomie und Statistik 209/1-2: 87
105.
Keane, M. and R. Moffitt, (1998). "A Structural Model of Multiple Welfare Program
Participation and Labor Supply," International Economic Review, vol. 39(3), pages 55389.
Keane, M.P. and R. Moffitt (1995) “A Structural Model of Multiple Welfare Program
Participation and Labor Supply” International Economic Review, 39(3), pp. 553-589
Kniesner, T. J. (1976a) “An Indirect Test of Complementarity in a Family Labor Supply
Model”, Econometrica, 44(4), pp. 651-669
Kniesner, T. J. (1976b) “The Full-time Workweek in the United States, 1900-1970”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 30(1), pp. 3-15
Kuismanen M. (2000) “Labour Supply and Income Tax Changes: A Simulation Study for
Finland” Bank of Finland Discussion Papers 5/2000.
Labour Supply, George Allen and Unwin, London

41

Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J Sargent, "The European Employment Experience," CEPR
Discussion Papers: 3543, 2002.
MaCurdy, T., D. Green and H. Paarsch (1990), “Assessing empirical approaches for
analyzing taxes and labor supply,” Journal of Human Resources 25: 415-490. ???
Marimon, Ramon and Fabrizio Zilibotti, "Employment and Distributional Effects of
Restricting Working Time," European Economic Review, vol. 44, no. 7, June 2000, pp.
1291-1326.
Nickell, S. (1998) "Unemployment: Questions and Some Answers," Economic Journal,
vol. 108(127), pp. 802-16.
Nickell, S. and L. Nunziata (2001) “Labour Market Institutions Database” Center for
Economic Performance.
Olovsson C. (2004) Why Do European Work so Little? unpublished.
Pencavel, J. (1986) "Labor Supply of Men: A Survey" in O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard,
eds., Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 1, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 3-102.
Prescott E. C. (2004) “Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?”
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Vol. 28, No. 1, July 2004, pp.
2–13
Rybczynski, W. (1992) Waiting for the Weekend, New York: Penguin Books.
Schneider, F. (2002) “The Size and Development of the Shadow Economies of 22
States.” Journal of Human Resources 25: 491–516.
Transition and 21 OECD Countries,” IZA Discussion Paper 514, June.
Triest, Robert K (1990) “The Effect of Income Taxation on Labor Supply in the United
Van Soest, A., I. Woittiez and A. Kapteyn (1990), “Labour supply, income taxes and
hours restrictions in the Netherlands,” Journal of Human Resources 25: 517-558. ???
Wales, T J & Woodland, A D, (1979). "Labour Supply and Progressive Taxes," Review
of Economic Studies, vol. 46(1), pages 83-95.
Winston, G. M. (1966) “An International Comparison of Income and Hours of Work”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 48(1), pp. 28-39

42

43

Table 1
Hours Per Person Per Week and Employment Ratios By Country
E/P, Weeks per Year, Usual Hours use OECD data. Hours per person per week is calculated as the product of
E/P*weeks/52*usual hours. OECD data on weeks and usual hours provided by the Secretariat and use same sources as
OECD Employment Outlook 2004. OECD data on E/P are from http://www1.oecd.org/scripts/cde. US data on usual
hours and weeks worked are from Luxembourg Income Study. We use usual hours and weeks worked for **all
employed** including part time. Table 3A uses full time employees.

Country

Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States

Weekly Employment/ Weeks per
Usual
Hours
Pop
Year
Weekly
Per
(Employed)
Hours
Person
(Employed)
17.92
20.63
19.73
17.95
18.68
20.10
20.10
16.68
17.25
19.94
16.98
18.14
19.06
21.42
25.13

44

0.643
0.761
0.688
0.636
0.656
0.576
0.659
0.565
0.734
0.774
0.523
0.576
0.735
0.721
0.719

40.0
38.9
38.5
40.5
40.6
44.6
43.7
41.0
38.4
36.0
41.8
42.2
35.4
40.5
46.2

36.29
36.27
38.75
36.21
36.48
40.71
36.29
37.42
31.79
37.25
40.37
38.85
38.10
38.19
39.39

Table 2
Hours Differences Between US, France, Germany, United Kingdom
The first panel shows the total hours worked per week per person aged 15-64. The next panels decompose the total
differences into the differences in labor force participation, weeks worked, and usual weekly hours. The fraction
explained column uses the accounting identity that total hours=lfp*weeks worked*hours per week. Total hours worked
and employment data use OECD data. Usual hours are from the Luxembourg Income Study. Weeks worked is
calculated as the residual.

Total Hours Per Week Per Person
US
25.13
France
17.95
Germany
18.68
Italy
16.68

US-France
US-Germany
US-Italy

7.18
6.45
8.45

Employment/Pop 15-64
US
France
Germany
Italy

0.72
0.64
0.66
0.57

US-France
US-Germany
US-Italy

0.08
0.06
0.15

Weeks Worked Per Year
US
France
Germany
Italy

46.16
40.54
40.57
40.99

US-France
US-Germany
US-Italy

5.62
5.59
5.17

Fraction of
Hours
Difference
Explained

1.00
1.00
1.00

0.36
0.31
0.59

0.39
0.44
0.29

Usual Weekly Hours per Worker
US
39.39
France
36.21
Germany
36.48
Italy
37.42

US-France
US-Germany
US-Italy

3.18
2.91
1.97

45

0.25
0.26
0.13

Table 3
Breakdown of 52 Weeks into Weeks Worked, Holiday and
Vacation Weeks, and Other Leave
Source: reprinted from OECD Employment Outlook 2004. This entire table is taken directly from the OECD.
Sickness and maternity leave estimates are adjusted for an estimated 50% underreporting rate. This is for full time
employees and thus weeks worked differs slightly from Table 3.

Annual
weeks
worked

Holidays
and
vacation
weeks

Full-week
absences
due to non
holiday
reasons

Part-week
absences
due to non
holiday
reasons

Absences
due to
sickness &
maternity

Austria
39.5
7.3
2.6
0.4
2.3
Belgium
40.3
7.1
2.2
0.5
2.0
Switzerland
42.6
6.1
1.5
0.7
1.1
Germany
40.6
7.8
1.8
0.3
1.5
Denmark
39.4
7.4
2.2
1.0
1.9
Spain
42.1
7.0
1.3
0.4
1.2
Finland
38.9
7.1
2.4
1.5
2.1
France
40.7
7.0
2.0
0.4
1.8
Greece
44.6
6.7
0.3
0.2
0.2
Hungary
43.9
6.3
0.9
0.1
0.8
Ireland
43.9
5.7
1.2
0.2
0.9
Italy
41.1
7.9
1.7
0.3
0.9
Luxembourg
41.9
7.5
1.3
0.1
1.1
Netherlands
39.6
7.6
2.0
0.8
2.0
Norway
37.0
6.5
4.0
1.1
3.5
Poland
43.5
6.2
1.2
0.3
0.9
Portugal
41.9
7.3
1.4
0.2
1.2
Sweden
36.0
6.9
3.8
1.7
3.7
United Kingdom
40.8
6.6
1.5
1.5
1.6
United States
46.2
3.9
.94
.96
For US data we calculate weeks of vacation and illness for full time heads in the PSID. We calculate
weeks of holidays using Federal and stock market holidays. We allow other non-holiday absences to the be
the residual.

46

Table 4
Breakdown of Days Off Into Holidays, Federally Mandated Days of
Vacation, Additional Days of Vacation
Here we attempt a further breakdown of OECD "holiday plus vacation time" into holidays, statutorily
required vacation, and additional vacation. The first column shows the OECD holiday and vacation weeks
number*5. The second column shows our survey of holidays which includes the union of federal holidays,
stock market holidays, and days when most stores are closed. Column (3) shows federally mandated
vacation days as reported in the EIRO report "Working Time Developments 2003." The last column is
column (1) minus (2)+(3). The fact that we get negative additional days for France may indicate that either
the OECD total days figure is too low for France or the EIRO mandated number is too high.

Holiday
Holidays
and
(Authors
Vacation Compilation)
Days
Total
(From
OECD)
Germany
France
Italy
United States

39
35
39.5
19.5

16
16
16
12

47

Federally
Mandated
Vacation
(EIRO
Data)

Additional
Vacation
Days

20
25
20
0

3
-6
3.5
7.5

Table 5
Statutory Minimum and Agreed Upon Annual Paid Leave (Vacation)
By Country
Country

Statutory

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Spain
Sweden
UK

25
20
25
20
25
20
20
20
20
20
25
20
21
20
22
20
22
25
20

Collectively
agreed
25
nd
30
25
25
29.1
23
nd
20
28
28
31.3
25
nd
24.5
24
nd
33
24.5

Source: EIRO: 'Working time developments - 2003', March 2004

48

Table 6
Implied Elasticity of Labor wrt Income Using US Europe Differences in
Hours Worked and Marginal Tax Rates
(Europe Average includes Germany, France, UK, Italy)
Marginal
Tax Rate

Weekly
Hours Per
Person 1564

United States
Europe Average

34.5%
52.7%

25.13
18.68

US-Europe

-18.2%

5.92

Log(US Hours)Log(Europe Hours)

0.297

Implied Elasticity

-1.629

49

Table 7
Estimated Hours –Wage Elasticities (Handbook of Labor Economics)
Author

Income
Elasticity

Compensated
Elasticity

-.16

-.34

.12

Cross
sectional
micro
regressions. NLS data for 1965.
Married men.

-.17

-.01

-.16

Wales and Woodland (1979)*

PSID Married men.
226
individuals.
Use non-linear
programming to fit cross section
of hours and wages to a labor
supply model derived from a
CES utility function and hours
budget constraint.

.14

-.90

.84

Atkinson and Stern (1980)*

UK Family Expenditure Survey
Data.
Use cross sectional
variation to identify parameters
in several types of utility
functions.

-.16

-.09

-.09

Ashworth and Ulph (1981)*

They impose a GCES utility
function with piecewise linear
budget constraint on an unnamed
UK micro data set.

-.13

-.46

.23

Hausman (1981)

Structural model

0 to .03

Blundell and Walker (1982)

Estimates structural model of

-.95 to
-1.03
-.46

.13

Men or Aggregates
Douglas (1934)

Winston (1962)
Finegan (1962)

Ashenfelter and Heckman
(1973)*
Kniesner (1976)*

Estimation Method

Cross sectional regression using
average wages and hours across
17 U.S. industries for 1890,
1914, 1926
Cross sectional regression of
average hours on average wages
across 31 countries
Cross sectional regressions of
average hours on average wages
across 300+ occupations in
1940, 1950 US Census data

50

Uncompensated
Elasticity
-.1 to -.2

-.07 to -.10
-.25 to -.35

-.23

Blomquist (1983)**
Hausman and Ruud (1984)*
MaCurdy et al. (1990)**
Triest (1990)
van Soest et al (1990)**
Flood and MaCurdy (1992)**
Kaiser et al (1992)**
Ashenfelter (1978)
Hausman and Wise (1977)
Johnson and Pencavel (1984)
Married Women Only
Hausman (1981)**

Arrufat and Zabalza (1986)**
Blundell et al. (1988)**
Triest (1990)**
van Soest et al (1990)**
Blomquist and HanssonBrusewitz (1990)**

Arellano and Meghir (1992)
Kaiser et al (1992)**
Keane and Moffitt (1995)**
Kuismanen (1997)**

utility in which individuals
choose consumptions goods and
leisure. Married men in 1974
UK Family Expenditure Survey
Data.
Structural model
1976
PSID.
Maximum
Likelihood estimation of an
indirect utility function.
Structural model
1983 PSID. Cross section with
non-linear budget constraint
from the multiple tax brackets.
Structural with IV
North
Carolina-Iowa
rural
Negative
Income
Tax
Experiment
NJ-PA NIT
Seattle-Denver
income
maintenance experiment
Structural model

Structural model
1981 Level of Living Survey.
Tobits and FIML regression of
hours worked on tax rate. Use
cross sectional variation in the
wage and tax rate.
UK LFS and FES 1983. Multiequation model estimated with
maximum likelihood.
Finnish Labor Force Survey.
Married women 25-60. Cross
sections for 87,89, 91, 93. Use
cross sectional variation in tax
rates.

Income Elasticity Estimates

51

.08

-.03

-.08

-.81

.55

0
.05

-.01

.01

.12
.16
-.004
0.21

-.01
-.1
-.28
.026

.13
.24
.21
0.19

0.10
0.02

-.013
-0.218

0.11
0.19

.995

-.121

1.08

2.03
.09
.97
.79
.79

-.02
-.26
-.33
-.23
-.24

2.05
.29
1.23
.97
.98

.29 to .71

-.13 to
-.40

.5 to .82

1.04
1.94
.01

-.18
-.21
.11

1.18
2.1
-.07

Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote
(2002)
Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and
Rosen (1993)****

Natural Experiment (winners
and non-winners)
Natural
Experiment
using
variation in inheritance

-.11
-.03

*In these rows, we have translated marginal propensities to earn into income elasticities
by multiplying by 1.28.
** In these rows, we have calculated compensated demand elasticities by assuming that
the ratio of unearned income to after tax income is 1.28.
*** The Holtz-Eakin et al number is conditional on the family still having positive
earnings after

52

Table 8
Annual Hours Worked Per Person Regressed on Marginal Tax Rate
Comparison of Our Results to Davis Henrekson Results
Column (1): our data from OECD 2002
Column (2) Davis Henrekson OECD 1995 hours data on Nickell Nunciata tax measure.
Column (3) Same as (2) excluding Switzerland
Column (4) Davis Henrekson OECD 1995 hours data on Schneider tax measure.
Column (5) Same as (4) excluding Switzerland.
Number in square brackets is the implied elasticity of hours wrt the tax rate. We convert dH/dT to the
elasticity of hours wrt taxes by dividing by the mean annual hours worked (roughly 1073 in our data and
1069 in the Davis et al data).

(1)
Annual Hours
(OECD 02)

Marginal Tax
Rate (OECD
02)

(2)
Annual Hours
(Davis, OECD
95)

(3)
Annual Hours
(Davis, OECD
95)
Exclude
Switzerland

-3.905

-1.969

(4.061)
[-0.366]

(4.263)
[-0.184]

Schneider Tax
Rate

Observations
R-squared

(5)
Annual Hours
(Davis, OECD
95)

-9.251
(2.442)**
[-0.865]

-8.890
(2.940)*
[-0.832]

1,643.272
(154.463)**
14
0.545

1,618.385
(190.274)**
13
0.454

-7.542
(3.013)*
[-0.699]

Nickell
Nunciata
Tax Rate

Constant

(4)
Annual Hours
(Davis, OECD
95)

1,422.535
(142.731)**
22
0.239

1,279.898
(223.197)**
14
0.072

1,159.847
(238.503)**
13
0.019

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Robustness comments: Inclusion of Switzerland is important for result using Nickell Nunciata data
(column 2), but not using Schneider. Our data do not contain Switzerland.
These are all cross sectional results. Using Nickell Nunciata data, Davis and Henrekson show that point
estimates are similar in a panel but statistical significance disappears.

53

Table 9
Effect of Tax Rates and Employment Regulations on Annual Hours
Worked: Country Level Data
The tax rate, union density, and employment protection data are from the Nickell Nunziata Labor Market
Institutions Database. Tax rates are expressed in percentage points (e.g. 50.1) and represent the sum of
direct taxes (i.e. income tax), indirect taxes (VAT?), and employment taxes (i.e. social security). The
mean tax rate for 1995 for Europe is 54.3 and the tax rate for the U.S. for 1995 is 46.0.
Annual hours are per person 15-64 and are taken from the OECD. Mean annual hours for the European
countries for 1995 is 1160 with a standard deviation of 134 hours. Annual hours for the U.S. for 1995 is
1431. The employment protection measure was created by Blanchard and Wolfers and ranges from 0-2
with 2 being the strictest employment protection. Union density is expressed as a decimal and has a mean
of .42. Years covered in the panel are 1960-1995 for up to 18 OECD countries.
Number in square brackets is the implied elasticity of hours wrt the tax rate. We convert dH/dT to the
elasticity of hours wrt taxes by dividing by the mean annual hours worked (roughly 1073 in our data and
1069 in the Davis et al data).

Tax Rate
(Nickell Nunziata)

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Annual Hours Annual Hours Annual Hours Annual Hours
Per Person 15- Per Person 15- Per Person 15- Per Person 1564
64
64
64
(1995 Cross
Section)
-5.396
-1.889
-0.682
-0.368
(2.646)
(0.825)*
(0.814)
(0.764)
[-0.503]
[-0.176]
[-0.064]
[-0.034]

Union Density
Employment Protection
Measure (Blanchard Wolfers)
Constant
Country Dummies?
Year Dummies?
Observations
R-squared

1,472.929
(142.020)**
18
0.206

54

1,465.960
(43.113)**
X
X
358
0.909

-270.625
(47.873)**

-383.780
(48.044)**

1,491.721
(41.318)**
X
X
358
0.918

-244.392
(37.216)**
1,776.665
(58.147)**
X
X
358
0.928

Table 10
Cross Sectional Regressions of Annual Hours On Tax Rates
Here we regress OECD Annual Hours on OECD Tax Rate Data, an OECD measure of coverage by the
union bargaining and the Perotti measure of the proportional representation at the federal level. (See
Glaeser et al 2002 for more detail). We limit the sample to the fourteen countries for which we have the
union coverage measure. Union density (members/ total employed population) is more widely available
but probably less useful since for example France has a union density of 10 percent, yet 95 percent of
French employees are covered by collective bargaining. When we run the regression in column (1) for our
larger sample of 22 countries (not restricting the sample by availability of union coverage) we find a similar
coefficient on the marginal tax rate. But the coefficient is statistically significant at the 95 percent level.
Number in square brackets is the implied elasticity of hours wrt the tax rate. We convert dH/dT to the
elasticity of hours wrt taxes by dividing by the mean annual hours worked (roughly 1073 in our data and
1069 in the Davis et al data).

Marginal Tax
Rate (OECD 02)

(1)
Annual Hours
(OECD 02)
-7.705*
(3.850)
[-0.718]

(2)
Annual Hours
(OECD 02)

(3)
Annual Hours
(OECD 02)
-3.572
(5.493)

(4)
Annual Hours
(OECD 02)
2.479
(6.330)

-3.688
(1.656)*
[-0.344]

-2.556
(2.432)
[-0.238]

-3.620
(2.690)
[-0.337]

Union Coverage

Log
Proportionality
Constant
Observations
R-squared

-15.749
(31.476)
1,434.202
(189.345)**
14
0.250

1,329.592
(125.336)**
14
0.292

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

55

1,419.759
(189.028)**
14
0.319

1,217.072
(217.461)**
13
0.356

Table 11:

Effects of Protestant, Union Membership, State Tax Rates,
Age on Weeks of Vacation: PSID

Full Time Employed Heads of Household in the PSID. 2001 Data from the PSID.

State Maximum Income Tax
Rate
Union Member

(1)
Head's Weeks
of Vacation
-0.033
(0.016)*

(2)
Head's Weeks
of Vacation
0.821
(0.110)**

(3)
Head's Weeks
of Vacation
-0.036
(0.015)*
0.830
(0.110)**

(4)
Head's Weeks
of Vacation
-0.045
(0.016)**
0.764
(0.098)**
-0.146
(0.362)
-0.232
(0.090)*

0.158
(0.139)
0.352
(0.108)**
0.583
(0.146)**
1.182
(0.297)**
0.601
(0.084)**
0.594
(0.114)**
0.267
(0.113)*
-0.470
(0.201)*
4941
0.086

0.167
(0.138)
0.359
(0.107)**
0.585
(0.146)**
1.193
(0.295)**
0.600
(0.085)**
0.589
(0.112)**
0.268
(0.111)*
-0.279
(0.237)
4941
0.087

0.172
(0.139)
0.363
(0.109)**
0.588
(0.148)**
1.198
(0.296)**
0.578
(0.084)**
0.580
(0.112)**
0.280
(0.113)*
-0.075
(0.265)
4941
0.089

Union*Right to Work State
Non-union*Right to Work State
Protestant
Age 30-39
Age 40-49
Age 50-59
Age 60+
Log (Wage)
Has 4+ Years College
Has 4+ Years High School
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

0.197
(0.136)
0.426
(0.106)**
0.657
(0.150)**
1.247
(0.302)**
0.650
(0.086)**
0.509
(0.117)**
0.310
(0.113)**
-0.368
(0.237)
4941
0.075

56

(5)
Head's Weeks
of Vacation
-0.038
(0.021)
0.810
(0.197)**
-0.765
(0.368)*
-0.172
(0.157)
0.126
(0.101)
0.143
(0.153)
0.289
(0.159)
0.434
(0.184)*
0.812
(0.339)*
0.587
(0.110)**
0.522
(0.135)**
0.149
(0.144)
-0.187
(0.300)
1791
0.070

Table 12: Effects of Protestant, Union Membership
Age on Weeks of Vacation: GSOEP
Full Time Employed Heads of Household in the GSOEP. 2001 Data from the GSOEP.

Protestant

(1)
Head's Weeks of
Vacation
-0.024
(0.064)

Union Member

(2)
Head's Weeks of
Vacation

(3)
Head's Weeks of
Vacation

0.595
(0.049)**

0.560
(0.048)**
0.388
(0.063)**
0.482
(0.064)**
0.582
(0.070)**
0.851
(0.114)**
4.706
(0.051)**
5945
0.041

Age 30-39
Age 40-49
Age 50-59
Age 60-64
Constant

5.233
(0.033)**
Observations
3258
R-squared
0.000
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

5.102
(0.024)**
5945
0.025

57

Table 13: Labor Force Participation By Country Age-Group Cells
OECD 2002 Data.

country

LFP
LFP
Men Women
15-64
15-64

LFP
Men
15-24

Australia
Belgium
Denmark
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

0.815
0.726
0.838
0.787
0.783
0.745
0.765
0.839
0.839
0.793
0.804
0.809
0.887
0.837
0.830

0.696
0.373
0.705
0.524
0.531
0.414
0.400
0.720
0.651
0.524
0.524
0.529
0.707
0.722
0.655

58

0.660
0.554
0.758
0.642
0.573
0.479
0.534
0.671
0.766
0.650
0.537
0.770
0.739
0.694
0.701

Table 14: Relationship Between Happiness and Weeks of Vacation in
the GSOEP
Full Time Employed Heads of Household in the GSOEP. Dependent variable is a life satisfaction question
that ranges from 0-10 with 10 being the highest level of satisfaction. The mean of the dependent variable is
7.16 with a standard deviation of 1.77. Columns (1) and (2) are cross sectional regressions for 1990 and
2000. Column (3) is a panel regression with individual fixed effects.

Head's Weeks of
Vacation
Age 20-29
Age 30-39
Age 40-49
Age 50-59
Age 60-64
Constant

(1)
Life Satisfaction
(1990 Cross
Section)

(2)
Life Satisfaction
(2000 Cross
Section)

(3)
Life Satisfaction
(Panel with
Individual f.e.)

0.050
(0.021)*

0.088
(0.011)**

0.037
(0.022)

-0.499
(0.207)*
-0.697
(0.206)**
-0.668
(0.208)**
-0.594
(0.216)**
0.000
(0.000)
7.742
(0.212)**
1779
0.010

-0.196
(0.122)
-0.340
(0.118)**
-0.477
(0.118)**
-0.396
(0.121)**
-0.293
(0.145)*
7.167
(0.122)**
7003
0.012

-0.396
(0.218)
-0.683
(0.233)**
-1.018
(0.245)**
-1.367
(0.261)**
-1.744
(0.310)**
7.975
(0.246)**
8782
0.914

Observations
R-squared
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

59

Table 15: Relationship Between Happiness and Annual Hours of
Work in a Across Countries
Annual hours worked are per person 15-64 and are from the OECD. Life satisfaction numbers are means
taken from Eurobarometers data. At the person level, life satisfaction took on values of 0,1,2,3
corresponding to not at all satisfied, somewhat, satisfied, and very satisfied. At the country level, the
dependent variable has a mean of 2.00 and a standard deviation of .26. Years included are 1995-1972.
Countries included are Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain,
United Kingdom. Column (1) is the cross section for 1992. Column (2) is the cross section in which we
instrument for hours worked with the level of vacation days collectively agreed (via collective bargaining)
to at the country level, and column (3) is the panel with country and year effects.

(1)
Life Satisfaction
(Cross Section)

Annual Hours Per
Person 15-64
Constant

(3)
Life Satisfaction
(Country Panel w/
Year Dummies)

-0.00128
(0.00046)*

(2)
Life Satisfaction
(Cross Section IV)
Instrument with
Collectively Agreed
Vacation Days
-0.00126
(0.00061)

4.20131
(0.77456)**

4.15603
(1.02109)**

2.94359
(0.31369)**
X
X

12
0.43

10
0.43

129
0.95

Country Dummies?
Year Dummies?
Observations
R-squared

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

60

-0.00054
(0.00018)**

Table 16:

Percent Covered By A Collective Bargaining Agreement

OECD Employment Outlook 2004.

Country

Union
Coverage
80
98
90
38
95
92
90
23
71
67
75
79
68
83
53
47

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Finland
France
Germany
Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United
Kingdom
United States

18

61

Figure 1
Annual Hours Worked Over Time
OECD data. Annual hours per employed person. Annual hours are equivalent to 52*usual weekly hours
minus holidays, vacations, sick leave.
2200

2000

US
1800

Italy
1600

France
Germany

1400

1200

62

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

19
80

19
78

19
76

19
74

19
72

19
70

19
68

19
66

19
64

19
62

19
60

1000

Figure 2: Hours Worked Over Time Versus GDP Over Time
OECD data. Annual hours per employed person.

2200

40,000

35,000
2000

US Hours Worked
30,000
1800
25,000

Germany Hours Worked
1600

20,000

US GDP/ Capita

15,000

Germany GDP/ Capita

1400

10,000
1200
5,000

0

1000
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

63

1985

1990

1995

2000

Figure 3
Men's Labor Force Participation Over Time
OECD data. Men ages 15-64.

1.00

.95

.90

US
.85

Germany
.80

Italy
France

.75
1950

1960

1970

year

64

1980

1990

2000

Figure 4
Women's Labor Force Participation Over Time
OECD data. Men ages 15-64.

US

Percent in Labor Force, Ages 15-64

.7

Germany

.6

France

.5

Italy

.4

.3
1950

1960

1970

year

65

1980

1990

2000

Figure 5
Labor Force Participation People 55-64

.3

Labor Force / Pop for Ages 55-64
.4
.5

.6

OECD Data. Lines from top to bottom in 2003 are US (blue), Germany (red), France
(green), Italy (Orange)

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980
1985
y ear

66

1990

1995

2000

Figure 6
Weekly Hours Per Person Versus Marginal Tax Rate

30

OECD data. Y axis shows total weekly hours worked per persons 15-64.

Weekly Hours Per Person
20
25

Iceland
New Zealand
United States
Canada

Mexico

Austria

United Kingdom
Ireland

Czech Republic

Greece
Norway

Denmark
Slovak
Republic
Sweden

Spain

Germany
Belgium

France
Netherlands
Italy

15

Portugal

Finland

.3

.4

.5
Marginal Tax Rate

67

.6

.7

Average Annual Hours Among Full Time Employed
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200

Figure 7
Hours Worked Versus Percent Covered By A Collective Bargaining
Agreement

Japan
United States

New
Zealand
Spain
Canada

Australia
Portugal

United Kingdom
Switzerland

Finland

SwedenBelgium
FranceAustria
Germany
Norway
Netherlands

20

40
60
80
Cov erage By Collectiv e Bargaining

Source: Coverage data are taken from OECD Employment Outlook 1994.

68

100

8

Figure 8
State Income Tax Rate Versus Average Weeks of Vacation From Work
Reported by Household Head (PSID)

VT

vacation_weeks_ave
4
6

NM

AK

CO

HI
MT

WA

2

SD
NV
TX
FL
TN

PA
IL
ID

RI
WI
NH UT
IA NJ
OK
MI NY IN CA
NC
VAGA OHAR
OR
MD MS
AZ
SC ND
KS
AL
WV
LADC
DE

ME
MN
CT

KY

MO

0

NE
WY

MA

0

5
tax_rate_max

10

Tax rate is highest income tax rate levied by the state in 2003. (From state tax dept's
joint website http://www.taxadmin.org/)

69

MA

MN

IA
PA
FL
NC
MS
TX

IN

OH

MO

VA
TN

CA
IL

NY
NJ
MI

OR
MD

AR
GA

1.5

State Average of Head's Weeks of Vacation
2
2.5
3

3.5

Figure 9
Average Days of Vacation Versus Unionization Rate (BLS Measure of
Union Rate)

SC

5

10
15
20
State Av erage Unionization Rate (BLS)

70

25

Figure 10
Average Hours Worked Versus Percent Protestant

30

Hours worked data are from OECD data. Protestant share is calculated from World Value Survey data.

Weekly Hours Per Person
20
25

Iceland

United States
Canada

Austria

Mexico

United Kingdom

Ireland
Slovak Republic

Finland

Sweden

Germany

Netherlands

15

Spain
France
Belgium
Portugal
Italy

Denmark
Norway

0

.2

.4
.6
Percent Protestant

71

.8

1

40

Figure 11
Weekly Hours Per Person Versus Gini

Weekly Hours Per Employed
25
30
35

Mexico
Austria
Canada

United States
Greece

Ireland
United
Kingdom
Italy
Finland
Denmark

Germany
France
Belgium

Sweden
Norway

20

Netherlands

20

30

40
Gini

72

50

60

100

Figure 12
Coverage By A Collective Bargaining Agreement Versus Perotti Log
Proportional Representation Measure

France

Coverage By Collective Bargaining
40
60
80

Austria

Finland
Germany
Belgium
Sweden
Portugal
Norway

Netherlands

Spain

Switzerland
United Kingdom

20

Canada

United States

0

1
2
3
4
Log(Proportional Representation Measure)

73

5

