                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  LABOUR MARKET INSTITUTIONS WITHOUT BLINDERS:
                          THE DEBATE OVER FLEXIBILITY
                       AND LABOUR MARKET PERFORMANCE

                                           Richard B. Freeman

                                          Working Paper 11286
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11286


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Labour Market Institutions Without Blinders: The Debate over Flexibility and Labour Market
Performance
Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 11286
April 2005
JEL No. J0

                                           ABSTRACT

The debate over the influence of labour market flexibility on performance is unlikely to be settled

by additional studies using aggregate data and making cross-country comparisons. While this

approach holds little promise, micro-analysis of workers and firms and increased use of experimental

methods represent a path forward. Steps along this path could help end the current 'lawyer's case'

empiricism in which priors dominate evidence.

Richard B. Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Harvard University
freeman@nber.org
                                                                                                     1

       In the thrilling days of yesteryear, economists believed that the key to economic

performance was macro-economic policy. Monetarists argued that appropriate monetary policies

were the magic bullet for price stability and curbing the business cycle. Keynesians favored

fiscal policy: deficits to speed economic recovery and surpluses to reduce inflationary pressures.

       Today, there is a new orthodoxy that makes the deregulation of labour market institutions

and increased employment and wage flexibility in the labour market the keys to economic

success. International agencies, such as the OECD and IMF, and many economists blame

unemployment and sluggish economic growth on unions and state regulations of pay and

employment that purportedly reduce market flexibility. They recommend that governments

weaken labour market institutions in favor of market driven solutions. They call for reductions

in the pay of low wage workers to create additional demand for them and tax breaks for the

highly paid to induce them to work more or harder.

       At the same time, there are substantive and growing objections to the evidentiary base on

which the new orthodoxy rests. Analysts critical of the claim that deregulating labour markets

and weakening trade unions will cure unemployment and spur economic growth argue that the

models that justify these policies are non-robust and ill-specified, more sawdust than hard wood.

As the criticisms have mounted, many international organizations have backed away from their

condemnation of labour instutions and now express more nuanced views about the economic

effects of labour market institutions than they did a decade or so earlier. But others hold firmly

to the view that, to paraphrase former President Clinton, “it’s the labour institutions, stupid”.

       Why, despite over a decade of empirical analysis, have economists failed to reach

consensus on the effect of labour institutions on aggregate economic problems and on the

potential for deregulation to improve outcomes? Is the problem with data? Is the problem with
                                                                                                    2

the way economists have examined the data? How might we advance more rapidly our

knowledge about labour institutions to answer the critical questions?

       This paper argues that there are two reasons for inconclusive debate over the claim that

labour institutions impair aggregate performance.1 The first reason is that many adherents to the

claim hold strong priors that labour markets operate nearly perfectly in the absence of institutions

and let their priors dictate their modeling choices and interpretation of empirical results. The

second reason is that the cross-country aggregate data at issue is weak – too weak to decisively

reject strong prior views or to convince those with weaker priors. Barring a Great Depression

level collapse of the US or EU economies, I cannot imagine the aggregate evidence being so

clear as to overwhelm strong priors.

       Progress in economics comes, however, not from maintaining priors in the face of weak

evidence but from obtaining new evidence and adjusting priors to new knowledge. To improve

our understanding of how labour institutions operate, and move the debate to more productive

terrain, I propose a two-part research strategy: 1) empirical analyses of firms, workers, unions

and other groups in micro settings that resemble the interactions of institutions in the macro-

economy; and 2) development of more sophisticated priors through artificial agent simulations of

markets where institutions can have positive as well as negative effects on outcomes. The

combination of micro evidence and of simulations of how institutions operate offers a way

around the inconclusive aggregate data that has made the debate over flexibility and labour

market performance so unsatisfying .

1. The orthodox view: “It’s labour institutions, stupid.”

       The 1994 Jobs Study of the OECD (OECD 1994a, 1994b) brought to the center of policy

       1
        This paper deals with the debate over institutions in developed economies. For an
analysis of the debate with regard to the developing countries, see Freeman (1993).
                                                                                                   3

debate the claim that labour institutions were the primary cause of unemployment in advanced

countries. The Jobs Study listed ten recommendations to reduce unemployment and improve

economic performance in the OECD. Five of the factors were boiler plate platitudes: good

macro-economic policy; enhanced technological knowledge; elimination of impediments to

creation of enterprises; improved education and training; enhanced product market competition.

Four recommendations called for labor market deregulation: increased flexibility of working

time; making wage and labour costs more flexible by removing restrictions; reforming

employment security provisions; and reforming unemployment and related benefit systems. The

last recommendation endorsed active labour market policies – training programs, job-finding

assistance to workers, subsidies to employers to hire long-term unemployed or disabled workers,

and special programs for youths leaving school.2 Most analysts and policy-makers interpreted

the Jobs Study as blaming the economic problems of advanced Europe on inflexible regulated

labour markets.

       Nearly a decade after the Jobs Study, the IMF published an article in its World Economic

Outlook that predicted that unemployment in Europe would fall massively below US levels if

European countries deregulated their labor market and product markets:

       “labor reforms could produce output gains of about 5 percent and a fall in the
       unemployment rate of about 3 percentage points. … those benefits could be              by
       simultaneous efforts to increase competition in the product market.”3

       high unemployment is largely structural in nature—and thereby potentially affected by
       institutions—rather than cyclical (and therefore determined by the business cycle and
       macroeconomic policies). (Enact the reforms and) … unemployment could fall by
       about 6 ½ percentage points”4


       2
           John Martin
       3
           IMF, 2003, chapter 4, p 129
       4
           IMF, 2003, chapter 4, p 131
                                                                                                       4


        “when labor markets are more competitive, the economy reacts more quickly and
        smoothly to changes in interest rates. This facilitates the task of the monetary authorities;
         in particular, smaller changes in interest rates—and therefore output—are necessary to
stabilize inflation in the face of shocks.”. 5

       The belief that labour institutions impede economic efficiency is not new to the IMF and

other international financial institutions (IFIs). The Fund published a similar analysis of

European unemployment problems in 1999, albeit without such bold predictions about the huge

reduction in unemployment that “reforms” would generate. In their effort to help developing

countries deal with balance of payments and fiscal deficit problems, both the Fund and the World

Bank have long feared that labour institutions will undermine the macro-economic stabilization

policies and structural adjustment programs they recommend. In a balance of payments crisis, a

country must shift resources from non-traded goods to traded goods. This usually requires a

currency devaluation, which lowers the real wage. Since traded goods sectors tend to be capital

intensive, moreover, the reallocation of resources is also likely to increase returns to capital

relative to the returns to labor. Similarly, in a fiscal crisis, governments must raise taxes and/or

reduce public spending, which lowers real wages and redistributes income from the poor to the

wealthy. Since the recommended policies harm labour, at least in the short run, the IFIs naturally

worry that unions and other labour institutions, which seek to protect the economic well-being of

workers, will oppose the policies. The IFIs view labor insitutions as potential “flies in the

ointment” of the adjustments needed to restore economic health to sick economies.

       This perspective has led IMF-associated economists to stress the dangers of insufficient

labour market flexibility in economic crises even when those crises arise from problems far

removed from the labour market. Commenting on the 2002 economic collapse of the Fund’s



       5
           IMF, 2003, chapter 4, p 129
                                                                                                       5

once poster economy, Argentina, Michael Mussa, former chief economist at the IMF wrote:

 “ If Argentina had a more flexible economic system, especially in its labor markets, its economy
would have been more able to adapt to the rigors of the convertibility plan, unemployment would
have been lower, growth would have been stronger, fiscal deficits would have been smaller, and
interest rates would have been lower6”

       At an NBER conference, Anne Krueger, then first deputy managing director, expressed a

similar view, blaming Argentina’s problems on

        “... two factors ... weak fiscal policy and mounting overvaluation, the latter reflecting
relatively high inflation, a stronger dollar, and insufficient domestic flexibility (for example, in
the labor market). The last point is especially important — under a firmly fixed exchange, you
need other sources of adjustment to maintain competitiveness.”7

       While neither IMF expert called for Argentina to weaken its unions, lower minimum

wages, lessen employment protection laws, cut unemployment benefits, etc., those are the

orthodox ways to make labor markets more flexible.

2. The other side: Innocent till Proven Guilty:

       On the other side are economists and international agencies who see labour market

institutions as a way of enhancing economic adjustments and avoiding macro crises. The Nordic

(Rehn-Meidner) Model of the open macro-economy posits that peak level unions and employers’

associations negotiate changes in wages that are roughly equal to productivity growth in traded

goods sectors and changes in world prices, so as to maintain fixed exchange rates (Aukrust;

Henry Milner and Eskil Wadensjö). The assumption is that national bargainers take account of

macro-economic facts, while local labour markets would produce inflationary wage changes in

periods of full employment. Reflecting a similar perspective, Mancur Olson has argued that

centralized collective bargaining in small open Nordic economies works because all-



       6
           Mussa, 2002, p. 9 The italics are mine.
       7
           Anne Krueger, 2002, The italics are mine.
                                                                                                     6

encompassing “peak” union organizations internalize the negative externalities that arise in

wage-bargaining at the firm or industry level. In fact, there is evidence that industry labour

markets in Nordic countries operate closer to the competitive ideal than industry labour markets

in the market-driven US. In the US changes in sectoral prices and productivity affect sectoral

wages, contrary to the standard model of competitive wage setting8 whereas in the Nordic

countries institutionally determined wages assure that changes in sectoral prices and productivity

have little impact on sectoral wages (Holmlund and Zetterberg, 1991).

       The international agency responsible for labour issues, the ILO, also

       “takes issue with the view that labour market rigidity has been the major cause of
       unemployment and that greater labour market flexibility is the solution ... jobless rates
       appear to have risen independently of levels of labour market regulations ...trade union
       power was reduced in many countries, together with unemployment benefits and in some
       cases minimum wages, producing little if any positive employment effect.”
       (www.jobsletter.org.nz/jbl05210.htm).

       The ILO argues to the contrary – that economic systems based on labor-management

discussions can improve aggregate efficiency: “Successful social dialogue structures and

processes have the potential to resolve important economic and social issues, encourage good

governance, advance social and industrial peace and stability and boost economic progress.” The

ILO does not root its positive attitude toward social dialogue in neo-classical economics, but the

notion that negotiations can lead to efficient outcomes is consistent with Ronald Coase’s analysis

of transactions costs. The Coase theorem holds that regardless of the distribution of property

rights, bargaining should produce an optimal allocation of resources as long as transactions costs

are low. Labour institutions could redistribute income toward workers without harming

economic efficiency.

       8
         This is what one would expect in an ideal competitive economy, where industry shocks
alter employment but not wages. See Council of Economic Advisors, 1962 and Salter, for classic
statements of this principle.
                                                                                                     7

       In the 1980s and early 1990s the World Bank looked askance at labour institutions:

“Labor market policies – minimum wages, job security regulations, and social security – are

usually intended to raise welfare or reduce exploitation. But they actually work to raise the cost

of labor in the formal sector and reduce labor demand ... and thus (depress) labor incomes where

most of the poor are found.” (World Bank, 1990b, p 63). But in its 1995 World Development

Report the Bank gave a more balanced view. It wrote about “how should governments intervene

in labor markets”, (WDR, 1995, p 69) not why governments should not intervene. The WDR

noted that “It is possible to identify the conditions and policies under which free trade unions can

advance rather than impede development” (WDR, 1995, p 86 ). By 2003 the Bank had deviated

even furthur from its traditional perspective. It released the book Unions and Collective

Bargaining: Economic Effects in a Global Environment under the headline “Economies Perform

Better In Coordinated Labor Markets”. This volume reported that “Workers who belong to trade

unions earn higher wages, work fewer hours, receive more training, and have longer job tenure

on average, than their non-unionized counterparts .... On the other hand, temporary layoffs can

be more frequent in unionized firms. At the macroeconomic level, high unionization rates lead to

lower inequality of earnings and can improve economic performance (in the form of lower

unemployment and inflation, higher productivity and speedier adjustment to shocks)” (World

Bank Group, 2003).

       The InterAmerican Development Bank has a similar view. In 2003 it explicitly rejected

the deregulation solution and called for institutions to help markets work better: “Labor

regulations are not cost-free, but deregulation is not the answer.... Unions are neither the sand in

the wheels of the labor market nor the solution to low wages.... better labor market performance

is compatible with lower earnings inequality ... The new agenda requires a strengthened labor
                                                                                                8

authority and a complex network of public and private institutions” (InterAmerican Development

Bank, 2003 pp 7-8).

       In short, while the position that labor market institutions are a major cause of

unemployment and related aggregate economic problems has considerable adherents, there is a

substantial and growing number of economists and international agencies who take exception to

that view.

3. What the Data Shows

       The natural way to resolve the debate about how labour institutions affect economies is to

examine data on economic outcomes in the presence and absence of the institutions. At this

writing, there have been dozens of studies that compare aggregate outcomes between countries

with or without various institutions and in the same country before and after it changes an

institutional arrangement.

       The OECD has been a a major contributor to the research. Its 1994 Jobs Study report was

accompanied by two volumes of supporting research and was followed by numerous studies and

reviews of studies, many given in the OECD’s annual Employment Outlook. The OECD has

provided new and valuable measures of employment protection legislation and of replacement

rates in unemployment benefit systems and measures of product market institutions as well as of

labour market institutions. In addition, Steve Nickell (1997), with various co-authors, and

Layard, Nickell, and Jackman (1994) have contributed significantly to the case that labour

markets are the root cause of Europe’s unemployment. Reading these studies, most of which

confidently proclaim that the data prove that institutions are indeed the problem, one could

readily end up believing that there was overwhelming scientific support that European labour

institutions are guilty as charged of having caused joblessness and slow economic growth.
                                                                                                     9

       But these analyses are akin to a prosecutor’s case in a trial. They give the evidence that

suggests the institutions are guilty but do not reflect on the weaknesses of that evidence. To

reach a verdict, it is necessary as well to see the arguments by analysts who take the other side of

the debate – the defense attorneys, as it were. These researchers give a different reading of what

the data shows and, most important, of the robustness of the case against labor institutions.9 In a

volume devoted to debunking the Jobs Study claims, Baker, Glyn, Howell, and Schmidt (2004)

document that the findings in several time series models that find that institutions adversely

affect aggregate outcomes are not robust. The estimated coefficients on labour institutions

disappear or becomes statistically insignificant when the researchers make modest changes in the

measures of instititutions, countries covered, and time periods of analysis. Models that cover

more years, countries, and measures than earlier studies “provide little support for those who

advocate comprehensive deregulation of OECD labor markets” (p 106). Baker et al conclude

that there is a “yawning gap between the confidence with which the case for labor market

deregulation has been asserted and the evidence that the regulating institutions are the culprits”

(p 198). Blanchflower (2001) tells a similar story, noting “only a weak positive relation in the

OECD between unemployment and benefits (p 390) and “no support (from a 1999 OECD report)

... for the belief that unions, benefits, the tax wedge, ALMP spending or earnings dispersion

influence unemployment ... contrary to the claims made in Layard et al, which appear to be based

on misspecified cross-country unemployment regressions (p 392)”.



       9
         Nickell and Bell, 1996 show that EU-US employment gaps are as large among skilled as
among less skilled workers. Card, Kramarz and Lemieux (1994) and Freeman and Schettkat,
(2001) find little relation between employment and labor costs of workers by industry or
occupation across countries. Increased hours worked in the US among the educated and women,
whose wages rose relative to the US average, also runs counter to the rigidity story (Freeman,
1995). Evidence that changes in the US minimum had negligible employment effects imply that
low wages did not cause high employment (Card and Krueger 1997)
                                                                                                       10

       Why are supporters of the new orthodoxy so convinced that their analysis definitively

convicts labour institutions while critics find inconclusive results in the same data?

        Blanchard and Wolfers suggest that one reason is a form of regression-mongering, in

which the models used to make the case against institutions “are in part the result of economic

Darwinism … measures … constructed ex post facto by researchers who were not unaware of

unemployment developments” (Blanchard and Wolfer, 2002, p 18). As an example of this form

of analysis, Blanchflower notes that some models include country dummy variables that

effectively remove observations that fail to fit the orthodox model. If Spain (or Ireland, or any

country) had drastically a different employment experience than measures of labour institutions

suggest they should have, analysts with strong priors can invariably find enough idiosyncracies

about that country to convince themselves that its observations should be treated differently than

those of other countries.

       In sum, both sides of the debate over institutions have operated as lawyers in a trial,

driven by a strong commitment to their client (priors). Adherents to the new orthodox view

search the data for specifications/measures that support their priors, while barely noticing

evidence that goes against them. If results are inconsistent with the priors, they assume that

something is wrong with their empirical specification or measures, rather than question the

validity of their case. If results fit their priors, they rarely look further to find weaknesses. On

the other side, critics of the case that labor institutions are the root cause of economic problems

act as defense attorneys. They see their job as finding specifications and measures that make the

institutions innocent of the alleged crime of causing unemployment or other economic problems.

To the extent that the burden of proof is on the prosecutor, the defense team has an easier job.

They do not have to come up with another suspect, which is hard, but have only to demonstrate
                                                                                                 11

that the data are more ambiguous than the prosecutor claims.

       At this writing, the critics of the new orthodoxy have done this with sufficient success to

impel even the OECD to retreat from its strong Jobs Study claim to a more equivocal position

about the impact of institutions on outcomes.10 The 2004 OECD Employment Outlook admitted

that “the evidence of the role played by EPL (employment protection legislation) on aggregate

employment and unemployment rates remains mixed” (p 81); and expressed concern that the

temporary contracts that replaced permanent jobs in some countries (such as Spain) produced

labour market duality between those with permanent contracts and those with temporary

contracts and job insecurity that were themselves a problem. The Outlook argued for “the

plausibility of the Jobs Strategy diagnosis that excessively high aggregate wages and/or wage

compression have been impediments” to jobs, while admitting that “this evidence is somewhat

fragile”. With respect to unionism, it accepted that the effect of collective bargaining “appears to

be contingent upon other institutional and policy factors that need to be clarified to provide

robust policy advice” (p. 165).

       While proponents and opponents of the case against labour institutions disagree about the

whether labour institutions are a significant contributor to unemployment and aggregate

economic efficiency, it is important to recognize that they concur on one point: that labour

institutions, particularly those associated with trade unions, reduce inequality of pay compared to

pay in competitive markets.11 The evidence here is overwhelming. In countries like the US

which decentralized labor markets set pay, dispersion of earnings is lower in unionized


       10
        The evolving views of the OECD can be seen in various Employment Outlooks (1995,
1996, 1997, 1999).
       11
          This is true for advanced countries. The situation is more ambiguous in developing
countries since unions do not represent workers in the informal sector and rarely represent rural
workers, who are paid less than those in the modern sector.
                                                                                                    12

workplaces than in nonunion workplaces; dispersion of pay falls for the same workers when they

move from nonunion to union settings, and increases when they move in the opposite direction.

Across countries, dispersion of pay tends to be lower in countries with high rates of collective

bargaining coverage than in countries with low rates of collective bargaining. Over time,

moreover, dispersion decreases in countries when institutions play a greater role in pay setting

and increases when institutional pay setting gets weaker. For example, when Italy used the Scala

Mobile to set pay, inequality fell rapidly whereas when it scrapped that form of national pay

bargaining, inequality began to rise.12

       In short, priors aside, the best summary of the data – what we really know – is that labour

institutions reduce earnings inequality but that they have no clear relation to other aggregate

outcomes, such as unemployment. From the perspective of the evidence, the claim that “it’s

labour institutions, stupid” is an interpretation, perhaps right, perhaps wrong, of the link between

institutions and aggregate economic problems. That institutions affect distribution but do not

affect aggregate efficiency is consistent with a Coase-theorem interpretation of how institutions

operate, though it is far from conclusive.13

4. The Role of Strong Priors in the Case Against Labor Institutions

       Despite the lack of robust evidence, many economists and policy-makers continue to

strongly defend the orthodox view that institutions are the root cause of economic problems. In

the January 2005 Economic Journal Nickell, Nunziata, and Ochel reitorated the claim that “the

broad movements in unemployment in the OECD can be explained by shifts in labour market

institutions” (p 1) ... without responding to the evidence given by critics of that view. And the


       12
         Erickson and Ichino, 1995; Manacorda, 2004
       13
         Patterns in strikes run counter to a Coase theorem interpretation. If management and
workers lose from strikes, they should come to an agreement without strikes or lockouts.
                                                                                                 13

IMF published the analysis cited earlier (IMF, 2003) and which I will consider in depth shortly –

also without responding to critical commentary about the robustness of results.

       What explains strong adherence to a claim whose empirical support is “fragile”, “mixed”,

“contingent on factors that need to be clarified”, and so on?

       The best interpretation I can give is that these economists come to the problem of

explaining unemployment with the prior that markets work well absent interventions, and thus

that the right place to look for causes of problems is at institutions that may impede the operation

of the markets.14 They have fairly tight bands around this prior, so that it dominates weak

evidence, and thus produces posteriors close to the priors, as in standard Bayesian inference.

       The April 2003 article in the IMF’s World Economic Outlook quoted earlier provides an

example of such prior-driven analysis. As noted, this article predicted that “reforms” that would

make European labour markets more like those in the US would reduce EU unemployment from

8.0% to 5.0% and raise GDP by 5 percent, while a combination of labour and product market

reforms would reduce EU unemployment by 6.5 points to 1.5%!

       Analysts with weaker priors might have noticed that the magnitude of these effects border

on the impossible. In 2003 many EU countries had unemployment rates below 6.5% -- Austria,

Denmark, Eire, Netherlands, Luxembourg, Portugal, Sweden, and the United Kingdom (as well

as Norway outside the EU), so the 6.5 point drop would put them into negative unemployment

terrain. Since this cannot occur, rates would have to fall by more than 6.5 points in other



       14
          The Spring 2004 German IFO institute economics magazine CESifo Forum was
devoted to European labour markets. Many economists favoured some aspects of the orthodox
view while one (me) argued that European labour markets were not “as bad as all that” (Freeman,
2004) . My argument was that no real world market looks good when compared to the ideal
competitive market, but that such a comparison was misleading since no real world market
performs in accord with the competitive ideal; and that it was this comparison of European
labour markets with the ideal that led many analysts astray.
                                                                                                14

countries. Analysts with weaker priors might have noticed that the country with nominally the

most flexible institutions, the US, did not have anything close to the predicted 1.5% rate of

unemployment. In 2003 the US unemployment rate was 6.0%. That the EU would have one-

fourth the unemployment rate that the US had if the EU only had flexible US institutions seems

prima facie nonsense. If the US couldn’t attain a 1.5% unemployment rate with these flexible

institutions or even the 5.0% unemployment rate predicted for European countries if they adopted

US style labour practices, why should European countries do so well?

       The excessive claim does not come from erroneous empirical work. The most rigorous

analysis in the article shows nothing like these effects. This analysis estimates a vector of

“Institution-Adjusted Unemployment Rates” for OECD countries – unemployment rates minus

the estimated impact of institutions on unemployment. Graphs in the article show that these

rates closely track actual changes in unemployment rates, and the article informs the reader that

this means that “Institutions …hardly account for the growing trend observed in most European

countries and the dramatic fall in U.S. unemployment in the 1990s” (my italics).15 In particular,

the article stressed that Germany had broadly unchanged institutions while unemployment rose

by about 6 percentage points. No change in institutions and higher unemployment – just the sort

of conclusion one might have expected from one of the critics of the orthodox position. But,

despite this finding, the article’s message was that weakening institutions would reduce

unemployment to 1.5%. How could they reach such a conclusion from such data?

        The analysts tell us: by ignoring the longitudinal evidence (which most empiricists would

regard as providing a stronger and more valid test of any claim) in favor of cross section

regressions that showed that institutions “... alone explain a good deal of the cross-country



       15
            IMF, April 2003, figure 4.4, p 134.
                                                                                                      15

differences in unemployment rates”. In the context of US-EU differences, this is a nearly

circular argument: the US has different institutions and lower unemployment than Europe, so

those institutions must explain the difference in unemployment. That the cross section analysis

predicted that Europe’s rate of unemployment would fall by incredible amounts to 1/4th the US’s

rate of unemployment should have been a red flag that even here something was amiss – be it

misspecification, omitted variable bias, what have you, of the sort that longitudinal analyses are

designed to reduce, if not eliminate. But the strong prior that European unemployment was due

to labour institutions overwhelmed the empirics and interpretation thereof. The prosecuting

attorney was committed to argue for conviction no matter what.

5. Configurations and evidence

       Priors aside, the problem of determining how institutions affect outcomes is difficult.

        One difficulty is the large number of possible configurations of institutions relative to the

number of cross-country observations on which to assess their impact on outcomes.16 By

configurations I mean combinations of institutional arrangements, such as union density,

collective bargaining coverage, centralization of bargaining, employment protection laws,

government regulation of wages, affirmative action policies, etc. Consider the problem of

analysing 4 institutions, all coded as 0/1 so that a country has/does not have a given institution,

and with institutions measured so that having one implies less reliance on decentralized markets.

In an experimental design to assess the impact of institutions, we would look at the outcomes

associated with the 32 (= 24) logically possible configurations of institutions.17 The orthodox



       16
         Charles Ragin (1987) has done the most to analyze the problem of inferring relations
from configurations.
       17
         If we used a high/medium/low categorization, we would have 81 (= 34) possible
configurations.
                                                                                                    16

hypothesis would be that the configuration with four 0s would give the best outcome – the lowest

unemployment rate. The alternative hypothesis that centralized bargaining works best would be

that the configuration with four 1'
                                  s would give the best outcome. In between are a diverse set of

possibilities.

        The social world does not provide the evidence needed to assess all of the possibilities.

Invariably there are no observations on some configurations, some of which may be impossible

to fit together, but others of which may be unobservable for some less compelling reason – such

as historical circumstance. There will also be some combinations for which the observation is a

single country, which makes it indistinguishable from anything else unique about that country,

and thus possibly meaningless for assessing how the combination might work in some other

country. With only 30 or so advanced countries, highly correlated outcomes, and infrequent

changes in institutions, the number of configurations can easily exceed the number of

independent data points.18

        To deal with the problem of excessive configurations, analysts of labour institutions have

aggregated arrangements into simpler categories: “neo-corporatist” economies vs “liberal”

economies, and so on. But there is no uniform agreement about these groupings. For example,

Japan combines company level unionism and profits related bonuses with a strong employer

federation, the Shunto offensive, and a sense of national unity. Is this neo-corporatist or liberal,

or does Japan merit its own categorization? As long as countries have many institutions that

differ in many ways, researchers risk forming classifications or groupings that support their



        18
          The highly correlated outcomes implies that having higher frequency data cannot
resolve the problem – you don’t learn any more by having monthly unemployment rates than
from yearly unemployment rates. In developing countries, the Easterly, Kremer, Pritchett, and
Summers’ finding that growth rates are not highly correlated creates a different problem in
assessing how institutions or policies affect outcomes.
                                                                                                    17

priors rather than that test those views.

       Another difficulty in analysing how institutions affect outcomes is that unlike Gertrude

Stein’s “ a rose is a rose is a rose”, institutions change over time as their members and leaders

learn from experience. Unions, government regulators, and employer federations do not respond

in the same way to the same stimula regardless of past events any more than does any other

economic agent. As cases in point, consider the way the British and German unions behaved in

the 1970s to the way they acted in the 1990s. In the seventies, the British unions were

troglodytes, opposed to seemingly rational economic thought and responsibility toward the UK

economy. German unions were widely praised as responsible economic agents. In the 1990s the

British unions were the modernizers, with the TUC endorsing “value added” unionism on the

notion that only if unions could add value to the performance of firms would they be able to

improve the well-being of workers. By contrast, the German unions seemed incapable of

adjusting to the economic realities of post-unification Germany and globalization. Recognizing

that unions learn from the past, one would not want to assume that unions would respond to

some future inflationary shock as they did to the 1970s inflation.

6. Doing better

       If excessively strong priors, configurations too numerous or complex for aggregate data,

and changes in institutional behaviour limit our ability to bring the debate about how labour

markets affect aggregate outcomes to closure, what can we do to increase our understanding of

those institutions?

       My proposed strategy has two parts. First, to supplement priors based on perfect markets

with priors based on experimental economics lab findings and artificial agent simulations of

markets which allow institutions to have positive as well as negative effects on outcomes.
                                                                                                   18

Second, to examine data on how firms, workers, unions and other groups operate in micro

settings that resemble the macro-economic institutional settings.

developing more realistic priors

       The prior that labor markets work perfectly absent institutional interventions comes from

standard models of how rational optimizing agents interact in competitive markets.19 Although

economics has theories that deal with other markets – monopsony theory being perhaps the most

prominent in labour analysis (Manning, 2005) – most economists downplay their importance and

hold the prior that markets operate according to the competitive model unless proven otherwise.

As a first approximation, this seems sensible, but once empirical evidence shows that the perfect

market model is incomplete, it is necessary to do more than search for impediments to perfection.

Analyzing the markets which most closely fit the theoretic ideal, financial markets, economists

have found it necessary to go beyond the first approximation “efficient market model”. Indeed,

the anomolies in financial markets, which can generate huge economic problems, have spawned

an entire field, behavioral finance. While it is always dangerous to argue by analogy, I am willing

to make such an argument here. If it’s necessary to develop more realistic priors about behavior

in finance, where all that matters is money, then surely it’s necessary to do so in labor, where

market participants are concerned with much more than monetary considerations.

       To develop more realistic priors about how people and institutions operate in aggregate

economies, we can make greater use of two modes of analysis. The first mode are laboratory

experiments, which provide insight into individual behavior and the way individuals connect in

markets. Experimental economics (see Kagel and Roth, 1995) has generated findings about

behaviour in diverse situations – the ultimatum game, the dictator game, the prisoners dilemma

       19
          Economists, like the general public, also derive priors from “anecdotal evidence” – ie
the events that we personally experience or observe others experiencing.
                                                                                                   19

game, and public goods games, that have implications for labour institutions. Experimental

economics has also generated findings about the conditions under which supply and demand

clear markets, and the conditions under which they do not. While the jump from laboratory

experiments to actual institutions is a large one, knowledge of what experimental economics has

found should help us form better priors about what to expect from labour institutions.

       The second tool are simulations based on artificial agent modeling. This form of

modeling can help us develop priors about the interaction among decision units. The Sante Fe

Stock market model (Le Baron, 2002), for example, shows how competing strategies adopted by

agents with bounded rationality can interact to produce swings in stock market values that more

resemble the actual swings than the random fluctuations in any efficient market model. Models

of labour economic institutions have focused on issues relating to the matching of firms and

workers (Neugart, 2004; Pingle and Tesfatsion, 2003) but they could not also examine other

institutions or issues – for instance the high dispersion of wages in labour markets. Al Roth and

co-workers (1999, 2000) have shown the value of combining modeling with the design of new

institutional forms for specific labor markets. These models provide powerful priors for what to

expect from actual institutions or changes in institutions.

Using micro data

       Priors help interpret evidence, but ultimately it is evidence that ends scientific debate. If

you accept my claim that the aggregate evidence is unlikely to be definitive in bringing closure to

the labour institution debate, then we should look for more micro evidence. Studies of firms,

whose organization is sufficiently complicated to provide insight into interactions of institutions

at a higher level, would seem to offer the most promising area for research. There are lots of

firms and lots of changes in labor practices among them, so there is no lack of data. To judge
                                                                                                   20

whether formal labour market rules produce worse employment outcomes, as claimed by

orthodox analysts, one could contrast employment between firms with more or less rigid internal

rules. When Martin Weitzman (1984) hypothesized that profit-sharing could reduce

unemployment and maintain low inflation by creating a permanent excess labor demand, labour

economists analyzed the employment pattern of firms with and without profit-sharing (Kruse,

1993) and found that the data was generally supportive of the hypotheses. While there are

problems with generalizing from micro analysis to the aggregate economy, there is still much we

can learn about how labour institutions operate from micro data. Indeed, the most convincing

evidence that some regulations affect unemployment adversely comes from micro studies that

show that longer durations of unemployment benefits generate longer spells of unemployment.

These estimates are much smaller than those obtained in some cross-country regressions, but they

are robust and driven by the data rather than strong priors and particular model specifications.

More can be learned from narrower investigations of hypotheses than from the sweeping claims

based on weak aggregative data.

Conclusion

        I draw three lessons from the debate over the link between labour instititutions and

aggregate outcomes.

       First, that the debate cannot be resolved by analysis of the aggregate data in question. The

data do not scream out loudly and clearly “it’s labour institutions, stupid,” as the new orthodoxy

initially claimed, nor does the data say “that’s impossible”. Rather, the data mumble omething

akin to “I don’t know ... don’t ask me ... maybe ... your guess is as good as mine.”

       Second, that researchers should beware the power of priors, particularly their own, in

analysing weak aggregate data. Strong priors can be blinders to knowledge, and can lead to
                                                                                                  21

excessive “lawyers’ case” empirical analysis, which will eventually be rebutted.

       Third, there is a road to improved knowledge. It is through developing more

sophisticated priors about how people behave in institutional settings and how institutions

interact in markets on the one side; and through analysis of the response of workers and firms to

particular institutional settings in micro settings. It is not by continued regression mongering of

weak cross country data .
                                                                                             22


                                          References

Aukrust, O. 1977. “Inflation in the Open Economy: A Norwegian Model’’, in L.B. Krause and
W.S. Salent (eds.): Worldwide Inflation; Theory and Recent Experience. Washington DC:
Brookings Institution.

Baker, D, Andrew Glyn, David Howell, and John Schmidt. 2004. “Labor Market Institutions and
Unemployment” in D. Howell (ed.) Questioning Liberalization: Unemployment, Labor Markets,
and the Welfare State, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.




Blanchflower, David G. 2001. “Unemployment, Well-Being, and Wage Curves in Eastern and
Central Europe,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 15, pp 364-402.

Card, D., F. Kramarz, and T. Lemieux. 1994. “Changes in the relative structure of wages and
employment: A comparison of the United States, Canada and France,” Princeton N.J.: Princeton
University Manuscript (December).

Card, D.and A. B.Krueger 1997. Myth and Measurement, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.

Council of Economic Advisors. 1962. Economic Report of the President. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office.

Easterly, William, Michael Kremer, Lant Pritchett, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1993.
"Good Policy or Good Luck? Country Growth Performance and Temporary Shocks." Journal of
Monetary Economics 32 (3): 459-83.

Erickson C and A. Ichino (1995), .Wage differentials in Italy: Market Forces, Institutions and
Inflation., in Freeman R, Katz L (eds), Differences and Changes in Wage Structure,University of
Chicago Press

Freeman, Richard B. 1993. “Labor Market Institutions and Policies: Help or Hindrance to
Economic Development?” Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conference on Development
Economics 1992. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

-----------. 2004. “Are European Labor Markets As Awful as All That?”CESifo Forum 1 / 2004
Focus: The European Labour Markets.
Freeman, R.B. and R. Schettkat. 2001. ‘Skill compression, wage differentials and employment:
Germany versus the US’, Oxford Economic Papers, 582-603.

Freeman, Richard B. 1995. “The Limits of Wage Flexibility to Curing Unemployment,” Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, 11(1) (Spring) pp 214-222.
                                                                                              23
Holmlund, Bertil and Johnny Zetterberg. 1991. “Insider Effects in Wage Determination:
Evidence from Five Countries,” European Economic Review, July.

InterAmerican Development Bank. 2003. Good Jobs Wanted. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
Press.

International Monetary Fund (IMF). 1999. “Chronic Unemployment in the Euro Area: Causes
and Cures.” Chapter 4 in World Economic Outlook (May). Washington, DC: IMF.

----------. 2003. “Unemployment andd Labor Market Institutions: Why Reforms Pay Off.”
Chapter 4 in World Economic Outlook (April). Washington, DC: IMF.

Kagel, John H. and Alvin E. Roth (eds). 1995. The Handbook of Experimental Economics.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Paperback edition, Fall 1997.

Krueger, Anne. 2002. “Crisis Prevention and Resolution: Lessons from Argentina
National Bureau Of Economic Research (NBER) Conference on "The Argentina Crisis"
Cambridge, July 17. http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2002/071702.htm

Kruse, Douglas. 1993. Profit-Sharing Does it Make A Difference? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research.

Layard, R., S. Nickell, and R. Jackman. 1994. The Unemployment Crisis. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

LeBaron, Blake. 2002. “Building the Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market,” Working Paper,
Brandeis University, June.
Manacorda, Marco Can the Scala Mobile Explain the Fall and Rise of Earnings Inequality in
Italy? A Semiparametric Analysis, 1977-1993'
                                           , Journal of Labor Economics, 2004, vol. 22, no. 3,
585-613.

Manning, Alan. 2005. Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Martin, J 1998 “What Works Among Active Labour Market Policies: Evidence from OECD
Countries’ Experiences” www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Conferences/1998/
Martin.pdf

Milner, Henry and Eskil Wadensjö. 2001. Göösta Rehn, the Swedish Model and Labour Market
PoliciesInternational and National Perspectives Ashgate.

Mussa, Michael. 2002. “Argentina and the Fund: From Triumph to Tragedy,” Policy Analyses in
International Economics 67 (July), Institute for International Economics.

Neugart, Michael. 2004. “Endogenous matching functions: an agent-based computational
approach,” Advances in Complex Systems, 7(2) 187-202.
Nickell, S. J. and B. Bell. 1996. “Changes in the Distribution of Wages and Unemployment in
the OECD countries,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 86(5): 302-308.
                                                                                                           24
              Nickell, Stephen., Luca Nunziata, and Wolfgang Ochel. 2005. “Unemployment in the OECD
              since the 1960s: What Do We Know?” The Economic Journal 115 (January) 1-27. Royal
              Economic Society.

              Nickell, S. 1997. “Unemployment and Labor Market Rigidities: Europe versus North America.”
              Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(3) (Summer): 55-74.

              Olson, Mancur. 1990. How Bright Are the Northern Lights?: Some questions about Sweden
              (Crafoord lectures). Lund, Sweden: Institute of Economic Research, Lund University.

              Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 1994. OECD Jobs Study,
              Evidence and Explanations, Part I: Labor Market Trends and Underlying Forces of Change.
              Paris: OECD.

              -----------. 1994. OECD Jobs Study, Evidence and Explanations, Part II: The Adjustment
              Potential of the Labor Market. Paris: OECD.

              -----------. 1995. OECD Jobs Study, Taxation, Employment, and Unemployment. Paris: OECD.

              -----------. 1996. OECD Employment Outlook. Paris: OECD.

              -----------. 1997. “Economic Performance and the Structure of Collective Bargaining.” OECD
              Employment Outlook (July). Paris: OECD.

              -----------. 1999. Implementing the Jobs Study. Paris: OECD.

              -----------. 2002. OECD Employment Outlook. Paris: OECD.

              -----------. 2004. OECD Employment Outlook. Paris: OECD.

              Pingle, Mark and Leigh Tesfatsion. 2003. “Evolution of Worker-Employer Networks and
              Behaviors Under Alternative Non-Employment Benefits: An Agent-Based Computational
              Study,” Computing in Economics and Finance, 7, Society for Computational Economics.

              Ragin, Charles. 1987. The Comparative Method. University of California Press.
Roth, A. E. and Elliott Peranson. 1999. The Redesign of the Matching Market for American Physicians: Some
               Engineering Aspects of Economic Design American Economic Review, 89(4) (September): 748-
               780.
Roth, Alvin E. 2002. “The Economist as Engineer: Game Theory, Experimentation, and Computation as Tools
               for Design Economics,” Fisher-Schultz Lecture, Econometrica, 70(4) (July): 1341-1378.

Salter, W.E.G. (1960) Productivity and Technical Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Weitzman, Martin L. 1984. The Share Economy: Conquering Stagflation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
            Press.

World Bank. 1995. World Development Report. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

World Bank. 1990. World Development Report 1990. New York: Oxford University Press.

World Bank 2003 news release. web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/0,,
             contentMDK:20091655~menuPK:34463~pagePK:34370~piPK:34424~theSitePK:4607,00.html
