NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ROCKONOMICS:
THE ECONOMICS OF POPULAR MUSIC
Marie Connolly
Alan B. Krueger
Working Paper 11282
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11282
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2005

We thank Art De Vany and Bentley MacLeod for helpful comments and Gary Bongiovanni for data, and
absolve them from any mistakes we may have made. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Marie Connolly and Alan B. Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Rockonomics: The Economics of Popular Music
Marie Connolly and Alan B. Krueger
NBER Working Paper No. 11282
April 2005
JEL No. Z1, L82, O34
ABSTRACT
This paper considers economic issues and trends in the rock and roll industry, broadly defined. The
analysis focuses on concert revenues, the main source of performers ' income. Issues considered
include: price measurement; concert price acceleration in the 1990s; the increased concentration of
revenue among performers; reasons for the secondary ticket market; methods for ranking performers;
copyright protection; and technological change.
Marie Connolly
Princeton University
marie@princeton.edu
Alan B. Krueger
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
akrueger@princeton.edu

The fact of the matter is that popular music is one of the industries of the
country. It’s all completely tied up with capitalism. It’s stupid to separate it.
– Paul Simon

1. Introduction
As was highlighted by a much ridiculed box in the 2004 Economic Report of the
President that questioned whether fast food restaurants should be classified in the
manufacturing sector, defining an industry necessarily entails some arbitrariness. We
seek to survey the economics of the popular music industry, a subfield of economics that
we euphemistically call Rockonomics. But what is popular music? Where does one draw
the lines? Here, we will define popular music as music that has a wide following, is
produced by contemporary artists and composers, and does not require public subsidy to
survive. This definition rules out classical music and publicly supported orchestras. It
includes rock and roll, pop, rap, bebop, jazz, blues and many other genres. What about
Pavarotti? Well, we warned you that the border of the definition can be fuzzy. If the
three tenors attract a large following and are financially viable, we would include them in
the popular music industry as well.
Why is popular music worthy of a handbook chapter? There are several
responses. First, Paul Simon’s sentiment in the epigraph not withstanding, for many fans
popular music transcends usual market economics and raises spirits and aspirations. In
this vein, for example, Bruce Springsteen once commented, “in some fashion, I help
people hold on to their own humanity, if I'm doing my job right.” Dewey Finn, the
character played by Jack Black in the hit movie, School of Rock, went even further,
immodestly claiming, “One great rock show can change the world.” The rock and roll
industry arguably started as a social movement intended to bring about political,
2

economic and cultural change, as much as it did as a business. Certainly, popular music
is an important cultural industry.
Second, precisely because emotion and non-traditional economic concerns loom
large in popular music, the industry can be a breeding ground for new insights into
economics. Social considerations are important in transactions outside the music
industry; they are just magnified when it comes to a rock and roll concert.
Third, the popular music industry provides a testing ground for some important
economic theories. For example, popular music is a classic superstar industry, where
rewards are highly skewed. Can economic models explain the distribution of rewards?
Also, despite the non-economic forces that affect the popular music industry, can basic
economic factors, such as supply and demand, still provide a good explanation of many
of the important developments in the industry?
Fourth, the industry is profoundly affected by technological change, such as the
advent of radio, TV, record albums, cassette tapes, CDs, MP3 players, the Internet, etc.
Thus, popular music provides an unusual setting to understand how rapid technological
change affects an industry.
Fifth, and finally, the popular music industry is, by definition, popular. As a
consequence, students are particularly motivated to learn about the industry, and
examples drawn from the industry thus provide good material for teaching economics.
To help guide our coverage, Table 1.1 provides a summary of the main income
sources for the top 35 popular music performers who toured in 2002, ranked by income.
The figures, which are taken from Rolling Stone magazine, should be viewed as rough
estimates. Another caveat to bear in mind is that some sources of income – such as

3

revenue from merchandise sales, movies, commercials and (don’t laugh) cell phone
jingles – are not itemized in the table, but included in the total. These other sources of
revenues can be substantial. The Osbournes, for example, had a huge success with their
reality TV show that aired on MTV. Nevertheless, the table provides an indication of the
relative importance of live concerts, record sales, and publication royalties in performers’
income. Although the concert figures are somewhat inflated because artists do not tour
every year (and our sample conditions on having toured), it is clear that concerts provide
a larger source of income for performers than record sales or publishing royalties. Only
four of the top 35 income-earners made more money from recordings than from live
concerts, and much of the record revenue for these artists probably represented an
advance on a new album, not on-going royalties from CD sales. For the top 35 artists as
a whole, income from touring exceeded income from record sales by a ratio of 7.5 to 1 in
2002. Royalties from publishing music was slightly less than income from recordings.
Consequently, we will devote much attention to live concerts in this paper.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section describes
the organization of the music industry, devoting particular attention to live performances.
Section 3 discusses theoretical issues in the pricing of concerts. Section 4 considers
major developments in the popular music concert industry, with particular emphasis on
prices, ticket sales, revenue, and concentration among promoters. Section 5 considers the
important role played by scalpers. Section 6 provides a method for ranking performers
based on economic data. Section 7 considers the role of the superstar model in the rock
and roll industry. Section 8 discusses the role of radio and royalties, and section 9

4

considers related issues involving file sharing. Section 10 concludes by highlighting
important questions for further research.

2. The Players
The market for popular music has many players and complex contracts. Figure
2.1 provides a schematic diagram of the organization of key elements of the popular
music industry. First and foremost, of course, are the musicians, who form a band. The
band may write its own music and lyrics, or it may purchase music from an outside
composer. In the Figure 2.1, we have illustrated a situation for a band that writes its own
music. The bands have managers who represent them and take a share of their earnings
in exchange for their managerial services. On behalf of the bands, managers make
contracts with promoters to promote live concerts. The promoter secures a venue,
advertises the event, and takes care of other arrangements. Successful bands also have
contracts with recording companies to produce and market CDs. Record companies are
occasionally involved in promoting concert tours, but they typically play only a
peripheral role in concerts, when they are involved at all.
If a band composed its own music, it will also contract with a publisher to
copyright the music. The publisher will contract with a performing rights organization,
which licenses the music for radio stations, television and other users, monitors the use of
the music, and collects royalties. The publisher usually takes half the royalties, and the
composer receives the other half (some of which goes to the manager). The performing
rights organizations also coordinate with performing rights organizations in other

5

countries to collect and distribute fees for music played abroad. (See Section 8.) Costs
are not deducted from the publishing royalties the band receives.
As is clear from Table 1.1, bands receive relatively little of their income from
recording companies. Indeed, only the very top bands are likely to receive any income
other than the advance they receive from the company, because expenses – and there are
many – are charged against the bands advance before royalties are paid out. In 2003 the
total value of recording sales (including CDs, singles, LPs, etc.) in the U.S. was $11.8
billion according to IFPI (2004), while the total value of concert ticket sales was $2.1
billion according to our tabulations. Thus, from the consumers’ perspective, recordings
are a much larger market, but from the artists’ perspective, concerts represent a much
more important income source. This point was made by Scott Welch, manager of Alanis
Morissette and LeAnn Rimes: “The top 10% of artists make money selling records, the
rest go on tour.”1
2.1 Contracts
Contractual arrangements between bands, promoters and record labels are
heterogeneous, but the typical contract resembles a book contract, with an initial advance
and then royalties if sales exceed a certain level. The typical contract between a band and
a concert promoter is most easily illustrated with a hypothetical example. Consider an
agreement covering a single concert.2 The band receives a “guaranteed advance” – e.g.,
equal to the first $100,000 of ticket sales, and then, before additional revenue is
distributed, the promoter recovers his expenses and a “guaranteed profit” – say $50,000
for expenses and $22,500 for profit. The expenses could include advertising, rent for the
1

Quoted in Kafka and Powers (2003).
It is interesting to note that as promoters have become more consolidated, more bands have signed
nationwide tours with a single promoter.
2

6

venue, costs of unloading the equipment, etc. The band also has expenses (e.g., travel),
which it pays for out of its income. The promoter and the band split any ticket revenue
above the guarantee plus expenses and minimum profit (above $172,500 in this case),
usually with the band receiving 85 percent and the promoter receiving 15 percent of these
revenues.3 The band’s guaranteed advance and percent of revenue after expenses is
higher for bands with greater bargaining power.
In its negotiation with the promoter, the band (or its manager on the band’s
behalf) agrees to the concert price, which naturally affects the amount of revenue
collected. In addition, the band usually receives 100 percent of merchandise sales (e.g.,
T-shirts) that take place at the concert.4 The venue usually receives the beer and parking
revenue. An interesting economic question is why the contracts for concerts take this
form. Because the parties receive revenue from the sources for which they are most
responsible – the band and promoter from ticket sales, the band from merchandise sales,
and the venue for parking and food – it is possible that this division of revenue streams
provides optimal incentives for efficient provision.
Promoters contract with a ticket distributor to distribute tickets. Tickets may also
be distributed directly by the venue box office and by the band to its fan club. By far the
largest ticket distributor is Ticketmaster. Ticketmaster also has exclusive arrangements
to distribute tickets for some venues. Ticketmaster fees are usually around 10 percent of
the list price. Unknown to the consumer, in some cases the venue, promoter or
performers receive a portion of this fee, depending on their contract.

3

These hypothetical figures were used by the head of a major management firm to illustrate a “typical”
contract.
4
In some cases, the band will be required to give a proportion (e.g., 30 percent) of the merchandise sales to
the venue for the right to sell there, however.

7

Record companies tend to sign long-term agreements with bands that specify an
advance on royalties and a royalty rate. The typical new band has very little negotiating
power with record labels, and the advance rarely covers the recording and promotion
costs, which are usually charged to the band. Because fixed recording costs vary little
with band quality, only the most popular artists earn substantial revenue from record
sales.
In the following passage from his book, So You Wanna Be a Rock & Roll Star,
Jacob Slichter (2004), the drummer for Semisonic (and grandson of former AEA
President Sumner Slichter), describes a typical recording contract:
Thus, armed with an attorney and a manager, we began our negotiations
with Electra. Dan [the lead singer] would relay the developments of those
negotiations after our evening rehearsals, when we went out for drinks. I
leaned back in my chair, sipped merlot, and listened as Dan and John
tutored me in the basics of record contracts.
Elektra would lend us money, called an advance, so we could pay for the
recording costs of making an album. As I already knew, those costs would
be high – studio rental could run $2,000 per day and recording could take
months. Producers’ and engineers’ fees might add another $100,000, not to
mention mastering, flights, hotels, rental cars – we could easily spend
$250,000. If there were anything left over, we’d get to keep it, but it
wouldn’t amount to much.
In return, we would grant Elektra the exclusive rights to our recordings. As
money from the sales of records came in, we would be allotted a percentage
of the proceeds, known as points. In a typical deal, the band gets thirteen or
fourteen percentage points. We’d have to give a few of our own points
(four perhaps) to the producer of our record (producers typically get a fee
and points). Then we’d be down to ten points. Before calculating the value
of those ten points, however, Electra would subtract a large percentage of
the gross sales to account for free goods, records given away for
promotional and other purposes. Thus, the amount on which our 10 percent
was calculated would be reduced by 20 to 25 percent. So we’d be down
even further, perhaps 10 percent on 75 percent of the wholesale album
revenue. If our CD was sold in stores for fifteen dollars, the band’s share of
the revenue might be something between fifty cents and a dollar per CD.
Would we get to keep it? No! Elektra would add up all of the expenses of

8

recording and promoting our album – rock videos, radio promotion, touring
costs, and so on. The total of those costs, which could run into the millions,
would be our recoupable debt to the record company. Our share of each
CD sold would be swallowed up by that debt. …. When it came time to
record and release future albums, any unpaid debt from our past albums
would carry forward. In fact, even if we sold millions of records (in which
case the size of our share would increase), we might never recoup. As one
friend of mine joked, we’d be rock-and-roll sharecroppers. (pp. 34-36)
Caves (2000) analyzes the contractual arrangements in the music industry in
terms of the efficient division of risk, incentives and rewards. He emphasizes that
reputation and the prospect of repeated contracts are essential for contract enforcement.
Eliot (1993) provides many colorful examples of malfeasance in music contracts. For
example, the Beatles accused Capitol Records of failing to pay royalties on 19 million
albums and singles. An audit revealed more than 20 separate areas where Capitol/EMI
had “wrongfully accounted” for costs or revenue concerning promotion, manufacture and
sales, resulting in $19 million of unpaid royalties due the Beatles from 1969-1979. Caves
prosaically notes that, “From the artist’s viewpoint, a problem of moral hazard arises
because the label keeps the books that determine the earnings remitted to the artist.”
An analogous problem arises with live concerts. The following remark by Sharon
Osbourne (2002; p. 56) underscores the difficulty of contract enforcement in the concert
industry: “My husband’s whole career, people stole from him. They walk off with
thousands of dollars that’s yours. So the only way, unfortunately, for me is to get nasty
and to get violent.” She described the following disagreement with John Scher, a
legendary New York promoter, who claimed advertising expenses for ads placed long
after a concert had sold out: “[H]e would not give in, and he was threatening that ‘Ozzy
will never work in the New York area again.’ All this crap. So I got up and nutted him

9

with my head, and then I kicked him in the ….” Caves notes that contract enforcement in
this industry relies heavily on repeated transactions among parties who value their
reputations. The Osbourne method is apparently another contract enforcement
mechanism.

3. Some theoretical issues regarding concert pricing
Here we consider some of the main theoretical issues in concert ticket pricing, the
main source of performers’ incomes. As an economic good, concerts are distinguished
by five important characteristics: (1) although not as extreme as movies or records, from
a production standpoint concerts have high fixed costs and low marginal costs; (2)
concerts are an experience good, whose quality is only known after it is consumed; (3)
the value of a concert ticket is zero after the concert is performed; (4) concert seats vary
in quality; (5) bands sell complementary products, such as merchandise and records.
Rosen and Rosenfield (1997) provide a thorough treatment of ticket pricing,
devoting particular attention to price discrimination, the practice of charging different
prices to different customers.5 Price discrimination tends to occur when marginal costs
are below average costs. Because fixed costs for a concert are high relative to variable
costs, and because high- and low-elasticity demanders can be sorted by seat location,
price discrimination is possible. Furthermore, bands are likely to have monopoly power,
deriving from the fact that they produce differentiated products and have loyal fans.
Rosen and Rosenfield consider a case where there are two types of seats, high
quality and low quality. Buyers prefer high quality to low quality. The seller chooses
the total number of seats and the quantity of each class of seat, and a pricing policy for
5

Also see Courty (2000) for a thoughtful summary of theoretical issues in ticket pricing.

10

complementary goods, such as merchandise. Buyers have reserve prices for high- and
low-quality seats, conditional on the seat quality and prices of complementary goods.
The seller knows the distribution of reserve prices, but cannot identify customers with
high and low reservation prices; ticket quality is used to sort buyers. Rosen and
Rosenfield show that the seller would solve the pricing problem in two steps: “First,
given the quantities and quality of the two classes of seats and the price of complements,
the seller chooses ticket prices to maximize revenue.… Second, given the optimum
pricing policy, the seller decides on the quantity and quality of seats and on the price of
complements.”
The price of a concert ticket is set lower than it would be in the absence of
complementary goods, because a larger audience increases sales of complements and
raises revenue.
One puzzle in actual pricing is that price discrimination is surprisingly rare, as we
will see in the next section. Another puzzle is that pricing results in excess demand for
many concert performances, which leads to scalping; scalping is addressed in Section 5.

4. Concert Industry Trends
This section, which draws heavily from Krueger (2004), makes extensive use of
Pollstar’s Box Office Report database to describe developments in the concert industry
from 1981 to 2003. Pollstar is the trade magazine of the concert industry, and a widely
recognized authority on concerts. Since 1981, the magazine has collected and published
data on concert revenue, venue capacity, ticket sales and prices. The data are provided by
venue managers, who have an incentive to report their data because Pollstar disseminates

11

it to potential clients. Managers report data on a wide range of musical concerts, and
occasionally on other entertainment events, such as comedians, professional wrestling
matches and traveling Broadway shows. The data are most complete for concerts, and
we tried to exclude the non-concerts from the sample. Before restrictions, the database
contains 260,081 box office reports. After eliminating non-concerts, benefit concerts
(which we think of as charity events), and events that occurred outside the United States,
the sample contains 232,911 reports, representing 270,679 separate performances.
Reporting of concerts to Pollstar increased substantially in the 1980s, so one
potential problem is that the dataset may not be representative of the entire concert
industry in all years. Major acts are more likely to be included in the dataset throughout.
As a partial adjustment for changes in sample composition, in some of the analysis we
restrict the sample to artists listed in The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll,
hereafter called Encyclopedia bands.6 This Encyclopedia contains information on 1,786
artists, and 1,275 of these artists performed at least one concert represented in the
Pollstar database. The edition of the Encyclopedia we use was published in October
2001; two earlier editions were published in 1984 and 1995. Thus, the Encyclopedia
contains something of a moving average of the leading bands in the period under study,
which produces more of a consistent sample. Bands listed in the Encyclopedia are
responsible for 75 percent of the dollar value of ticket sales in the Pollstar data from
1981 to 2003.
Two other limitations of the data should be noted. First, the ticket price and
revenue pertain to the list price. Any service fees charged by the ticket distributor are
excluded. Because service fees have been growing rapidly in recent years, this omission
6

George-Warren et al. (2001)

12

probably serves to understate the acceleration in ticket prices in recent years. Second, we
do not have information on the secondary market, and it might be common for tickets to
be resold in a scalper market. Nevertheless, the list price, not the resale price, is relevant
from the standpoint of artists and promoters, as their ticket revenue is derived from
tickets sold at the list price. Moreover, fragmentary evidence summarized in Section 5
suggests that scalping is a less common phenomenon than widely believed.
4.1 Trends in Prices
Figure 4.1 displays the average price of a concert ticket (total revenue divided by
total tickets sold each year) for all concerts from 1981 to 2003, and the (ticket-weighted)
average high and low price of a concert ticket. The figure also shows what the average
price would have been had it grown in lockstep with the CPI-U. From 1981 to 1996,
concert prices grew slightly faster than inflation: concert prices grew a compound 4.6
percent per year while overall consumer prices grew 3.7 percent per year. From 1996 to
2003, concert prices grew much faster than inflation: 8.9 percent a year versus 2.3
percent a year. And if the sample of concerts is limited to those performed by bands
listed in the Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll in an attempt to hold constant changes in
composition and quality, the acceleration in concert prices after 1996 is slightly greater:
11.1 percent a year growth from 1996 to 2003 versus 4.9 percent a year in the 1981-96
period.
The cost of the highest priced ticket in the house has grown even faster than the
average ticket (see the top dashed line in Figure 4.1). Weighted by total ticket sales, the
average high price ticket grew by 10.7 percent per annum from 1996 to 2003, while the
average of the lowest price ticket grew by 6.7 percent a year. Thus, price dispersion

13

increased across seats for the same concert. (The rise in income dispersion among
consumers may partially account for the rise in price differentiation; unfortunately, data
on consumers is unavailable.) Nonetheless, in 43 percent of concerts in 2003, all seats in
the house were priced the same, suggesting less price discrimination than might be
expected from Rosen and Rosenfield (1997).7 Even in venues with more than 25,000
seats, 26 percent of shows charged just one price for all seats in 2003. The amount of
price differentiation has grown over time, however: in the 1980s, 73 percent of concerts
with more than 25,000 seats charged just one price for all seats.
Instead of overall consumer price inflation rate, probably a more appropriate
comparison for concerts is the price of other live entertainment events. Figure 4.2
reproduces Krueger’s (2004) comparison of concert prices to the CPI-U sub-index for
movies, sporting events and theater.8 To make the data as comparable to the CPI as
possible, a Laspeyres price index for concerts using the venue as the unit of observation
was computed. It is clear that price growth for entertainment events exceeded overall
price inflation throughout the period. Concert price growth tracked price growth for
movies, theatre and sporting events remarkably well from 1981 to 1996, but beginning in
1997 the two series diverged. From 1997 to 2003, the concert Lasypeyres index rose 64
percent, whereas the CPI for other entertainment events increased 32 percent.
4.1.1 More on Price Indices

7

Larger concerts are more likely to vary prices. A quarter of all tickets in 2003 were for shows that had
just one price, as compared to 43 percent of concerts.
8
To be precise, the BLS produces a CPI for movies, sporting events, theater and concerts. A separate subindex covering just movies, sporting events and theater is not available from BLS, so Krueger adjusted the
index as follows. In November and December 2001, concerts accounted for 8.4 percent of price quotes for
this sub-index (email correspondence from Patrick Jackman, Feb. 7, 2002). Consequently, Krueger netted
out the concert component using his Laspeyres estimate of the concert CPI.

14

Recall that the Laspeyres price index is defined as L = Σ p1Q0 / Σ p0Q0 and the
Paasche index is defined as P = Σ p1Q1 / Σ p0Q1, where p is the price and Q is the
quantity, and the subscript refers to either the base period (0) or the follow-up period (1).
Intuitively, the Laspeyres index gives the proportionate increase in money needed to buy
the exact same bundle of goods in the follow-up period as was purchased in the base
period, and the Paasche index gives the proportionate difference in money if the bundle
purchased in the follow-up period had been purchased in the base period at the base
period prices. If tastes are constant – a strong assumption for musical entertainment –
and other assumptions are met, the Laspeyres Index is expected to overstate the cost of
living, and the Paasche Index is expected to understate it. The Fisher Ideal index, which
approximates a true cost of living index, is the geometric mean of these two indices: F =
(LP)1/2.
Left unstated in these formulas is the unit of observation. When the CPI is
computed, the sum is taken over products within stores. For entertainment events, the
venue is the unit of observation in the CPI. In essence, the BLS interviewers go to a
venue and ask for the price this month, and compare it to last month’s price, regardless of
what the performance is. This could obviously create a good deal of noise in the price
data, as the product being compared is not exactly the same. For example, in April 2004,
Beyoncé, Alicia Keys, Missy Eliott and Tamia performed a concert at Madison Square
Garden for an average price of $81, and in May 2004, Yes performed there for an average
price of $61. The within-venue price index would record this as a decline in price, while
it might more appropriately be viewed as a decline in quality. (As further support for this
view, we note that Beyoncé, et al. sold out, while Yes only sold 79 percent of the seats.)

15

An alternative to using the venue as the unit of observation is to use the performer
as the unit of observation; that is, to follow the same movie or concert over time in
different venues. Krueger (2005) computed a Fisher Ideal price index using the headline
band as the unit of observation in an effort to hold composition constant. The artist was
selected to more directly control for composition effects, although there are clearly
problems with this approach as well: the venue could be larger or smaller, or in a more
remote location, so the experience is different from concert to concert.
Thus, concerts by different performers in the same venue over time, or concerts
by the same band in different venues over time are not the same products. It is therefore
worthwhile to consider the impact of measurement error in prices on the various price
indices. Suppose the baseline price is measured correctly, and the second period price is
a noisy measure of the price of the same performance in the baseline. The simplest case
is classical measurement error. Let p1’ = p1 + e, where p1’ is the observed price, p1 is the
correct price (i.e., price for the same quality of performance), and e is a white noise,
mean-zero measurement error. In this scenario, the Laspeyres and Paasche indices are
still unbiased estimators, but the Fisher Ideal index will overstate the true rate of price
inflation. The expected value of the square of the Fisher Ideal index with the noisy price
data (F’) is:
⎡ ∑ P1' Q0 ∑ P1' Q1 ⎤
σ 2 ∑ Q0 Q1
2
•
F
=
+
(4.1) E[ F '2 ] = E ⎢
⎥
∑ Po Q0 ∑ Po Q1
⎣ ∑ Po Q0 ∑ Po Q1 ⎦

where σ2 is the (assumed constant) variance of e. Because the last term is positive, in
expectation the Fisher index will overstate the value of the index if prices were measured
without error. Intuitively, the reason the index is biased upward is because the error in

16

follow-up period prices appears in the numerator of both the Laspeyres and Paasche
indices.
Table 4.1 explores the effect of the unit of observation on the various price
indices for the Pollstar concert data. The first three columns report the Laspeyres,
Paasche and Fisher ideal indices, respectively, using the headline artist as the unit of
observation. The next set of three columns report the same indices using the venue as the
unit of observation. The seventh column reports the CPI for movies, sporting events and
theater, based on BLS data, which also uses the venue as the unit of observation. The
weights used to compute the price indices for the concert data are updated each year,
which is more frequent than the CPI.
Looking at Table 4.1, it is immediately clear that the price growth is much greater
if the artist is used as the unit of observation instead of the venue, especially for the
Laspeyres index. This is probably a result of sample selection: only artists who perform
in adjacent years can be used in the analysis if the artist is the unit of observation. These
artists may not be representative of all artists, and their prices appear to be growing very
rapidly, especially when base period quantities are used as weights. It is also interesting
to note that when the venue is used as the unit of observation, the growth in the Paasche
index exceeds that of the Laspeyres index in two of the three subperiods.
A final issue about price indices worth mentioning involves rationing. The price
indices, which already have well known deficiencies as measures of the cost of living
(see Moulton, 1996), are even more problematic if there is rationing. If a concert is sold
out, there is likely some degree of rationing. In 2003, a third of tickets sold were to
concerts that were sold out, down from 55 percent in the 1980s. These figures may

17

overstate the amount of rationing, however, if artists perform multiple shows in the same
city, and tickets are available for some shows.
4.2 Shows, Sales and Revenues
Figures 4.3a, 4.3b and 4.3c, taken from Krueger (2004), summarize trends in the
number of shows performed, tickets sold, and revenue collected from 1981 to 2003. The
figures restrict the sample to artists in the Rolling Stone Encyclopedia because coverage
in the Pollstar database should be more consistent for these artists.9
Several trends are noteworthy. First, the number of shows performed rose in the
1980s, plateaued in the first half of the 1990s, and has declined by 16 percent from 1996
to 2003.
Second, the number of concert tickets sold by these bands fluctuated around 30
million per year from the late 1980s until 2000, and has dropped since 2000. In 2003, 22
million tickets were sold to concerts performed by these bands. The drop in ticket sales
is also consistent with a Gallup poll, which found that the percentage of teenagers who
said they attended a rock concert fell from 40 percent in 1976 to 31 percent in 2000. (By
contrast, the percent of teens who said they attended a pro sports event rose from 43
percent to 63 percent over this period.)
Third, despite flat or declining tickets sales, total revenues (in 2003 dollars)
trended upwards until 2000 because of price increases. Other things equal, these trends
suggest the elasticity of demand was less than 1 before 2000. Since 2000, however, there
has been a 10 percent drop in ticket revenue for these artists, suggesting that prices
increases have been offset by a larger than proportional demand response.

9

The trend in capacity utilization for the full universe is similar to that for the Encyclopedia bands, but the
number of shows and tickets sold has trended upwards if the larger sample is used.

18

Another trend worth noting is that the capacity utilization rate, or the fraction of
available seats that are sold, has fallen over the last two decades. The fraction of tickets
sold fell from around 90 percent in the late 1980s to just over 75 percent in 2003.
Interestingly, the drop in the capacity utilization rate was much steeper for concerts held
in larger venues.
One possible interpretation of these trends is that these artists are becoming less
popular. But this view is hard to reconcile with the sharp increase in ticket prices for
Encyclopedia bands. Instead, it seems that price growth is causing a movement up the
demand curve for tickets.
4.3 Distribution of Revenues
As was documented, concert revenues increased in the 1980s and 1990s. Figure
4.4 displays the share of ticket revenue going to the top 1% and top 5% of all performers,
ranked by their total annual concert revenue. Bear in mind that these are ticket revenues,
and not income, but they still indicate how the fan dollars are allocated across the
distribution of acts.
The figure indicates that concert revenues became markedly more skewed in the
1980s and 1990s. In 1982, the top 1% of artists took in 26% of concert revenue; in 2003
that figure was 56%. By contrast, the top 1% of income tax filers in the U.S. garnered
“just”14.6% of adjusted gross income in 1998 (see Piketty and Saez, 2003). The top 5%
of revenue generators took in 62% of concert revenue in 1982 and 84% in 2003. Surely,
this is a market where superstars receive the lion’s share of the income. We return to the
issue of superstar effects in section 7.

19

To further investigate the distribution of concert revenues, we followed De
Vany’s (2005) and De Vany and Walls (2004), and fit a Pareto distribution to the revenue
data. As is well known, a Pareto distribution is characterized by thick tails (on one or
both sides), and thus provides a good fit for income distributions. The Pareto distribution
is part of a more general class of stable distributions, S(α,β,γ,δ), of which the Gaussian is
also a special case. The parameter of interest here is α, the tail weight, with 0 < α ≤ 2. A
tail weight of 2 implies a normal distribution. As α approaches 0, greater weight is
placed in the tail of the distribution. To estimate α, we used a simple regression
method.10 We first assigned ranks to each artist’s 2003 revenues, with rank 1 indicating
the highest revenue, rank 2 the second highest, and so on. Then we regressed log revenue
on the log of the ranks as follows:
(4.2) Log(Revenue) = a – b Log(Rank),
where the inverse of b is an estimate of α. Note that in the class of stable distributions,
the variance is infinite when α is less than 2, and when α is less than 1 the mean does not
necessarily exist either.
We used this method to estimate α for the distribution of artists’ concert revenues,
as well as for promoters’ revenues, in 2003. We find a coefficient α of 0.45 for artists’
revenues, and 0.55 for promoters’ revenues. In comparison, De Vany (2005) and De
Vany and Walls (2004) estimate α to be in the range 1.3 to 1.7 for motion picture box
office revenues. This suggests that the concert performers’ revenues are not only very far
from being Gaussian, but they are also more skewed than movie revenues. Probably a
more appropriate point of comparison for artists’ revenues is actors’ lifetime cumulative
movie grosses, however, for which De Vany estimates an α of 0.4 – very close to what
10

See De Vany (2004).

20

we find for artists’ revenues in 2003. Thus, the movie stars’ lifetime revenues are
positively skewed to about the same degree as concert performers’ annual revenues.
Despite the infinite expected variance of revenues in the parametric distribution,
in the finite sample of data we have the distribution of artists’ revenues is fairly stable
from year to year, with a correlation of 0.75 between revenues in 2002 and 2003.
Promoters’ revenues are even more stable, with a correlation of 0.98 between 2002 and
2003.
4.4. Explanations: Baumol and Bowen’s disease; Cartelization; Bowie Theory
Krueger (2005) examines several explanations for the coincidence of declining
ticket sales and rising prices, which he notes is consistent with the market becoming more
monopolized over time, and inconsistent with a downward shift in demand. We consider
these in turn.
In some respects, popular music concerts are a slow productivity growth sector: it
takes just as long and about as many people to perform a concert today as it did 20 years
ago. As Baumol and Bowen (1966) point out, prices should rise faster than overall
inflation in low-productivity growth sectors because of cost increases. Baumol and
Bowen’s disease may well account for the mildly faster price growth in live
entertainment events than overall price inflation in the pre-1996 period. Yet it is unlikely
that there was a discrete jump in costs in the concert industry compared to other
industries – let alone other entertainment industries – after 1996. Indeed, reductions in
the costs of audiovisual electronics equipment probably reduced the cost of concerts.
Nevertheless, some concert promoters do point to an increase in production costs (e.g.,
pyrotechnics) and insurance costs as a rationale for the acceleration in prices.

21

Another popular explanation for the acceleration in concert prices is that the
concert industry has become monopolized by Clear Channel Communications, the giant
multimedia conglomerate. On the surface, there is an air of plausibility to this story.
After the Telecommunications Act of 1996 relaxed constraints on radio station
ownership, Clear Channel acquired nearly 1,200 stations. It also owns amphitheaters,
billboards and TV stations. Clear Channel entered the concert promotion business in a
major way by acquiring SFX Entertainment in 2000. As shown in Figure 4.5, the share
of concert revenue that Clear Channel promotes rose dramatically from 1999 to 2001 and
then fell sharply in 2002 and 2003. Despite the recent dip, concentration in the industry
is still high at the national level.
Many critics have accused Clear Channel of using its vertical and horizontal
concentration to monopolize the concert industry. Although anecdotal evidence abounds,
and some court cases have charged Clear Channel with anticompetitive practices,
Krueger finds little evidence linking Clear Channel to the sharp growth in concert prices.
First, he finds that Clear Channel’s share of listeners in the radio market in a city
was unrelated to the share of ticket revenue for concerts promoted by Clear Channel in
those markets in 2000 and 2001. Additionally, at either the city or state level, Clear
Channel’s share of concert promotion dollars was insignificantly or negatively related to
the growth in prices. It is possible that Clear Channel uses its muscle to sign up concerts
for national or international tours, obscuring the city- and state-level correlations, but it is
surprising that the company does not exercise its monopoly position at a regional level as
well.

22

Another fact that casts doubt on Clear Channel’s role is that ticket prices have
also risen sharply in Canada and Europe since the mid-1990's. Although, to some extent,
prices are arbitraged between countries because bands play across national borders, it is
unlikely that deregulation of radio in the United States and the rise of Clear Channel can
account for concert price growth worldwide.
Perhaps the most important strand of evidence against the concentration argument
is that concert promotion has always been a highly concentrated business on a regional
level. In the 24 largest cities, the four-firm concentration ratio within cities has hovered
around 90%, on average, for the last two decades. The average within-city HerfindahlHirschman Index (HHI) for promoters actually fell from a lofty 4,200 in 1986 to a still
high but less lofty value of 2,800 in 2001. (An industry with an HHI above 1,800 is
considered highly concentrated according to the Justice Department Merger Guidelines.)
Thus, the concert industry has gone from having regional monopolies to having a large
national firm, but within cities competition could quite possibly have increased.
Krueger’s final hypothesis is that concert prices have accelerated because
recording artists have seen a large decline in their income from record sales, a
complementary product to concerts. Record sales slumped from 1999 to 2002, and were
flat for 5 years before then, putting downward pressure on artists' royalties (see
Weinraub, 2002). As discussed in Section 9, it is quite possible that record sales are
down because many potential customers frequently download music free from the Web
or copy CD’s, either legally or illegally.
Formally, the problem is one of a firm with two complementary outputs, concert
seats and record albums, denoted good 1 and good 2, and monopoly power in both

23

markets (see Tirole, 1988 or Rosen and Rosenfield, 1997). The demand curves for the
band’s products are denoted D1(p1,p2) and D2(p1,p2), each of which depends on both
prices. Costs are independent of each other and depend only on the quantity of the
specific good produced, C1(D1) and C2(D2). A profit maximizing band will set the
proportionate markup of concert tickets over marginal cost so that:
(4.3)

p1 − C1'
1 ( p 2 − C 2' ) D2 ε 12
=
+
p1
ε 11
p1 D1ε 11

where the ε ij’s represent the value of the own- or cross-price elasticities of demand.
Bands will keep the price of concerts below the single-market monopoly price if greater
attendance raises record royalties, but if this is no longer the case because of file sharing
or CD copying, the price of concerts will rise.
To some extent, this model was anticipated by the rock and roll singer David
Bowie, who predicted that, “Music itself is going to become like running water or
electricity” and he advised performers, “You'd better be prepared for doing a lot of
touring because that's really the only unique situation that's going to be left.” (Quoted
from Pareles, 2002.) Hence the name Bowie Theory.
As support, Krueger (2005) notes that relative to album sales, jazz fans are much
less likely to download music from the Web than are fans of rock and pop, and that from
1996 to 2003 concert prices increased by only 20 percent for jazz musicians, but by 99
percent for rock and pop performers.11 The declining complementarities argument can
also account for the price growth in Canada and Europe. Section 9 provides a detailed
review of the direct evidence on the effect of file sharing on record sales, and concludes
11

Oberholzer and Strumpf (2004) note that jazz is the genre least downloaded on the internet, but do not
provide a reason. Perhaps it is that MP3 files are of lower quality than CDs, and that jazz enthusiasts value
quality more than others.

24

that the evidence is mixed. Thus, the reason for the sharp acceleration in concert prices
remains something of an open question.

5. Ticket Distribution and Scalping
As was mentioned, promoters and venues utilize a variety of options for ticket
distribution, including the box office, Ticketmaster, and direct sales to fan clubs. Tickets
are almost always initially distributed at a fixed price, as opposed to a floating price
determined by an auction or other mechanism. Ticketmaster and other distributors have
recently begun experimenting with using auctions to sell tickets, however. We suspect
that ticket auctions will be more prevalent in the future, and a worthy topic for research.
About a third of popular music concerts currently sell out. Tickets for the hottest
concerts are often sold on a secondary market, through unregistered scalpers, over the
web (e.g., eBay), or through ticket brokers (who can also be online). These distribution
channels are often lumped together and viewed as a scalper or secondary market.
Persistent pricing of tickets at a level that permits scalping is a puzzle for neoclassical
economic models of concerts. Why don’t performers or promoters raise the price of
tickets and capture some of the revenue from the secondary market for themselves?12
Below we consider theoretical issues and available evidence on scalping.
5.1 Scalping: Theoretical Issues
Various theories have been proposed for why a firm – restaurant, ski lift, or rock
band – may price their services below the market level. None of them is entirely

12

As an aside, we note that Warren Buffett recently came to this realization. Tickets for the annual
meeting of Berkshire Hathaway were given to shareholders, and then often resold. Apparently, Mr. Buffett
was distressed by this practice, and began selling tickets for $5 a pair on eBay in 2004 to capture the
secondary market.

25

satisfactory. Becker (1991) presents a model in which eating at a popular restaurant (or
going to a concert) is a social event, so customers’ demands are positively related. The
bigger the audience, the more enjoyable the experience. Concert promoters and fans
often do treat concerts like social events, lending some credence to this view. As Courty
(2000) points out, however, although Becker’s model “explains why a firm may not raise
prices in the short run when capacity is fixed, it does not shed much light on the long run
outcome that firms typically do not raise capacity to meet excess demand.” Kahneman,
et al. (1986) argue that customers value being treated fairly, and the market clearing price
may be considered unfair. Fairness is likely to be a more important consideration if
attendance at a concert is viewed as a social event rather than an economic transaction.
Courty (2003) makes the insightful point that customers for live entertainment
events have time-dependent demands. He presents a model in which there are two types
of consumers: die-hard fans who want to see a concert and secure a ticket in advance, and
others who are not sure if they will be free during the concert. As time elapses, the
uncertainty is resolved for the latter group. The late-demanders have higher valuations of
the event than the die-hard fans in his model. He further assumes that promoters cannot
compete with ticket brokers or scalpers, and that die-hard fans outnumber the late
deciders. With these assumptions, in equilibrium ticket brokers will buy tickets early at
face value and resell them for a profit. Although the model requires many ancillary
assumptions to prevent promoters from taking over the secondary market, the observation
that some customers learn about their demand over time is undoubtedly an important
feature of the ticket market.
5.2 Evidence on Scalping

26

Because scalping is primarily an underground activity, little systematic empirical
analysis has been done on secondary ticket markets. In an effort to make a small step
toward closing that void, one of us (Krueger) conducted a survey of 858 fans at Bruce
Springsteen and the E Street Band’s concert at the First Union Center in Philadelphia on
October 6, 2002, with the help of 12 Princeton students.13 As was common in the past,
every ticket in the house was originally sold for a single price, $75 (plus service charge if
distributed by Ticketmaster). The concert was part of the group’s “The Rising” tour, and
it quickly sold out when tickets were put on sale. Thus, the concert would be expected to
have a high scalping rate.
Several results of the survey are worth noting. First, only 20 to 25 percent of the
tickets were bought through a scalper or ticket broker or over the Web. Many industry
analysts had expected a higher reselling rate prior to the survey. Scalping at the stadium
was quite rare; it was much more common for the secondary market to clear through
purchases from licensed ticket brokers or the web. Second, the average ticket that was
resold went for around $280, yet most fans paid the list price. Third, tickets for the best
seats were less likely to be resold than were seats in the upper deck, even though the
consumer surplus was greater for the better seats. One interpretation of this finding is
that serious fans queued for tickets (or applied to Ticketmaster early), and if they
obtained a good seat they attended the concert and if they obtained a bad one they sold it.
This finding, which was not anticipated, is consistent with how one would expect tickets
to be allocated in a market: those who valued the best seats the most were the ones who

13

The survey of fans was conducted shortly before the concert began. A stratified random sample of rows
and sections was drawn. Weights were computed to make the sample representative of the entire venue.
The response rate for the survey was very high. Ticketmaster and the First Union Center arranged for us to
have access to the venue before the start of the show.

27

sat in them. But one could argue that the distribution mechanism is inefficient (e.g.,
because of time wasted queuing and uncertainty), even if it mimics the market in terms of
allocative efficiency.
Fourth, fans were asked when they purchased their tickets, in an effort to test
Courty’s model of scalping. The results yielded mixed support. On the one hand, tickets
on the secondary market were purchased later than tickets sold by Ticketmaster or the
box office, as expected. (Ninety percent of those who purchased their tickets from the
box office or Ticketmaster bought their tickets more than a month before the concert,
compared with 47 percent of those who bought from ticket brokers.) On the other hand,
the price did not rise as the date of the concert approached, as Courty’s model would
seem to predict. Instead, prices on the secondary market fell as the day of the concert
approached, consistent with the literature on the declining price anomaly in auctions (see
Ashenfelter, 1989).
Fifth, the concert would have earned substantially more revenue if tickets were
priced high enough to eliminate the secondary market. If the market price equaled $280,
the average price of a ticket in the secondary market, then $4 million [= ($280-$75) x
19,738 tickets ] of additional revenue could have been collected by Springsteen and his
band. Given that the actual revenues collected were $1.5 million, this figure is staggering
even if one allows for some error. The revenue foregone by the band in the secondary
market alone was sizable, between $1.1 and $1.4 million, according to our estimates.
These calculations suggest that, at least in the short run, performers sacrifice considerable
income if they price their shows below the market rate.

28

An important cautionary note, however, is that these results pertain to just one
concert, and it is unclear whether they generalize to concerts for other performers. The
nature of the First Union Center, which is isolated alongside Intestate 95, may also have
led to less on-the-street scalping than in other, more centrally located venues. But we
would argue that replicating this type of survey in other concerts will yield valuable
insights into secondary markets.
5.3 Scalping and Price Trends
An important question concerns the effect of the secondary market on the trends
documented in Section 4. We have seen that the secondary market can be substantial, at
least for some concerts. It is possible that the list price does not represent the price to
consumers, because of widespread scalping. Perhaps the rise in ticket list prices has only
cut out scalpers, and not affected the price to consumers.
Although we have no doubt that the secondary market is important in the popular
music industry, the following three reasons lead us to doubt that a disconnect between the
list price and price to consumers is responsible for the major trends documented in
Section 4. First, the total number of tickets sold has declined. If concerts are no more
expensive to consumers than before, then one would not expect to see attendance fall.
Second, the decline in the capacity utilization rate also suggests that customers are
finding concerts more costly. Moreover, even in the early 1990s, most concerts did not
sell out, so it would have been possible to avoid the higher priced secondary market.
Third, Krueger (2005) found that prices surged in the late 1990s even when he limited the
sample to concerts that sold fewer than 90 percent of their tickets, events where scalping
would have been unnecessary.

29

6. Rankings
It is common in the arts for various parties to devise schemes for ranking artists.
Music is no exception. For example, Billboard provides numerous “music charts” based
on record album sales and radio airplay. Being ranked high on the charts is important to
artists because future sales and recording contracts are related to their placement on the
charts. Evidently, many consumers turn to rankings to decide which music to purchase or
listen to, and radio stations rely on the charts to determine which music to play on the air.
When information is costly to obtain, rankings can be very valuable to consumers,
especially for goods that have social externalities (e.g., when you play music at a party,
you would like your guests to enjoy the music).
Pollstar produces three sets of rankings of bands: one based on gross concert
revenue; one based on the number of tickets sold; and one based on the number of hits
seeking information about each band’s schedule on its web page. Although useful, these
methods have their limitations. An important limitation can be seen from Figure 6.1.
Hypothetical demand schedules for three bands, denoted A, B, and C, are reported. As
drawn, the demand curves all have the same slope but different intercepts. Band C is the
most popular: at any given price, it has the greatest ticket demand.
We can write the demand curves in Figure 6.1 as:
(6.1) Log Qi = ai - , log Pi
where Q is quantity of tickets sold, P is price, ai is an indicator of band popularity, and , is
the elasticity of demand. The subscript i indicates the band. This constant elasticity
demand curve is, of course, a simplification, but it illustrates a serious problem with

30

current rankings, and provides an easily implemented solution. A more realistic model
would also allow for the elasticity (,i) to vary across bands, but greatly increase the
parameters needed for implementation.14
Now if the market clears, the band’s concert supply curve also affects revenues
and ticket sales. (We will discuss disequilibrium shortly.) Bands have different concert
supply functions. Suppose band C hardly tours (e.g., Barbra Streisand) and band A tours
a great deal (e.g., Dave Matthews). Band A could sell more tickets than band C and
collect more revenue if it wanted. This framework highlights problems with Pollstar’s
methods for ranking bands. First, it is clear from equation 6.1 that as long as the band is
on the demand curve, the quantity of tickets sold is not a good indicator of popularity
because price varies. Second, total revenue would only be an appropriate measure of
popularity in the unlikely event that the elasticity of demand equaled 1. Third, bands that
tour frequently (or set prices lower) are likely to receive more hits from potential
consumers on the web, but that reflects concert supply as well as popularity.
A simple solution is to rank the bands according to ai = Log Qi + , log Pi. To
implement this solution, one needs an estimate of ,. The first two columns of Table 6.1
provide rankings of the top 50 bands using ,=1 and ,=2.15 The former corresponds to the
Pollstar Top 100 Tour ranking, which is based on gross revenue.
If the market is in disequilibrium, the price and quantity may not be determined
on the demand curve. In particular, if the band sets the ticket price below the market
clearing level, the quantity of tickets demanded at the list price will exceed the quantity
14

Another addition to the model would be to allow for rival bands’ prices to affect the demand for band i’s
concerts, and then take into account the effect of all other band’s price on the choice of band i’s price. We
will leave this extension for IO economists.
15
For simplicity, we have ignored price discrimination, and just used the average concert price as a
measure of pi.

31

of tickets sold, and our method would not provide an accurate measure of ai. We can still
conceptualize notional demand curves in this situation, however. The challenge is to
determine how much excess demand exists. As we saw in the previous section, at the
Bruce Springsteen concert about 25 percent of tickets were purchased above the list price,
suggesting that excess demand was at least 25 percent as large as the number of tickets
sold. (An alternative method for estimating excess demand would be to use information
on the number of willing -- or at least interested -- buyers who sought tickets from on-line
sales venues after tickets were sold out.) A simple solution is to apply the 25 percent
figure to all concerts that sell out. Accordingly, in columns 3 and 4 of Table 6.1, we
inflated the quantity of tickets sold by 25 percent in all sold out concerts, and recomputed
the rankings for ,=1 and ,=2.
For comparison, in column 5 we present the ranking based on revenue per show,
which can be thought of as a crude indicator of the performers’ wage rate. If demand for
artists’ performances were infinitely elastic, as in a competitive market, this would
provide a ranking of artists’ potential income. And lastly in column 6 we report the
ranking based on total tickets sold, which is one of Pollstar’s criteria.
The results are sensitive to the type of ranking. Bruce Springsteen and the E
Street Band, for instance, move from the top ranked artists by revenue in 2003 to second
place when an elasticity of demand of 2 is used (or 3rd place if rationing is taken into
account), to fifth place when revenue per show is used, and back to first place when the
number of tickets is the basis of the ordering. Celine Dion is ranked second based on
revenue and 14th based on tickets sold. The Rolling Stones move from 13th to 5th place
when the elasticity is increased from 1 to 2. Overall, however, the rankings are fairly

32

similar if popularity (ai) is the criteria (the correlation between the ranks in column 3 and
4 is 0.91), and quite different if revenue per show or total tickets sold is the criterion (the
correlation between columns 4 and 5 is 0.56).
We should emphasize that our framework misses many important features of the
concert industry. Most importantly, we have made an ad hoc assumption about the
elasticity of demand, and imposed the same elasticity for all bands. In addition, we have
ignored advertising and promotion efforts, which are endogenous and undoubtedly
influence ticket sales. A more complete approach would adjust for promotion efforts.
Nevertheless, considering rankings in the framework of a simple supply and demand
model highlights an often overlooked feature of existing rankings: popularity depends on
both price and quantity. This simple insight applies to record sales as well as to concerts.

7. Superstar Effects
As we saw in section 4.3, the distribution of concert revenues is highly skewed,
suggesting that the music industry is a superstar industry, where a small fraction of the
performers earn a substantial share of the revenues. Sherwin Rosen (1981) was the first
to provide a formal theoretical model to explain why “relatively small numbers of people
earn enormous amounts of money and seem to dominate the fields in which they
engage.” Building on the intuition of Marshall (1947), Rosen models a market where
demand is characterized by imperfect substitution among the sellers (here, the
performers), and where “the costs of production (writing, performing, etc.) do not rise in
proportion to the size of a seller’s market.” At the heart of the imperfect substitution of
performers is the notion of quality, or talent, of a performer. As Rosen (1981) puts it,

33

“Lesser talent often is a poor substitute for greater talent. The worse it is the larger the
sustainable rent accruing to higher quality sellers because demand for the better sellers
increases more than proportionately: hearing a succession of mediocre singers does not
add up to a single outstanding performance.” When combining the demand and supply as
depicted above, Rosen ends up with a market equilibrium in which small differences in
talent at the top of the distribution can account for large differences in revenue.
Borghans and Groot (1998) also address the issue of superstardom, arguing that a
certain degree of monopolistic power of the artist generates higher revenues for
superstars, on top of a difference in talent. They note that a stylized fact concerning
superstars is that those whose talent is "suitable for media replication" earn much more
than others. They argue that the availability of a mass media market gives the most
talented artists an endogenous property right, derived from the fact that the public prefers
to watch the best performances – consistent with the imperfect substitution assumption of
Rosen's model. Borghans and Groot conclude that, "Due to media production, only one
person is needed to serve the whole market, where without this technology many
producers are needed. Efficient allocation requires the most talented producer to be
assigned to this task, but in practice the situation provides this person with an opportunity
to exploit the number-one position."
Adler (2005) takes exception with Rosen’s view of talent, and maintains that
superstars do not exist because of differences in talent, but because of “the need of
consumers to have a common culture.” Because Adler’s chapter thoroughly addresses
this and related issues, we tread lightly on theoretical aspects of superstar models.

34

Empirical evidence and tests of the superstar model are not straightforward,
because of the lack of reliable income data and, more importantly, because of the
inherent difficulty of objectively measuring talent or quality in a meaningful metric apart
from economic success. What is a small difference in talent? On what objective,
cardinal metric is Celine Dion only slightly more talented than Rod Stewart? As Krueger
(2005) notes, “An objective measure of star quality for popular musicians is hard to
define and even harder to quantify.” Measuring talent on a meaningful scale
independently of economic success is an obstacle to testing the superstar model.
Hamlen (1991, 1994) looks at singers of popular music, and uses a measure of
voice quality to assess the artist’s quality. The measure, which is external and objective,
is the harmonic content of a singer’s voice sample. Hamlen then regresses the value of
total record sales on harmonic content and a few observables for 107 singers, and finds an
elasticity of 0.14. Since the Marshall-Rosen model would predict an elasticity above
unity, Hamlen concludes that his empirical findings do not support the superstar model.
Krueger (2005) points out, however, that “it is unclear whether the scaling of units of
quality is appropriate (a different scaling could produce an elasticity above 1) and
consideration of other dimensions of star quality could possibly rescue the theory.”
Krueger (2005) considers escalating superstar effects – perhaps due to the
revolution in consumer electronics equipment which reduce the cost of copying and
listening to music – as a possible explanation for the rising cost of concert tickets and
increased concentration in concert revenue, which were documented in section 4.
Specifically, he tests whether the increase in prices (or revenue per artist) could be linked
to a stronger superstar effect over in the 1990s. He uses a novel measure of star quality:

35

namely, the number of millimeters of print that are devoted to each artist in The Rolling
Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll.16 This information is then merged with the Pollstar
data on concert revenue and prices, and the following regression is estimated:
(7.1) ln Yit = α+ βt Si + x'itγ + δt + εit,
where ln Yit is the log average price (or log annual revenue or log revenue per show), Si is
the measure of Star Quality, x'it is a vector of covariates (number of supporting acts, years
of experience of the band, and dummies for genre, gender and foreign status), δt is a set
of 22 unrestricted year fixed effects, and εit is an error term.
Notice that the coefficient on star quality, β, has a t subscript, indicating time
period (1981-86, 1987-91, or 1997-2003). This allows the effect of star quality to vary
across time periods. In the regressions, this is accomplished by interacting the amount of
print with dummies indicating the four periods. The test of the rising-return-tosuperstardom hypothesis amounts to a test of whether there is a discrete jump in βt after
1996.
Krueger finds that the return to superstardom has indeed increased over time, but
that the timing does not coincide with the increase in ticket prices. He concludes that we
must look at other factors to explain the rising prices.
Empirical testing of superstar models lags behind the development of new
theoretical versions of the model. At least when it comes to music, and probably for
many other branches of the arts, a major limitation of tests of superstar models is the
absence of natural units with which to measure talent. Rosen postulates that “small
differences in talent become magnified in larger earnings differences.” But what is a
“small” difference in quality of popular music performers? Surely there is an
16

See Krueger (2005) for a more detailed explanation of the data and procedures.

36

intrinsically subjective component to quality; some music appeals to a subset of listeners
but not to others. Also, one might argue that talent should be measured within genres:
otherwise, how is it possible to compare a jazz band to a heavy metal band? More
empirical work could certainly be done on the superstar model, and perhaps the popular
music industry could help shed light on some distributional and marginal return to labor
issues in broader fields, but we are skeptical that current methods of measuring talent will
shed much light on the superstar model.

8. The World of Radio Broadcasting
Ever since radio broadcasts started in the United States, England, and other
countries in the early 1920s, the business of radio has been intertwined with that of
music. As we will see, even if at first record companies and music publishers’ profits
were threatened by the supply of “free” music on the radio, they quickly learned to
promote their records and collect royalties from performing rights sold to radio
broadcasters. Now, bands and composers also benefit from radio exposure. From a
publicity standpoint, radio is an important part of record promotion. And from a royalties
standpoint, composers can garner substantial returns if they have a hit song on the radio.
Table 1.1 documents that artists receive substantial revenue from performing rights
royalties.
8.1. Royalties from performing rights
Under Section 106 of the U.S. Copyright Act, a copyright on a musical work
grants an exclusive right to reproduce, distribute copies, publicly perform, and create a
derivative of the work in question. Thus, anyone who wants to legally play a copyrighted

37

song on the radio, or press it on a compilation CD, must acquire a license to do so from
the copyright owner. Artists generally transact with music publishing firms, which are
often but not always affiliated with their record company, to collect their publishing
income. Music publishers acquire administrative rights from the copyright owner, which
entitle them to find users, issue licenses, collect money and pay the songwriter. The
traditional split of publishing income is 50/50 between the publisher and the songwriter
(see Passman, 2000; and Krasilovsky et al., 2003).
Various uses of a musical work are covered by different rights that must be
purchased separately. Table 8.1 summarizes these rights.
The reproduction right is the exclusive right of a music copyright owner to
authorize the mechanical reproduction of the work in a record, cassette or CD. The
license granting such a right is called a mechanical license, and the fees charged for it are
the mechanical royalties, calculated at a certain rate per song and per unit manufactured
and sold.17 In the case of audiovisual productions, the license of reproduction rights is
often referred to as a synchronization license, because the music is to be synchronized
with the images.
The public performance right gives the copyright owner the exclusive right to
authorize the use of the musical work in public. Radio and television broadcasts, as well
as jukeboxes and music played in bars, restaurants and any type of public establishment,
all fall under the public performance right. As such, broadcasters and establishment
owners must acquire public performance licenses anytime they want to use copyrighted
music. Because searching and bargaining with every single copyright owner and
17

Once a work has been made available to the public (after its first-use), a copyright owner is obligated to
grant a mechanical license to anyone paying the statutory rate. For this reason, it is called a compulsory
mechanical license.

38

publisher would prove costly and infeasible, and because an individual owner of
copyrighted music could not possibly survey all the radio stations to enforce his public
performance right, all licenses are handled by performance rights organizations (PROs).
PROs issue public performing licenses to broadcasters and establishment owners,
monitor and survey radio and television broadcasts to determine the amount of airplay for
each composition, and then remunerate the copyright owners.
Performing rights also cover cellular phone ringtones, which cell phone owners
increasingly download from the internet. In 2003, ringtones were a $2.5 billion industry
worldwide (Flynn, 2004)! PROs have struck deals with the ringtone providers, and now
compensate composers for each ringtone downloaded. On their website, BMI, one of the
American performing rights organizations, boasts of having deals with 175 ringtone
providers reaching more than 90% of U.S. cell phone subscribers. BMI’s payments are
of 5¢ per ringtone, 2.5¢ each for the publisher and the composer.18
In the United States there are three performing rights organizations, typically
known by the acronyms: ASCAP, BMI and SESAC. All offer blanket licenses, which
grant the right to use all the songs in their respective catalogs.19 Artists and composers
can sign on with only one PRO. Radio stations can contract with multiple PROs. A
radio station that wanted to play both Springsteen and Madonna, for example, would
need to contract with both ASCAP and BMI.
Founded in 1914, the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers
(ASCAP) is the oldest of the performing rights organizations. It was the first organized
effort to collect fees for public performances of music, which had been protected since
18

See BMI’s website at www.bmi.com/news/200406/20040616b.asp .
See Passman (2000), Krasilovsky et al. (2003), and Besen et al. (1992), as well as www.ascap.com,
www.bmi.com, and www.sesac.com for more on the different American PROs.
19

39

the inception of the Copyright Act of 1897. In its first few years, ASCAP struggled to
establish itself and persuade publishers to become members. Only in 1921 did it write its
first royalty checks to publishers and composers. That is also the time when radio
broadcasting began, suddenly creating a whole new market for ASCAP compositions.
Broadcasters, however, were reticent to pay for the performing rights, arguing that once
they had a copy of the record they were allowed to do whatever they pleased with it,
including playing it on the radio. By 1932, the radio lobby had convinced seven states to
outlaw ASCAP, on the basis of illegal racketeering practices and attempted extortion.
Eliot (1993) relates: “In 1940, as many of the contracts ASCAP held were about to
expire, the organization threatened to withdraw all member recordings if radio stations
didn’t agree to a broad-based, cohesive form of royalty payment. …. In retaliation, even
as the FCC was threatening to outlaw the paying of records on the air, which ASCAP felt
was largely the result of the broadcast lobby, station owners decided to start their own
organization, to break what they claimed was ASCAP’s monopolistic tactics.”
Kleit (2000) notes that ASCAP’s blanket license rate rose from 2% to 7.5% in the
1930s, parallel with the popularization of radio. Needless to say, the radio broadcasters
were unhappy with the rising cost of the copyrighted music. To increase competition and
to provide an alternative to writers and publishers not represented by ASCAP, the
National Association of Broadcasters, together with NBC and CBS, created Broadcast
Music Incorporated (BMI) in 1939.
ASCAP is now a not-for-profit entity owned by its members. The membership
totals more than 180,000, including composers, songwriters, lyricists, and music
publishers of every kind of music. Approximately 100,000 new songs are added to the

40

catalog every year. The fees charged by ASCAP for its blanket license are not based on
the amount of airplay its music gets, but on the station’s or venue’s gross revenues less
certain adjustments. The current basic rate is just under 2% of the adjusted gross
advertising revenue for radio stations. BMI is a non-profit company owned by
broadcasters. It now represents approximately 300,000 songwriters, composers, and
music publishers in all musical genres, and its website mentions a repertoire of about 4.5
million compositions. BMI’s blanket license rate for radio stations is about 1.6% of
adjusted gross advertising receipts.
The Society of European Stage Authors and Composers, or SESAC, is the
smallest of the three American performing rights organizations, with a market share
estimated at 3%. Market shares are not easily computable, but Krasilovsky et al. (2003)
report that a 1990 court proceeding concerning pay cable determined the current market
shares at 54% for ASCAP, 43% for BMI and the remaining 3% for SESAC. SESAC is a
for-profit private licensing company founded in 1930. It currently represents over 8,000
publishers and writers and has a repertoire of more than 200,000 compositions. SESAC
specializes in country and Latin music, and operates differently from ASCAP and BMI.
It has a somewhat more selective procedure to accept new writers in their catalog, but
also it charges fees for blanket licenses based on fixed determinants, such as market
population served by the radio station and the station’s standard advertisement rates.
While law papers on the topic abound, few articles have been written about
performing rights in the economic literature. Notable exceptions include Besen, Kirby
and Salop’s (1992) article on copyright collectives and Kleit’s (2000) study of
competition among PROs. Besen, Kirby and Salop present an economic model that

41

attempts to explain why copyright collectives are formed, how they operate and how they
may compete. They start with a model of an unregulated monopoly copyright collective,
where the cost for each individual copyright owner to collect fees from the broadcasters
is prohibitively high, justifying the formation of the copyright collective as a means of
saving costs. A collective also gives the copyright owners the possibility of cooperative
price setting, and thus of more market power vis-à-vis big broadcasters. Besen et al. look
at both models where the collective has the ability to limit the membership, and where it
lacks such ability. They analyze the competition between the collectives as well as the
effect of different types of government regulation. No formal statistical tests of their
models are presented, although their predictions accord with certain stylized facts. As
Johnson (1992) notes in a commentary, Besen et al. address the puzzle of the coexistence
of ASCAP and BMI, but cannot test their suggested answer.
Interestingly, in most countries there is only one copyright collective. Besen et al.
suggest three explanations for this fact: “First, government regulation may authorize only
a single collective to administer a particular right. This is especially likely in countries
like Austria, Germany, and Switzerland, where collectives must be licensed by the
government. Second, government policies that mandate open entry and equal treatment
of members may lead to a single collective. …. Third, efficient negotiation between the
monopoly collective and user groups may eliminate any incentive for competitive entry.”
Why exactly did three organizations come to coexist in the U.S. is still something of a
mystery. Besen et al. suggest that perhaps ASCAP miscalculated its hold on the market,
and by requesting too high fees, it led excluded songwriters and broadcasters to form a
collective of their own.

42

Kleit (2000) takes the blanket licenses offered by the PROs as a form of bundling,
or block booking. He proposes a model of competition between PROs using blanket
licenses, and shows that such licenses lead to higher profits for the PROs and higher costs
for the users of the copyrighted music when there are a small number of competing
licensing organizations.
8.2.

Music Publishing in the U.S.
The United States is by far the largest market for music publishing. Table 8.2

gives a breakdown of revenues by source of income. In 2001, the performance-based
revenues alone almost reached $1 billion, for a total publishing income of nearly $2
billion. That represents 29.3% of the world publishing income. By comparison,
Germany, the second biggest market, shows a total income of just over $800 million, for
12.2% of world income (see Table 8.4 below).
8.3. Foreign markets
In the U.S., both ASCAP and BMI earn just above 20% of their revenue from
foreign sources. Performing rights organizations have agreements with their affiliates in
other countries to share revenues. They both collect revenues from abroad for their
national members, as well as collect from users in the United States on behalf of foreign
PROs. Table 8.3 lists the PROs in the U.S. and the other top ten markets in the world.
While figures on the flows of revenues from copyright licenses from country to
country are hard to obtain, we can observe total revenues for each country. Table 8.4
shows the top ten countries and the breakdown of the publishing revenues.

43

Table 8.5 shows ASCAP’s flows of revenues from foreign publishing companies.
Overall, we can see that the balance is positive, meaning that the United States (or at least
ASCAP) is a new exporter of musical talent to the rest of the world.
8.4. Payola
Payola is the practice of record companies giving cash or gifts to radio stations in
exchange for airplay. Payola is interesting both for its history and from an economics
standpoint because payola is an illegal economic transaction. Payola has been a federal
criminal offense since 1960.20 One may ask, What is wrong with payola? It could be
argued that payola only creates a market for radio hits, a market in which the amount paid
by the record company to the radio station becomes the price of a hit. It is akin to
advertisement and promotion of a song by a record company. Indeed, if record
companies are willing to pay to promote their songs on the radio, it must be that radio
promotion translates into higher record sales.21
So why has payola become illegal? Perhaps an analogy is instructive. Payola is
analogous to a professor paying bribes to the editor of the American Economic Review to
publish his paper. The professor would be willing to pay since a publication is good for
career advancement, and eventually translates into higher future earnings. But AER
readers expect the published articles to be the best and most relevant to the field, not the
ones written by those with the deepest pockets or the most eager to get tenure. An
essential function of a scientific journal is to screen papers. One could argue that an

20

It is legal for a record company to directly pay a radio station to broadcast a song as long as an
announcement is made to the public. Undercover and undisclosed payments are illegal.
21
Liebowitz (2004a) points out that even though radio spins seem to increase sales of the particular record
being spun, it does not mean that the recording industry as a whole benefits from radio broadcasting.
Indeed, record sales fell in the first half of the 1920s after the popularization of the radio.

44

essential feature of a radio station is to screen records, especially since the right to
broadcast on the radio waves is licensed by the government.
Payola has a colorful history. Payola is a contraction of the words “pay” and
“Victrola”, an early type of LP record player.22 The first laws and court cases involving
payola were in 1960, but payola had been around for much longer, and still persists
today, albeit under a different name. Coase (1979) traces the history of payola, going as
far back as 1867 in England. Of course, back then the payments were not made to radio
stations, but to public performers, with a request to play a song from the publisher’s
catalog. The agents that involved in this business were referred to as song-pluggers, and
it became commonplace for vaudeville singers to be compensated for adding certain
songs to their repertoire. When radio came about, song-pluggers turned to big bands
performing live on radio stations to plug their songs. And then, when records made their
appearance on the air, radio stations and their employees were approached by record
companies to play their songs.
Coase (1979) explains, “Payola took the form of cash payments (which might be
on a regular weekly or monthly basis), royalties on the sales of records, a share in a
record company, advertisements in the disc jockeys’ hit sheets, the reimbursement of
recording stars’ fees for appearances on the disc jockeys’ programs or at record hops
which they organized, expensive gifts, and mortgage loans on disc jockeys’ homes.”
Early on, payola was viewed as an impediment to competition. Many attempts were
made to outlaw the practice, but these attempts only succeeded in pushing payola
underground. The situation changed in 1959, when the president of the American Guild
of Authors and Composers wrote a letter to the FCC (Federal Communications
22

See http://www.history-of-rock.com/payola.htm .

45

Commission) and the FTC (Federal Trade Commission) about payola and other deceptive
practices, urging a congressional enquiry.23 After a year of widely publicized hearings,
the FCC amended the Communications Act of 1934 to make unannounced payments to
deejays a criminal offense. Over twenty-five deejays and program directors were
exposed in the scandal, but the top two deejays in the country, Dick Clark and Alan
Freed, were the hardest hit.
Most of the pressure to outlaw payola came from ASCAP, which lost ground to
BMI-licensed rock and roll records from small independent record labels during the
1950s. Coase (1979) points out that “during the period 1948 through 1955, 68% of the
tunes which were number 1 on Billboard’s top hits were controlled by ASCAP, and
ASCAP’s share was never less than 50% (in 1951). In 1956, its share was 23 %, in 1957
and 1958, 25% and in 1959, 31%. In the circumstances, it is hardly surprising to find that
the suppliers of ‘good music’ [ASCAP-licensed music] came to the conclusion that
something was wrong with the economic organization of the popular music industry.”
After 1960, program directors took over the playlist and left the disc jockeys out
of the loop, shielding them away from payola charges. However, the pay-for-play
business did not stop there. Soon, what became known in the industry as “independent
record promoters” started acting as middlemen between the record companies and the
radio stations, blurring the transactions and making this sort of payment not quite payola,
but with a similar result and intent. Coase (1979) sees this as inevitable: “When a pricing
system is not used and something of value is provided for nothing, people are willing to
incur costs up to its worth in order to secure the benefits of that service.” He goes on to

23

This came at the end of a Congressional hearing on a television quiz show scandal, in which shows were
exposed to be rigged and fixed in advance.

46

argue that a payment system “is both natural and desirable,” and that a ban on payola
leads to a lower real income of the community. True enough, independent record
promoters, or indies, could also be compared to food and beverage distributors who pay
for placement in grocery stores, facilitating the connection between wholesaler and
retailer. But Boehlert (2001) warns that “radio isn’t really retail – that’s what the record
stores are. Radio is an entity unique to the music industry. It’s an independent force that,
much to the industry’s chagrin, represents the one tried-and-true way record companies
know to sell their product.”
How big is the independent promoter business? Boehlert (2001) explains: “There
are 10,000 commercial radio stations in the United States; record companies rely on
approximately 1,000 of the largest to create hits and sell records. Each of those 1,000
stations adds roughly three new songs to its playlist each week. The indies get paid for
every one: $1,000 on average for an “add” at a Top 40 or rock station but as high as
$6,000 or $8,000 under certain circumstances. That’s a minimum $3 million worth of
indie invoices sent out each week.” While it is easy to think that big record companies
have a financial advantage in playing this game, Surowiecki (2004) argues that the big
players already have the biggest names in show business, the biggest sales staff and the
connections that go with it. Independent record promoters could thus enable small labels
to get their artists on the radio, much the same way payola helped propel rock and roll in
the 1950s. “Paying to play, then, creates a rough marketplace democracy: if you can
come up with the cash, you get a shot. But that’s all. Labels can buy themselves

47

exposure; they can’t buy themselves a hit. If people don’t want to hear a record, radio
stations won’t keep playing it of their own accord.”24
So payola, even if disguised a bit, is still present.25 Whether or not the current
laws are optimal for the society is a good question for economists. Surowiecki (2004)
says that pay for play is simply a signaling mechanism enabling record companies to
signal which songs they think will be hits, thus reducing the radio station’s scouting
efforts. Interesting developments are sure to come, with the growing consolidation of the
radio business and power houses like Clear Channel Communications, which owns well
over 1,000 radio stations in the U.S., and with the advent of internet radio stations and
file sharing. Some stations, such as KROQ in Los Angeles and Clear Channel, also
refuse to accept payment from independent record promoters. Perhaps the record
companies will find new ways to promote their records, or perhaps big radio
conglomerates will need to exert caution and stay away from the independent promoters
business, to avoid payola charges or to enhance their reputation for independent
judgment. It is also possible that large media conglomerates will use their position in
multiple markets to extract even larger payments from record companies.
8.5. Digital Recordings in the Internet Era
With the advent of new technologies, such as streaming and downloading on the
internet, the Copyright Act no longer provided adequate protection for copyrighted
works. In 1995, the Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act was passed in
an effort to strengthen copyright protection. The Act recognizes that digital
transmissions of sound recordings are required to have an appropriate license.
24

Surowiecki (2004)
Interestingly, these promotion payments are among the many costs that are deducted from record sales
before bands receive royalties.

25

48

Interestingly, the license is administered by SoundExchange, a nonprofit entity created by
the RIAA (Recording Industry Association of America), and not by the performing rights
organizations. Krasilovsky et al. (2003) note that between 1996 and March 2000, 80
million performances were licensed by SoundExchange. The revenues are split: 50%
goes to the record company (NOT the publisher), 45% to the featured musicians and
vocalists, and 5% to an escrow fund for distribution to the nonfeatured musicians and
vocalists. In addition, the Act establishes a statutory digital mechanical license rate,
separate from the one for physical records.
Another Act was passed in 1998, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. This
Act was designed to implement two 1996 World Intellectual Property Organization
Treaties dealing with copyrights in a digital environment. It provides restrictions on the
use of technologies to copy and transmit copyrighted works, by making it illegal to
circumvent measures put in place to guarantee the copyrights. The next section explicitly
addresses new technologies and copyright issues.

9. File sharing and other new technologies
Throughout the 20th century, the rise and fall of various technologies have
affected and shaped the way the world listens to music. Broadcasting, first via radio,
jukeboxes, and movies, and then through television, cable television, and satellite
television – including music channels like MTV and VH1 – and, very recently, via
internet webcasts, has allowed music to reach more and more listeners. Sound recordings
also have evolved, with new formats –and along with them new playback machines –
being introduced, and most often completely replacing the earlier generations.

49

Recordings began with Edison’s cylinders and Berliner’s gramophone, then vinyl 33 1/3
rpm records, then 45 rpm singles, eventually followed by 8-track tapes, and then cassette
tapes and Sony’s Walkman. Records, as we know them today, in the form of laser
compact discs (CDs), were introduced in the mid 1980s. By 1992, CD sales eclipsed
cassette sales in the US.26 Since 2000, CDs account for more than 90% of the market,
whether one looks at total value of records sold or number of units shipped. In 2003, the
CD market share was 95%.27
The supremacy of the compact disc is now threatened by a new format: the MP3,
which stands for MPEG-1 Layer 3, a standardized digital file format that compresses
audio to enable many songs to fit in a small amount of disc space.28 Along with the
spread of broadband internet connections, file sharing and peer-to-peer (P2P) software,
MP3 players have dramatically grown in popularity in the early 2000s. The actual
number of song downloads seems to be impossible to pin down, but estimates suggest
that more than one billion songs are downloaded each week! (See Oberholzer and
Strumpf, 2004; and Zentner, 2004.) While many music lovers rejoice and engage in
massive downloading and illegal file sharing, record companies and many music
copyright holders deplore the practice, alleging that file sharing is responsible for
declining album sales and lower profits. Industry executives were quick to put the blame
on MP3 sharing. The Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) successfully
sued to shut down Napster in 2001, and as P2P networks provided an alternative platform
for users, the RIAA is now suing thousands of individual users.29

26

In units per capita. See Table 5, Liebowitz (2003a).
Source: RIAA, www.riaa.com. Note that the figures do not include digital download sales.
28
MPEG is the acronym for Moving Picture Experts Group.
29
Napster was up and running in its original incarnation between June 1, 1999, and July 11, 2001.
27

50

9.1 Intellectual property issues
Economists have begun to look into the question of file sharing and CD sales.
The situation can be considered from a normative perspective, questioning the legitimacy
of the existence of copyright protection, especially since it can be seen as hindering the
development of new technologies. Indeed, as Liebowitz (2004a) notes: “It is common in
the literature, particularly in the more popular press, to encounter the claim that copyright
owners always cry wolf when a new technology appears to threaten the old, only later to
discover that the new technology was nothing short of a bonanza. This claim implies that
foolish copyright owners misunderstood the new technology and were fortunate enough
to have been thwarted in their attempts to restrict the new technology.”30
How far does intellectual protection go? Are rights strong enough to encourage
the optimal amount of innovation? The problem stems from the fact that musical
compositions are nonrival goods, whose property rights, as laid out by Nordhaus (1969),
generate a trade-off between under-provision of the nonrival good (with weak rights) on
the one hand and monopoly distortions (when the property rights are strong) on the
other.31 The RIAA is clearly pushing for stronger rights, and is lobbying for greater
governmental control over technology. Romer (2002) points out that “The relevant
economic question is whether the net harm (if any) created by a shift along the Nordhaus
trade-off justifies this kind of intervention.” He also warns that “giving an industry veto

30

Liebowitz (2004a) goes on to argue that, for example, when the VCRs were introduced, television
broadcasters had a legitimate concern because of the possibility that users would be able to time-shift
television viewing and thus kill the possibility for broadcasters to sell advertisement, their principal source
of revenue.
31
Musical compositions are nonrival goods, since once their reproduction cost is paid, they can be
simultaneously enjoyed by many. Efficiency would dictate a price (above reproduction costs) of zero, but
then composers would be underpaid, and the production of music recordings would be too low. See
Liebowitz (2003b).

51

power over new technologies that threaten its current business model would set a very
dangerous public-policy precedent.”
Boldrin and Levine (2002) argue against intellectual property protection. They
present a model of competition where downstream licensing, in this case copyright
protection, leads to the Pareto worst outcome, whereas a case without copyrights results
in first-best. “‘Intellectual property’ has come to mean not only the right to own and sell
ideas, but also the right to regulate their use. This creates a socially inefficient monopoly,
and what is commonly called intellectual property might be better called ‘intellectual
monopoly’.” Klein, Lerner and Murphy (2002) reject Boldrin and Levine’s model and
reach the opposite conclusion: file sharing technologies reduce the value of the copyright
to its holder.32 These models remain theoretical, without any support from empirical
evidence.33 The first question to ask here is whether or not there exists a causal
relationship between file sharing and the slump in CD sales.
9.2. Does file sharing lower CD sales? Preliminary considerations
There is no unambiguous theoretical prediction regarding the effect of MP3 file
sharing, or other illegal forms of music piracy, on CD sales. Various effects have been
suggested that point in opposing directions. Furthermore, available evidence is, at best,
mixed. Liebowitz (2004b) and Peitz and Waelbroeck (2004b) present the most thorough
reviews of the existing theoretical and empirical literatures. Before we review the results,
it is informative to take a look at trends in record sales. Figure 9.1 shows the evolution of
recording sales (of all formats) worldwide and in the United States from 1969 to 2003, in

32

Klein, Lerner and Murphy (2002) reject Boldrin and Levine’s model on the basis that it is based on “the
innocuous assumption that the copyright holder’s demand is elastic.”
33
Hui and Png (2002) provide empirical evidence on the movie industry by estimating the impact of
economic incentives on the supply of motion pictures.

52

constant dollars. It is apparent that the value of sales has declined in recent years, after
peaking in 1999 in the U.S. and in 1995 worldwide.34 Sales have dropped an average of
7% per year since 2000 in the U.S.. The picture is similar for the global music industry.
At least for the U.S., the downturn coincides with the launch of Napster and new portable
MP3 players, such as Diamond’s Rio in 1999. One should also note that CD copying
became widely feasible on home computers in the late 1990s. Could these technologies
be responsible for the drop in record sales?
The timing for the U.S. is certainly suggestive, but it should be noted that there
have been periods of sharp declines in sales before. In the late 1970s and early 1980s,
sales plummeted, though not as sharply as in the last few years. Furthermore, the fact
that the decline in sales began outside the U.S. before it did in the U.S. is suspicious,
because Internet technology was more widespread in the U.S. than elsewhere in the
1990s.
Before jumping to conclusions from the coincidence of these trends, one needs to
also consider other factors that affect record sales. Liebowitz (2003a, 2004b) lists the
price of records, income, population, changes in taste, and prices of substitutes and
complements as relevant factors. Liebowitz (2004b) looks at these standard demand
determinants and concludes, “They do not appear capable of explaining the decline in
sound recordings that had occurred.”
On a theoretical level, file sharing, or more broadly piracy, can have many
potential effects on CD sales.35 The main argument set forth by Napster and other “pro-

34

One limitation of these data is that the dollar value is based on the suggested retail list price, not on the
actual sales generated by the albums.
35
This section focuses on file sharing. For more on piracy and the effect on CD sales, see Hui and Png
(2003). Using international data from 1994 to 1998, they find that piracy reduces CD sales by 6.6%.

53

file-sharers” is commonly called the sampling argument. (See Gopal, Bhattacharjee and
Sanders (2004) for a formal model of sampling.) Sampling is thought to have a positive
effect on CD sales by allowing potential customers to hear songs before they purchase
them. Because of file sharing, customers would be better informed, making CDs a less
risky purchase. Like advertising, sample could have the effect of increasing sales.
However, Liebowitz (2004b) questions the force of the sampling argument, pointing out
that once someone has in his or her possession a song obtained for free, he or she might
not go the extra step of actually paying to legally purchase the CD. He concludes that
“the effect of sampling (more music-listening services at a constant CD price) is to lower
the price of music-listening services. The net effect should be to lower the revenues
generated by music-listening services. With a price per CD that is independent of the
sampling effect, this implies that the quantity of CDs will fall due to sampling.” Thus,
sampling could be viewed as a supply shift as well as an information source, with
opposing effects on sales.
Another effect, known as the substitution or replacement effect, clearly is
expected to have a negative impact on sales: here, music downloaded simply replaces
purchased CDs. Even if MP3s and CDs are not perfect substitutes since CDs come in a
package with the CD jacket and perhaps lyrics and liner notes, and since the sound
quality of MP3s can be inferior to CDs, we would nevertheless expect that if people can
download a song for free, it will to a certain extent replace their purchases of music.
A third effect that Liebowitz (2004b) cites is the network effect, but again, there is
no clear prediction as to whether this would have a positive or a negative impact on CD

54

sales. A network effect occurs when the value of a commodity varies with the number of
people that are using it.
Another point to consider is that perhaps what has occurred is not just substitution
of CDs for MP3 files, but a shift in leisure activities brought about by the new
technologies. Internet and computers could have created a change in how people spend
their time, possibly reducing the demand for pre-recorded music. Peitz and Waelbroeck
(2004b) look at different surveys of time use and daily internet activities, and conclude
that “there is evidence that the increasing availability of broadband is changing the spare
time activities of consumers in favor of online activities.”
9.3. Empirical studies
Perhaps the first empirical study of the effect of illegal file sharing on CD sales
was produced by the RIAA during the Napster trial. SoundScan’s CEO, Michael Fine,
(2000) had been engaged by the plaintiffs to produce evidence on the question. His
report is not very compelling. His main claim is that because sales declined more at
stores near colleges and universities, and because college students are heavier
downloaders than the rest of the population, then it must be that file sharing reduces CD
sales. However, this analysis does not take into account the fact that the students might
use the internet to legally buy CDs online, thus also reducing the sales at local music
stores.
Liebowitz (2004b) surveys the existing empirical literature, classifying papers in
terms of their unit of analysis. He distinguishes between countries, records, cities,
households, and genres as possible units of analysis. Liebowitz (2004b) notes that a
methodology relying on genres would be interesting, but dismisses such studies because

55

of lack of consistent and reliable data. He reviews the household methodology quickly,
citing Michel (2004) as an example. Michel builds a model in which the consumer has
the choice between buying a CD and copying music illegally. He then derives the market
demand for CDs, and finds that the introduction of new file sharing technologies actually
brings to the market people who were not previously buying any music. This would
imply that CD sales should not decrease because of P2P networks. Michel uses
household level data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, taking computer ownership
as a proxy for file sharing. This has obvious problems, since it measures neither internet
access nor file sharing behavior. Michel uses a difference-in-differences estimator to
assess the impact of MP3 downloads on CD sales between 1998 (pre-treatment) and 2001
(post-treatment). He finds an insignificant effect, and is therefore unable to reject the
hypothesis that “some file sharing (prior to 2002) was undertaken by consumers formerly
not in the market for music.” One caveat that we need to mention here is that this result
would hold if nothing else had changed between the two years studied. We can however
suspect that computer ownership and internet use has greatly expanded in that time
period, so we would not necessarily be capturing the behavior of the same type of
households.
Liebowitz (2004b) also criticizes Boorstin’s (2004) study, which used cities as the
unit of analysis, with Census data from 1998, 2000, and 2001. Boorstin regressed CD
sales by city on the number of people with internet access. Liebowitz argues that the
regression is flawed because it includes dummy variables for the years 2000 and 2001,
which are likely to pick up the effect of file sharing. He redoes Boorstin’s analysis
without the year dummies, and regressing on per capita CD sales (not total sales), and

56

ends up finding that file sharing could explain a decline in CD sales of 12% in the U.S.,
when the actual total decline was of 15%. Liebowitz concludes that “These two values
are so close that we can say that this evidence is consistent with a view that all of the
decline is due to file sharing. This is a charming story, but it isn’t clear how reliable
these results are.”
A study by Zentner (2004) uses data from a European consumer mail survey from
October 2001. In an OLS regression of a dummy for buying CDs on a dummy indicating
regular downloading, he finds an insignificant effect. However, as he points out,
“simultaneity between tastes for music and peer-to-peer usage makes it difficult to isolate
the causal effect of music downloads on music purchases.” Consequently, Zentner
instruments for regular downloading, using variables such as the speed of the individual’s
internet connection and measures of internet sophistication.36 He then finds a negative
and significant effect, indicating that music downloads reduce the probability of CD
purchases by around 30%, which would explain a drop of 7.8% in the sales of music in
the countries covered by the survey.
Peitz and Waelbroeck (2004a) use countries as a basis of analysis, with data from
16 countries representing 90% of world sales and from an IPSOS-REID survey, for 2000
and 2001. Taking first-differences, they run a regression of CD sales (expressed in units
of CDs sold) on GDP, downloads (defined as the percentage of adults who downloaded
MP3s at least once during the period) the percentage of households with broadband
connection, and two variables indicating the sales of musical cassettes and the number of
CD players per household. They find a significant and negative effect of downloads on
36

Zentner’s (2004) measures of internet sophistication include whether or not the individual publishes his
own webpage, participates in online auctions, asks for technical support online, reads computer magazines,
and how long he or she has used email and the internet.

57

music sales, reducing the sales by about 11% between 2000 and 2001. They then use
survey data from the U.S. for the period 2000-2002 to try to assess the partial effect of
internet piracy on CD sales. After making necessary assumptions, they conclude that
“internet piracy alone can only explain 22.5% of the CD decline in 2002 and is most
likely not to be a significant factor in 2003 as the percentage of internet users who
download music is reported to have declined further after the series of legal actions
undertaken by the RIAA in the summer of 2003.” They note that this implies that a
coefficient more than 4 times bigger would be needed to fully explain the drop of 8.9% in
CD sales in the U.S. in 2002. Peitz and Waelbroeck note, however, that their “results
should be taken with caution since we consider a small number of countries in the
econometric analysis. Also, the use of aggregated data and the particular choice of
explanatory variable can be questioned.”
One study that stands out from the others in terms of sophistication and data is
Oberholzer and Strumpf (2004), which reaches the controversial conclusion that file
sharing does not have a significant impact on CD sales. They have access to unique data
on actual downloads and sales, whereas the rest of the literature mostly relies on smallscale survey data or national and international aggregates.37 Their data set contains 1.75
million file downloads, which represent about 0.01% of the world downloads for the
seventeen-week period spanning from September 8, 2002, to December 31, 2002. They
link this data set to album sales from Nielsen SoundScan from the second half of 2002,
and also merge on information on the artists and track time taken from the website
www.allmusic.com. They use the data set to regress observed record sales on album
37

Their download data are logs from two OpenNap servers (centralized P2P network), which tells them
which files users searched for and which files they downloaded, for seventeen weeks from September 8 to
December 31, 2002.

58

characteristics and the number of downloads for that album, using a fixed effects model
to control for album-specific, time-invariant characteristics. To avoid endogeneity
problems they instrument for the number of downloads, using shifters related to
download costs, which they argue influence downloads but should have no effect on
sales. The shifters they use as instruments are: album average and minimum track length,
time length of albums in the same music category, and also the percentage of German
students on vacation due to German school holidays. They maintain that the last variable
is a valid shifter of the supply of files available for downloads because in their sample,
one out of six U.S. download is from Germany. When German children are on vacation,
they would spend more time at their computer at home sharing files, thus shifting up the
supply of MP3s. This choice of instruments has been criticized on various grounds. One
criticism is that if, as the authors argue, file sharing leads to more CD sales through an
advertising or (sampling effect), then cost shifters should enter the demand equation for
CDs directly, rendering the identification strategy invalid. In any case, throughout their
various specifications, they find that downloads have an insignificant effect on album
sales. When comparing their estimates with the sharp drop in record sales, Oberholzer
and Strumpf conclude that “At most, file sharing can explain a tiny fraction of this
decline.”
Liebowitz (2004b) criticizes this conclusion and the underlying methodology. He
warns about a potential fallacy of composition that would arise because records are the
unit of analysis. Just as the elasticity of demand at the industry level is expected to be
lower than at the firm level, downloading could increase the sales of one particular album
and reduce overall CD sales. This effect, as Liebowitz points out, can seriously change

59

the interpretation of Oberholzer and Strumpf’s results: “A regression using downloads to
explain sales would return a positive coefficient, assuming that all other simultaneity
problems were overcome. After all, increases in downloads, by assumption, lead to an
increase in the sales of the downloaded recordings in this example. But that does not
mean that downloads increase overall record sales. A positive coefficient could be
entirely consistent with record sales being severely harmed by downloads and thus
couldn’t answer the question about the overall impact of downloading.”
Needless to say, the effect of file sharing on record sales remains a hotly
contested issue. This is one area where we expect a good deal of research in the near
future.
9.4. Searching for a new business model
The jury might still be out on the effect of file sharing on CD sales, but one thing
is certain: the record industry is suffering. And it is likely that the business model for
distributing music will change dramatically in the near future. Zhang (2004) claims that
the current music distribution system is inefficient and that peer-to-peer file sharing
networks might be a solution: “P2P networks help to provide a better information
environment for music listeners to experience the music works.” He further predicts,
“While smaller labels and unknown artists welcome the new technology, the big labels
and stars suffer from the transition. The overall effect on social welfare is positive, but it
is harmful to the music industry if only a small proportion of P2P users buy albums.”
Gayer and Shy (2004) present a model of an artist and her publisher, and show that the
artist’s revenues are greater under file sharing since the more revenue comes from live
concerts, which get better publicity from the distribution of songs on P2P networks.

60

However, in that model, music publishers lose from file sharing. In an interesting twist
on Rosen’s superstar model, Gopal, Bhattacharjee and Sanders (2004) predict that
sharing technologies erode the superstar phenomenon widely prevalent in the music
business. This implies that top artists actually loose from file sharing, but that less
popular artists may gain from the extra exposure and lower distribution costs that the
internet has to offer. Michel (2003, chapter 3) similarly predicts, “It appears that the
artists and the consumers will reap most of the benefits of the new technologies.” It is not
surprising then to see how strongly the record companies react to the technological
changes.
Legal issues are also prominent. Millions of people are infringing copyright laws,
and the RIAA, as well as the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), its
equivalent in the movie industry, are actively suing users and P2P software companies
alike. In the midst of all this, some are proposing new copyright systems. A compulsory
license system, much like the performing rights system right now, where radio stations
acquire a blanket license to have the right to broadcast songs, and artists and publishers
get compensated via a performing rights organizations (ASCAP, BMI, SESAC in the
U.S.), has been proposed, for example, in a recent book by Fisher (2004).38
Peitz and Waelbroeck (2004b) describe technology developments known as Digital
Rights Management, or DRM. DRM refers to technologies aimed at monitoring and
blocking the use of copyrighted files. Some companies have already included such
features in their software. It is unclear whether blocking technology will succeed in the
race against file sharing.
38

See also Liebowitz (2003b), footnote 2 on page 2, for a list of references. Liebowitz (2003b) discusses
the pros and cons of the compulsory license, insisting on the cons and concluding that “only as a very last
resort should we replace the current system with a compulsory license.”

61

9.5. New business models
Napster is now back – as a legitimate service selling songs over the internet.
Other competitors include Apple’s iTune and RealNetworks’ Rhapsody. The terms they
offer vary. Some offer a sort of rental service where, for a monthly subscription fee, the
user can download an unlimited quantity of songs onto his PC or portable device, but
cannot burn CDs; once the subscription expires, the files can no longer be read. Others
sell songs for a fee – 49¢ or 99¢ per song, or $9.99 per album – and the tracks belong to
the buyers forever. These services originally received a lukewarm reception: why pay for
songs that are available for free on P2P networks? But interest at universities and
colleges, fertile grounds for illegal file sharing (and lawsuits) with their broadband
connections and student population, is growing. Some schools are starting new
partnerships with music providers, in order to save bandwidth and curtail piracy. Napster
has signed deals with eight colleges, including Penn State University, the University of
Rochester, Cornell and George Washington University, through which the students
receive free subscription to the regular Napster service (which is usually $9.99 per
month).39 Berkeley and the University of Minnesota have signed agreements with
RealNetworks.40 Others, including Yale, Duke, Wake Forest and the University of
Colorado at Boulder, have a similar deal with Cdigix (formerly Cflix), to receive not only
music but also movies.41

39

See Young (2004a).
See Young (2004b).
41
The movie industry is also confronted with illegal file sharing, albeit perhaps on a smaller scale. Like the
RIAA, the MPAA has taken legal action. On August 19, 2004, the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Los
Angeles ruled that P2P software developers were not infringing the copyright law by making products that
people use to illegal download copyrighted material. The case was against the Grokster and Morpheus
softwares. This is probably only an early opening round in the battles to come.
40

62

10. Conclusion
Rather than summarize our lengthy survey, we conclude by suggesting some worthwhile
questions for further study, which might stimulate research on the popular music
industry. Below is our list of 11 areas that seem particularly worthy of further research:

z Why do contracts in the popular music industry take the form that they take? Are they
efficient?
z Why have prices for popular music concerts grown so much faster than prices of other
entertainment events since the late 1990s? Can more appropriate price indices for
concerts – that take into account price discrimination, rationing, shifts in demand, and
other factors – be constructed?
z What determines the amount of price differentiation within concerts, and why has price
discrimination grown since the 1980s? Is there less regional variation in prices for the
same concerts than one would expect in an efficient market? If so, why?
z How has increased concentration in promoters and media affected the popular music
industry? Will continued technological change cause the industry to become more or less
concentrated?
z There is a paucity of evidence on demand elasticities for concerts. As always,
identifying demand and supply parameters requires some assumptions or exclusion
restrictions. One potential approach is to use supply shocks, caused by factors like bad
health (especially for older performers), to identify the elasticity of demand for concerts.
Once a set of parameters is available, more elaborate rankings could be computed.
z The internet lowers the cost of band promotion. How will the continued development
of the internet change the music industry? If bands rarely receive much income from
record sales, will they seek other means for distributing their music? Will start-up bands

63

have greater bargaining power with record companies because they can directly promote
their music themselves on the internet?
z How will future technological developments, which are hard to predict at present,
affect the concert industry and the distribution of recorded music? Will the variety in
popular music increase because of new distribution technologies?
z We lack systematic data on concert production costs over time. What are the trends in
concert production costs? Can these costs account for the trend in prices?
z Tickets are beginning to be distributed in auctions. How do ticket auctions affect the
average price and the size of the secondary market? What strategies do fans use when
they have the option of purchasing tickets in an auction.
z Why is there a secondary market for tickets? Why do tickets appear to be under priced
for many concerts?
z Does the practice of legal payola (i.e., payments to radio stations via independent
record promoters) affect the popularity of bands? Will payola become a common
practice in new domains, such as webcasts, as technological change continues to shape
the popular music industry?

64

References
Adler, Moshe (2005), “The Economics of Superstars: A Review with Extensions”, in:
Victor Ginsburgh and David Throsby, eds., Handbook on the Economics of Arts
and Culture, forthcoming, Elsevier.
Ashenfelter, Orley (1989), “How Auctions Work for Wine and Art”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 3(3): 23-36.
Baumol, William J. and William G. Bowen (1966), Performing Arts: The Economic
Dilemma (The Twentieth Century Fund: New York NY).
Becker, Gary, (1991), “A Note on Restaurant Pricing and Other Examples of Social
Influences on Price”, Journal of Political Economy 99(5): 1109-1116.
Besen, Stanley M., Kirby, Sheila N. and Steven C. Salop (1992), “An Economic Analysis
of Copyright Collectives”, Virginia Law Review (Symposium on the Law and
Economics of Intellectual Property) 78(1): 383-411.
Boehlert, Eric (2001), “Pay for Play”, salon.com (March 14, 2001). Available at
http://dir.salon.com/ent/feature/2001/03/14/payola/index.html .
Boldrin, Michele and David Levine (2002), “The Case against Intellectual Property”,
American Economic Review, AEA Papers and Proceedings 92 (2): 209-212.
Boorstin, Eric. S (2004), “Music Sales in the Age of File Sharing”, Senior Thesis
(Department of Economics, Princeton University),
http://www.princeton.edu/~eboorsti/thesis/Music%20Sales%20in%20the%20Age
%20of%20File%20Sharing.pdf.
Borghans, Lex and Loek Groot (1998), “Superstardom and Monopolistic Power: Why
Media Stars Earn More Than Their Marginal Contribution to Welfare”, Journal of
Institutitonal and Theoretical Economics 154(3): 546-571.
Caves, Richard E. (2000), Creative Industries: Contracts between Art and Commerce
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA).
Coase, R.H. (1979), “Payola in Radio and Television Broadcasting”, Journal of Law and
Economics 22(2): 269-328.
Courty, Pascal (2000), “An economic guide to ticket pricing in the entertainment
industry”, Louvain Economic Review 66(1): 167-191.
Courty, Pascal (2003), “Some Economics of Ticket Resale”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 17(2): 85-97.

65

De Vany, Arthur S. (2005), “The Movies”, in: Victor Ginsburgh and David Throsby,
eds., Handbook on the Economics of Arts and Culture, forthcoming, Elsevier.
De Vany, Arthur S. and W. David Walls (2004), “Motion Picture Profit, the Stable
Paretian Hypothesis, and the Curse of the Superstar”, Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 28: 1035-1057.
Eliot, Marc (1993), Rockonomics: The Money behind the Music, 2nd edition (Carol
Publishing Group, New York NY).
Fine, Michael (2000), “SoundScan Study on Napster Use and Loss of Sales”, Report of
the CEO of SoundScan, engaged by the plaintiffs in the action, A&M Records,
Inc. et al. v. Napster, Inc., http://www.riaa.com/news/filings/pdf/napstert/fine.pdf.
Fisher, William W. III (2004), Promises to Keep: Technology, Law, and the Future of
Entertainment, (Stanford University Press, Stanford CA).
Flynn, Laurie J. (2004), “The Cellphone's Next Makeover: Affordable Jukebox on the
Move”, The New York Times (August 2, 2004).
Gayer, Amit and Oz Shy (2004), “Publishers, Artists, and Copyright Enforcement”,
Unpublished paper (Department of Economics, University of Haifa).
George-Warren, Holly, Patricia Romanowski and Jon Pareles (2001), The Rolling Stone
Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll (Revised and Updated for the 21st Century)
(Fireside, New York NY).
Goldstein, Paul (1992), “Commentary on ‘An Economic Analysis of Copyright
Collectives’”, Virginia Law Review (Symposium on the Law and Economics of
Intellectual Property) 78(1): 413-415.
Gopal, Ram D., Bhattacharjee, Sudip and G. Lawrence Sanders (2004), “Do Artists
Benefit from Online Music Sharing”, Journal of Business, forthcoming.
Hamlen, William A. Jr., (1991), “Superstardom in Popular Music: Empirical Evidence”,
Review of Economics and Statistics 73(4): 729-33.
Hamlen, William A. Jr., (1994), “Variety and Superstardom in Popular Music”,
Economic Inquiry 32(3): 395-406.
Hui, Kai-Lung and I.P.L. Png (2002), “On the Supply of Creative Work: Evidence from
the Movies”, American Economic Review, AEA Papers and Proceedings 92 (2):
217-220.

66

Hui, Kai-Lung and Ivan P.L. Png (2003), “Piracy and the Legitimate Demand for
Recorded Music”, Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy, Berkeley
Electronic Press 2 (1): Article 11.
Johnson, William R. (1992), “Commentary on ‘An Economic Analysis of Copyright
Collectives’”, Virginia Law Review (Symposium on the Law and Economics of
Intellectual Property) 78(1): 417-419.
Kafka, Peter and Kemp Powers (2003), “Celebrity 100, The Road to Riches”, Forbes.com
(July 7, 2003).
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch and Richard Thaler (1986), “Fairness as a Constraint on
Profit Seeking: Entitlements in the Market”, American Economic Review 76(4):
728-41.
Klein, Benjamin, Lerner, Andres V. and Kevin M. Murphy (2002), “The Economics of
Copyright ‘Fair Use’ in a Networked World”, American Economic Review, AEA
Papers and Proceedings 92 (2): 205-208.
Kleit, Andrew N., 2000, “ASCAP versus BMI (versus CBS): Modeling Competition
between and Bundling by Performance Rights Organizations”, Economic Inquiry,
38 (4), 579-590.
Krasilovsky, M. William and Sidney Shemel, cont. by John M. Gross (2003), This
Business of Music; The Definitive Guide to the Music Industry, 9th edition
(Billboard Books, New York).
Krueger, Alan B. (2004), “The Economics of Real Superstars: The Market for Concerts
in the Material World”, Journal of Labor Economics, 23(1): 1-30.
LaFranco, Robert (2003), “The 2nd Annual Rolling Stone Money Report, Rock’s 50
Richest”, Rolling Stone 919 (April 3, 2003): 57-61.
Liebowitz, Stan J. (2003a), “Will MP3 Downloads Annihilate the Record Industry? The
Evidence So Far”, in: Gary Libecap, ed., Advances in the Study of
Entrepreneurship, Innovation, and Economic Growth 15 (JAI Press, Greenwich
CT).
Liebowitz, Stan J. (2003b), “Alternative Copyright Systems: The Problems with a
Compulsory License”, Unpublished paper (School of Management, University of
Texas at Dallas), www.utdallas.edu/~liebowit/intprop/complpff.pdf.
Liebowitz, Stan J. (2004a), “The Elusive Symbiosis: The Impact of Radio on the Record
Industry”, Unpublished paper (School of Management, University of Texas at
Dallas).

67

Liebowitz, Stan J. (2004b), “Pitfalls in Measuring the Impact of File sharing”,
Unpublished paper (School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas),
www.utdallas.edu/~liebowit/intprop/pitfalls.pdf.
Marshall, Alfred (1947), Principles of Economics, 8th edition (MacMillan, New York
NY).
Michel, Norbert J. (2003), “A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of The Impact of the
Digital Age on the Music Industry”, Doctoral thesis (Department of Financial
Economics, University of New Orleans).
Michel, Norbert J. (2004), “The Impact of the Digital Age on the Music Industry: A
Theoretical and Empirical Analysis”, Unpublished paper (The Heritage
Foundation, Washington DC).
Moulton, Brent (1996), “Bias in the Consumer Price Index: What is the Evidence?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 10 (4): 159-177.
NMPA International Survey of Music Publishing Revenues, 12th edition, National Music
Publishers’ Association, Inc. and The Harry Fox Agency, Inc. (available online at
www.nmpa.org)
Nordhaus, William D. (1969), Invention, Growth, and Welfare: A Theoretical Treatment
of Technological Change (MIT Press, Cambridge MA).
Oberholzer, Felix and Koleman Strumpf (2004), “The Effect of File Sharing on Record
Sales, An Empirical Analysis”, Unpublished paper (Harvard Business School and
Department of Economics, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill),
www.unc.edu/~cigar/papers/FileSharing_March2004.pdf.
Osbourne, Sharon (2002) “Interview: Women in Rock”, Rolling Stone 908 (October 31,
2002): 54-56.
Pareles, Jon (2002), “David Bowie, 21st-Century Entrepreneur”, The New York Times
(June 9, 2002).
Passman, Donald S. (2000), All You Need to Know about the Music Business, 4th
edition, (Simon & Schuster, New York).
Peitz, Martin and Patrick Waelbroeck (2003), “Piracy of Digital Products: A Critical
Review of the Economics Literature”, CESifo Working Paper No. 1071.
Peitz, Martin and Patrick Waelbroeck (2004a), “The Effect of Internet Piracy on CD
Sales: Cross-Section Evidence”, CESifo Working Paper No. 1122.

68

Peitz, Martin and Patrick Waelbroeck (2004b), “An Economist’s Guide to Digital
Music”, CESifo Economic Studies Conference, Working Paper.
Peitz, Martin and Patrick Waelbroeck (2004c). “Making Use of File sharing in Music
Distribution”, Unpublished paper (University of Mannheim and ECARES,
Université Libre de Bruxelles).
Piketty, Thomas and Emanuel Saez (2003), “Income Inequality in the United States,
1913-1998” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1): 1-39.
Read, Brock (2004), “College Leaders and Record Executives Tell Congress of Steps to
Curtail Music Piracy”, The Chronicle of Higher Education (August 25, 2004).
Romer, Paul (2002), “When Should We Use Intellectual Property Rights?”, American
Economic Review, AEA Papers and Proceedings 92 (2): 213-216.
Rosen, Sherwin (1981), “The Economics of Superstars”, American Economic Review
71(5): 845-858.
Rosen, Sherwin and Rosenfield, Andrew M (1997), “Ticket Pricing”, Journal of Law &
Economics 40(2): 351-376.
Slichter, Jacob (2004), So You Wanna Be a Rock & Roll Star, How I Machine-Gunned a
Roomful of Record Executives and Other True Tales from a Drummer’s Life
(Broadway Books, New York NY).
Surowiecki, James (2004), “Paying to Play”, The New Yorker (2004-07-12).
Tirole, Jean (1988), The Theory of Industrial Organization (MIT Press: Cambridge MA).
Weinraub, Bernard (2002), “For the Industry, Less to Celebrate at the Grammys”, The
New York Times (February 25, 2002): C1.
Young, Jeffrey R. (2004a), “Napster and 6 Colleges Sign Deals to Provide Online Music
to Students”, The Chronicle of Higher Education (July 30, 2004).
Young, Jeffrey R. (2004b), “RealNetworks Announces Deals With Berkeley and U. of
Minnesota to Offer Online Music”, The Chronicle of Higher Education (August
24, 2004).
Zentner, Alejandro (2004), “Measuring the Effect of Music Downloads on Music
Purchases”, Unpublished paper (Department of Economics, University of
Chicago), home.uchicago.edu/~alezentn/musicindustrynew.pdf.
Zhang, Michael X. (2002), “Stardom, Peer-to-peer and the Socially Optimal Distribution
of Music”, Unpublished paper (School of Management, MIT).

69

70

Table 1.1: Estimated pre-tax gross income by source for 35 top artists who toured in 2002
(Millions of US Dollars)
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

Live
Artist
Concerts
Paul McCartney
$64.9
The Rolling Stones
39.6
Dave Matthews Band
27.9
Celine Dion
22.4
Eminem
5.5
Cher
26.2
Bruce Springsteen
17.9
Jay-Z
0.7
Ozzy Osbourne/the Osbournes
3.8
Elton John
20.2
The Eagles
15.1
Jimmy Buffett
13.7
Billy Joel
16.0
Neil Diamond
16.5
Aerosmith
11.6
Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young
15.7
Creed
10.9
Rush
13.4
Linkin Park
1.7
The Who
12.6
Red Hot Chili Peppers
6.1
Brian "Baby" Williams
0.2
Nsync
7.7
Barry Manilow
8.0
Britney Spears
5.5
Alan Jackson
4.6
Rod Stewart
6.6
Andrea Bocelli
8.1
Brooks and Dunn
6.7
Enrique Iglesias
4.4
Tom Petty
6.6
Tool
7.3
Kid Rock
3.4
Kenny Chesney
5.8
6.0
Santana
Average
$12.7

Recordings Publishing
$2.2
$2.2
0.9
2.2
0.0
2.5
3.1
0.9
10.4
3.8
0.5
0.0
2.2
4.5
12.7
0.7
0.2
0.5
0.9
1.3
0.7
1.4
0.2
0.5
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.3
1.0
0.8
0.0
0.3
1.1
1.6
0.0
0.0
4.7
6.3
0.0
0.0
3.4
2.7
2.7
0.9
0.5
0.9
1.2
0.0
1.8
1.0
3.0
1.4
1.4
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.4
1.4
1.5
1.7
0.2
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.8
1.3
1.1
0.1
0.0
0.7
$1.7
$1.3

Total
Income
$72.1
44.0
31.3
31.1
28.9
26.7
24.8
22.7
22.5
22.4
17.6
17.6
17.0
16.8
16.5
16.0
13.4
13.4
13.1
12.6
12.1
11.8
9.4
9.2
9.1
9.0
8.8
8.7
8.1
7.6
7.5
7.4
7.0
7.0
6.9
$17.4

Notes: Figures are estimates of pre-tax gross income in 2002. The total income may exceed the sum
of the first three columns because of TV, movie, merchandise and other potential sources of income.
Source: LaFranco, 2003.

Figure 2.1. Organization of the Popular Music Industry

Band/Composer

Publisher

Manager

ASCAP
BMI
SESAC

Movies, TV

Record
Company

Restaurant

Radio
Independent
Record
Promoter

Music
Video

Promoter

Concert

Figure 4.1: Average Price per Ticket, High and Low Price Tickets, and Overall Inflation Rate,
1981-2003
70

High

60

50

Average

Price

40

Low

30
CPI
20

10

19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03

0

Table 4.1: Various price indices for concert tickets and other entertainment events,
using either the headline artist or venue as the unit of observation

Year
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

Artist
Laspeyres Paasche
(1)
(2)
100.0
112.8
129.6
143.8
157.2
166.5
179.1
199.6
215.3
236.0
254.0
273.9
286.6
310.0
340.5
398.5
426.2
518.0
606.0
671.7
750.1
802.1
877.1

100.0
108.9
118.0
126.0
136.5
144.9
155.0
171.6
187.6
200.3
207.7
214.3
225.8
209.5
219.5
234.6
238.6
273.9
273.0
300.9
324.7
334.9
365.1

Fisher
(3)
100.0
110.8
123.6
134.6
146.5
155.4
166.6
185.0
201.0
217.5
229.7
242.3
254.4
254.9
273.4
305.8
318.9
376.7
406.7
449.6
493.5
518.3
565.9

Venue
Movies, Sports
& Theater (CPI)
(7)

Venue
Paasche
(5)

Fisher
(6)

100.0
106.0
115.2
124.7
130.8
142.7
150.7
167.4
168.1
181.2
182.3
190.8
198.3
229.3
216.4
220.1
238.6
258.2
298.0
312.2
340.3
348.5
360.7

100.0
106.3
115.7
127.0
132.8
142.1
148.4
165.2
169.3
185.1
188.6
198.8
207.0
235.1
227.7
225.2
230.9
251.5
288.5
304.7
326.9
336.1
347.3

100.0
106.2
115.5
125.8
131.8
142.4
149.5
166.3
168.7
183.1
185.4
194.7
202.6
232.2
222.0
222.6
234.7
254.8
293.2
308.4
333.5
342.2
353.9

100.0
106.1
113.4
120.8
127.8
133.0
140.3
147.1
159.6
170.5
180.3
186.0
188.7
195.7
205.4
217.1
223.7
230.1
240.4
256.1
264.3
272.9
287.5

6.7%
3.9%
7.3%

6.8%
4.2%
6.4%

6.8%
4.0%
6.8%

6.0%
4.5%
4.1%

Laspeyres
(4)

Per Annum Percentage Growth Rate
1981-89
1989-96
1996-03

10.1%
9.2%
11.9%

8.2%
3.2%
6.5%

9.1%
6.2%
9.2%

Notes: authors' calculations based on Pollstar data and data from BLS. Index sets 1981 to 100.
Weights are updated each year for columns 1-6.

Figure 4.2: Concert Prices Tracked Movie, Theater and Sports Tickets Well Until 1997
Venue Laspeyres Price Index versus CPI-U for Movies, Theater and Sports Events
50

45
Concerts

40

Average Price

35

30
Movies, Theater
& Sports

25

20

15

10

5

0
1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

Figure 4.3a: Number of Shows Each Year
Rolling Stone Encyclopedia Artists
8000
7000

Number of Shows

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000

19
98

19
99

20
00

20
01

20
02

20
03

19
98

19
99

20
00

20
01

20
02

20
03

19
97

19
96

19
95

19
94

19
93

19
92

19
91

19
90

19
89

19
88

19
87

19
86

19
85

19
84

19
83

19
82

0

Figure 4.3b: Number of Tickets Sold Each Year
Rolling Stone Encyclopedia Artists

Number of Tickets Sold (Millions)

40

35

30

25

20

15

19
97

19
96

19
95

19
94

19
93

19
92

19
91

19
90

19
89

19
88

19
87

19
86

19
85

19
84

19
83

19
82

10

Figure 4.3c: Total Ticket Revenue in 2003 Dollars
Rolling Stone Encyclopedia Artists
$1,400

Ticket Sales (Millions)

$1,200
$1,000
$800
$600
$400
$200
$0
1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

Figure 4.4: Share of Total Ticket Revenue Accruing to Top Performers, 1982-2003
100%

Everybody Else
80%

60%

Top 2-5 Percent

40%

20%

Top 1 Percent

0%
1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Year

Figure 4.5: Percent of Total Revenue Handled by Biggest Four Promoters,
Nationwide and by Clear Channel Communications

Percent of Ticket Sales

80

60

41%
CC

40

20
1981

1986

1991

1996

2001 2003

Source: Calculated by Alan Krueger based on Pollstar data. Only concerts performed in the
U.S. are included in the analysis. Sample consists of artists listed in Rolling Stone Encyclopedia.

Figure 6.1: Hypothetical Demand Curve for 3 Bands
Log
Price

B

A

C
B
A

Log Quantity of Tickets

Table 6.1: Alternative rankings of artists who toured in 2003
Artist
Bruce Springsteen & The E Street Band
Celine Dion
Fleetwood Mac
Eagles
Simon & Garfunkel
Cher
Aerosmith / KISS
Dixie Chicks
Billy Joel / Elton John
Dave Matthews Band
Summer Sanitarium Tour / Metallica
Toby Keith
The Rolling Stones
Kenny Chesney
Tim McGraw
Shania Twain
Justin Timberlake / Christina Aguilera
Jimmy Buffett
Phish
Pearl Jam
Ozzy Osbourne
James Taylor
Yanni
50 Cent
Bon Jovi
John Mayer / Counting Crows
Matchbox Twenty
Alabama
Red Hot Chili Peppers
The Dead
Michael Flatley's Lord of the Dance
American Idols Live
Alan Jackson
Brooks & Dunn
George Strait
Lollapalooza 2003
Steely Dan
Radiohead
Def Leppard
Bill Gaither & Friends Homecoming
ZZ Top
Santana
Widespread Panic
Journey / Styx / REO Speedwagon
Luis Miguel
Elton John
Mana
Mamma Mia
Ben Harper / Jack Johnson
Trans Siberian Orchestra - East

Rank1 Rank2 Rank3 Rank4 Rank5 Rank6
1
2
1
3
5
1
2
1
2
1
41
14
3
6
4
6
15
8
4
3
6
4
9
13
5
4
3
2
7
12
6
9
5
9
32
4
7
8
7
8
12
7
8
10
8
10
14
6
9
7
9
7
6
27
10
12
10
12
19
3
11
11
12
11
4
17
12
16
13
17
54
5
13
5
11
5
2
51
14
21
14
21
56
2
15
14
15
15
36
15
16
13
16
13
16
21
17
15
18
14
30
23
18
17
17
16
13
20
19
23
19
23
29
9
20
25
20
26
51
10
21
20
22
22
21
24
22
24
21
25
53
16
23
18
24
20
61
30
24
34
25
30
79
11
25
19
23
18
20
34
26
32
26
31
43
18
27
35
28
37
111
22
28
30
29
32
50
26
29
36
27
36
59
25
30
29
30
29
33
31
31
31
32
34
392
32
32
38
31
38
63
29
33
39
34
39
82
33
34
43
35
45
84
28
35
27
33
27
26
45
36
40
37
40
42
37
37
33
40
35
75
55
38
44
36
41
31
39
39
45
39
46
143
40
40
67
41
70
125
19
41
47
42
48
121
41
42
49
43
49
70
42
43
55
38
52
216
36
44
41
46
42
60
49
45
28
45
28
47
81
46
37
44
33
34
77
47
46
48
44
44
60
48
42
52
43
226
70
49
61
47
59
80
44
50
58
50
56
136
54

Notes: Rank1 assumes elasticity of demand is 1 (gross revenue); Rank2 assumes elasticity of demand is 2;
Rank3 assumes elasticity of demand is 1 and that latent demand is 25% greater than ticket sales for
sellouts; Rank4 assumes elasticity of demand is 2 and that latent demand is 25% greater than ticket sales
for sellouts; Rank5 is based on revenue per performance; Rank6 is based on number of tickets sold.
Rankings are computed for all artists, but only the first 50 according to Rank1 are shown.

Table 8.1 – Rights attached to musical compositions
Right

What it covers

Standard rate

Public performance right

The right to publicly perform a

Blanket license via a performing rights

composition, for example on the

organization (ASCAP, BMI, SESAC), rate

radio, in a club, in a concert, or on

based on factors such as advertising revenues

a jukebox.

and size of audience reached

Mechanical

The right to record and distribute

8.5 cents per composition, or 1.65 cents per

Right (called compulsory

recordings of a composition, only

minute, whichever is greater

because

once it has been made public

Compulsory

the

composer

cannot refuse to grant it
once he gets paid)
Synchronization Right

The right to use a sound recording

It depends on the length used and the use itself

in a movie, commercial, or TV

(background, integral part)

program (must be coupled with a
performance right)

Source: Krasilovsky et al. (2003) and Passman (2000)

Table 8.2 – 2001 Revenues from Music Publishing in the U.S. (Millions of U.S.D.)
Performance-Based Income
Radio
TV/Cable/Satellite
Live Performance & Recorded

$ 317.17
381.09
216.40

914.66
Reproduction-Based Income
Phono-Mechanical
Synchronization

552.70
102.31

655.01
Distribution-Based Income
Interest Investment Income
Misc.
TOTAL

331.85
37.10
1.80
1,940.42

Source : NMPA International Survey of Music Publishing Revenues, 12th edition, Table 6,
Master Survey Data

Table 8.3 – List of Performing Rights Organizations
Country
Organization
Unites States American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers;
of America
Broadcast Music Incorporated;
Society of European Stage Authors and Composers
Germany
Gesellschaft für musikalische Aufführungs- und
mechanische Vervielfältigungsrechte
Japan
Japanese Society for Rights of Authors, Composers and
Publishers
United
Performing Rights Society
Kingdom
France
Société des Auteurs, Compositeurs et Éditeurs de Musique
Italy
Società Italiana degli Autori ed Editori
Spain
Sociedad General de Autores Y Editores
The
BUMA-STEMRA
Netherlands
Canada
The Society of Composers, Authors, and Music Publishers
of Canada
Switzerland
Société Suisse des Auteurs, Suisse Auteurs

Acronym
ASCAP; BMI; SESAC

GEMA
JASRAC
PRS
SACEM
SIAE
SGAE
BUMA-STEMRACEDAR
SOCAN
SSA, SUISA

Table 8.4 – Publishing Income in the Top Ten Countries (U.S.$M – 2001)
Country

Performanc
e-Based
Income

Reproduction
-Based
Income

DistributionBased
Income

Interest
Investment
Income

Misc.

2001
Grand
Total

U.S.A.
Germany
Japan
United
Kingdom
France
Italy
Spain
The Netherlands
Canada
Switzerland
TOP TEN
TOTAL

914.66
305.28
291.17
260.11

655.01
318.81
350.74
321.75

331.85
153.72
49.64
72.65

37.10
30.55
0.50
8.05

1.80
0.00
67.60
7.17

1,940.42
808.36
759.64
669.73

% of
Total
World
Income
29.3
12.2
11.5
10.1

320.80
257.01
70.51
78.03
71.40
50.08
2,619.05

166.58
73.93
114.43
53.21
44.39
24.71
2,123.56

61.17
22.90
2.15
29.22
18.84
25.83
767.97

0.00
0.00
9.68
16.12
4.53
5.01
111.54

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
76.57

548.55
353.83
196.77
176.57
139.17
105.63
5698.67

8.3
5.3
3.0
2.7
2.1
1.6
86.0

Source : NMPA International Survey of Music Publishing Revenues, 12th edition, Table 6,
Master Survey Data

%
Cumulative

29.3
41.5
52.9
63.0
71.3
76.7
79.6
82.3
84.4
86.0

Table 8.5 – ASCAP’s Foreign Relations (U.S.$M)
2002
2003
Amount received from foreign publishing
$148,027
180,309
Amount distributed to foreign companies
133,253
149,526
Balance
+14,774
+30,783
Source: Jim Steinblatt, ASCAP Media Relations, personal communication.

Figure 9.1 - Total value of record sales, 1969-2003
$50,000
$45,000
$40,000
US$ (M)

$35,000
$30,000
$25,000
$20,000
$15,000
$10,000
$5,000

19
69
19
72
19
75
19
78
19
81
19
84
19
87
19
90
19
93
19
96
19
99
20
02

$0

Year

World Sales Value
US Sales Value

Source: IFPI World Sales History
Notes: All values in millions of 2003 constant US dollars.
Turkey and China are excluded as they do not comply with IFPI standards and definitions.
Other audio formats (MiniDisc, DVD-A, SACD) included in totals from 1997 onwards.
Music video figures included in totals from 2001 onwards. Digital download sales excluded.

