                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           ADVANCED PURCHASE COMMITMENTS
                                FOR A MALARIA VACCINE:
                          ESTIMATING COSTS AND EFFECTIVENESS

                                            Ernst R. Berndt
                                           Rachel Glennerster
                                           Michael R. Kremer
                                               Jean Lee
                                              Ruth Levine
                                           Georg Weizsäcker
                                            Heidi Williams

                                         Working Paper 11288
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11288


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2005




We thank Pia Bruce, Iain Cockburn, Joseph DiMasi, Amy Finkelstein, Heather Freeman, Henry Grabowski,
Hannah Kettler, Andrew Metrick, and Blair Sachs for their helpful comments and input, as well as other
participants in the Pull Mechanisms Working Group of the Global Health Policy Research Network, a
program of the Center for Global Development that is supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
We are especially grateful to Henry Grabowski for his generosity in sharing the pharmaceutical sales revenue
data with us. All errors and opinions are those of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Ernst R. Berndt, Rachel Glennerster, Michael R. Kremer, Jean Lee, Ruth Levine, Georg
Weizsäcker, and Heidi Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Advanced Purchase Commitments for a Malaria Vaccine: Estimating Costs and Effectiveness
Ernst R. Berndt, Rachel Glennerster, Michael R. Kremer, Jean Lee, Ruth Levine, Georg
Weizsäcker, and Heidi Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 11288
April 2005, Revised July 2006
JEL No. I18, O19, O31, O38

                                           ABSTRACT

To overcome the problem of insufficient research and development (R&D) on vaccines for diseases

concentrated in low-income countries, sponsors could commit to purchase viable vaccines if and

when they are developed. One or more sponsors would commit to a minimum price that would be

paid per person immunized for an eligible product, up to a certain number of individuals immunized.

For additional purchases, the price would eventually drop to short-run marginal cost. If no suitable

product were developed, no payments would be made. We estimate the offer size which would make

the revenues from R&D investments on a malaria vaccine similar to revenues realized from

investments in typical existing commercial pharmaceutical products, as well as the degree to which

various contract models and assumptions would affect the cost-effectiveness of such a commitment

for the case of a malaria vaccine. Under conservative assumptions, we document that the intervention

would be highly cost-effective from a public health perspective. Sensitivity analyses suggest most

characteristics of a hypothetical malaria vaccine would have little effect on the cost-effectiveness,

but that the duration of protection against malaria conferred by a vaccine strongly affects potential

cost-effectiveness. Readers can conduct their own sensitivity analyses employing a web-based

spreadsheet tool.

Ernst R. Berndt                  Michael R. Kremer                 Ruth Levine
Sloan School of Management       Harvard University                Center for Global Development
MIT, E52-452                     Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive                Littauer Center 207               Georg Weizsäcker
Cambridge, MA 02142              Cambridge, MA 02138               London School of Economics
and NBER                         and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu                  mkremer@fas.harvard.edu           Heidi Williams
                                                                   Research Assistant, NBER
Rachel Glennerster               Jean Lee
MIT Poverty Action Lab           Harvard University
                                                                                                     3




1.        Introduction

          Compared to the social need, there is a dearth of research and development (R&D) on

vaccines for diseases concentrated in low-income countries. One commonly cited estimate is that

half of all global health R&D in 1992 was undertaken by private industry – but that less than five

percent of that was spent on diseases specific to poor countries (WHO, 1996).

          Biotechnology and pharmaceutical (“biopharmaceutical”) firms that operate under a profit-

maximizing business model are likely reluctant to invest in R&D for such diseases if they fear they

may be unable to sell a vaccine at prices that would cover their risk-adjusted costs. Low anticipated

prices reflect both the poverty of the relevant populations as well as at least two severe distortions

in markets for vaccines for these diseases.

          First, governments and other institutions that buy vaccines for these diseases (such as

bilateral and multilateral aid agencies) face a time-inconsistency problem. Once biopharmaceutical

companies have invested in the R&D necessary to develop vaccines, governments and international

organizations often use their powers as dominant purchasers and arbiters of intellectual property

rights to keep prices close to marginal cost. Because the largest part of the industry’s expenditures

lies in the initial R&D cost (while the variable costs of production are typically modest), near-

marginal cost pricing likely implies negative total profits from the investment, thereby deterring

industry from investing in the first place.

          Second, the knowledge generated by research on these diseases is an international public

good. Because the benefits of scientific and technological advances spill over to many nations,

none of the many small countries that would benefit from vaccines for diseases like malaria,

tuberculosis, or HIV have an incentive to encourage research by unilaterally offering to pay higher

prices.
                                                                                                    4




        One proposal which could potentially address both market failures would be for purchasers

(for example, foreign aid donors) to undertake advance market commitments for desired vaccines –

to commit, in advance of product development and licensure, to fully or partially finance vaccine

purchases for poor countries at a pre-specified price. As we discuss in Section 2, such

commitments could create market incentives for firms to develop needed vaccines. If no vaccine is

developed, no donor funds would be spent.

        This type of policy initiative has recently been gathering momentum. A working group

convened by the Center for Global Development in Washington, DC, with financial support from

the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, recently released a report exploring the details of how such a

commitment could be implemented (Barder et al., 2005). In November 2004 Britain’s Chancellor

of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, announced that the UK government, working in cooperation

with other donors, would be willing to enter into an advance market commitment for a malaria

vaccine (Brown, 2004); the Chancellor later announced that the UK will also explore the use of

advance market commitments for HIV vaccines. In December 2005 the G7 finance ministers

announced an agreement to work with others on developing a pilot advance market commitment

(HM Treasury, 2005), and further statements of support were issued by several countries at the July

2006 G8 Summit in St. Petersburg, Russia (G8 Information Centre, 2006).

        In this article, we first provide a brief background on the structure of advance market

commitments (Section 2). We then estimate what size of a commitment would provide a market

comparable to those of existing biopharmaceuticals (Section 3), discuss the cost-effectiveness of

commitments for vaccines against three diseases concentrated in low-income countries (malaria,

tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS) (Section 4), and conduct sensitivity analyses of such commitments

under various contract models and assumptions (Section 5).
                                                                                                    5




        To preview our results, we find that a commitment to pay $13-$15 per person immunized

for the first 200 million people would provide a market comparable in size to the net present value

(NPV) of revenues earned by the average of a sample of recently launched commercial products,

adjusted for lower marketing costs. If sponsors wished to generate a similar level of competition as

has been observed in vaccine markets in recent years, a price of $22-$25 would likely be more

appropriate (depending on the disease). We use these benchmark commitment sizes along with

estimates of the benefits of such a commitment (measured in terms of reduced disease burden) to

estimate the cost-effectiveness of such commitments for the cases of malaria, tuberculosis, and

HIV/AIDS. We show that under a reasonably conservative set of assumptions, a commitment of

this size would be highly cost effective from a public health perspective for any of these diseases.

For example, a malaria commitment of $15 for the first 200,000,000 individuals immunized would

cost less than $15 per year of life saved; for tuberculosis a commitment of similar magnitude would

cost $31 per year of life saved; and for HIV/AIDS, $17.

        We also examine the more complex issue of the value of the commitment in accelerating

the development and distribution of a vaccine, using malaria as an example, and find that even in

the extreme case in which a commitment accelerated vaccine development by only one year and

adoption in poor countries by only two years, a malaria commitment would cost about $80-$90 per

additional year of life saved—still less than commonly-cited cost-effectiveness benchmarks for

health interventions in poor countries.



2.      Brief background on advance market commitments

        As described in the Introduction, this paper focuses on two issues related to advance

market commitments: first, what size of a commitment would provide a market comparable to

those of existing biopharmaceuticals (Section 3); and second, how cost-effective would such
                                                                                                      6




commitments be under various contract models and assumptions (Sections 4 and 5). Other issues

relevant to advance market commitments are discussed elsewhere; for example, Kremer and

Glennerster (2004) discuss the rationale behind such commitments as well as design details, and

Berndt and Hurvitz (2005) discuss some of the legal and economic practicalities of structuring

advance market commitments.

        In this section we describe the basic structure of advance market commitments, and then

discuss one design issue of particular relevance for estimating the appropriate size of such

commitments – namely, the treatment of second and subsequent market entrants.



Basic structure of advance market commitments

        The basic structure of an advance market commitment is that sponsors commit (in advance

of product development and licensure) to fully or partially finance purchases of vaccines for poor

countries at a pre-specified price. A program sponsor or coalition of sponsors that potential

investors in R&D would find credible (i.e. sponsors that are financially solvent and thought to be

unlikely to renege on a commitment) would sign a contract underwriting a guaranteed price for the

vaccine supplier. Poor countries would decide whether to buy a given product at a low and

affordable price (say, $1 per treatment), and sponsors would guarantee to top-up to a higher price

(say, $15 per treatment) – thus providing market returns for the developer which are comparable to

other average-revenue biopharmaceutical products. Once the full number of treatments has been

purchased at the guaranteed price, the supplier would, in return, be committed to either selling

further treatments at an affordable price in the long-term, or to licensing the technology to other

manufacturers. Although not part of the contract, there would be nothing to stop the original

sponsors or other donors from covering the $1 price on behalf of poor countries at the time of

purchase.
                                                                                                          7




        For private firms, this type of advance market arrangement would reduce the political risk

that firms would be forced to sell their product at a very low price, and thus would give investors

confidence about the returns they could expect if the relevant scientific challenges were overcome.

It is important to note that advance market commitments would not eliminate all risk to developers.

In particular, the scientific challenges and associated risks (as in markets for diseases prevalent in

rich countries) would be considerable, and the risk of failure high. But advance market

commitments would greatly reduce the risks that are particular to markets for diseases concentrated

in poor countries—especially the risk that once R&D investments had been made, a company

would face enormous pressure to sell the product at a very low price. In terms of R&D allocation

decisions, advance market commitments would therefore put diseases like malaria or tuberculosis

on a more equal footing with health conditions prevalent in affluent populations.



Second and subsequent market entrants

        In calculating the commitment size necessary to put vaccines for diseases common in low-

income countries on an equal footing (in terms of research incentives) with products for diseases

prevalent in rich countries, a key design question is how an advance market commitment would

deal with second and subsequent market entrants. As discussed by Kremer and Glennerster (2004),

advance market commitments can potentially be structured in a variety of ways to cover the case in

which more than one vaccine is developed – ranging from, on one hand, giving no preference at all

to the first vaccine (relative to later entrants) to, on the other hand, providing the entire reward to

the developer of the first qualifying vaccine Appropriately balancing various considerations would

require judgment calls on the part of sponsors about how they wanted to design the commitment,

but it is worth briefly mentioning several relevant issues, both static and dynamic.
                                                                                                      8




        From the perspective of static efficiency, if a superior product becomes available it should

be used. From a dynamic standpoint rewards to individual developers should ideally reflect the

marginal value of each vaccine to society; while it is difficult to precisely measure that marginal

value, a system should aim to generate at least a rough correspondence between innovation

incentives and the value of the innovation. Once a qualifying vaccine is developed, the incremental

benefit of subsequent vaccines will typically be smaller, suggesting that in most cases it will

typically be appropriate to provide smaller rewards for subsequent vaccines than for the initial

vaccine, particularly if the subsequent vaccine is developed significantly later (in which case a

large portion of R&D expenditures for the subsequent entrant would have been incurred after the

successful launch of the first product was clear). It is also worth noting that providing favorable

treatment to subsequent products will tend to reduce incentives for the first developer, holding

constant the total size of a commitment: to the extent funds are used for subsequent developers,

they cannot be used to provide incentives for the first developer. Moreover, the provision of

incentives for subsequent developers will likely also lead to reduced expected revenues for the first

developer on commercial markets outside the advance market commitment. Overall, these

considerations suggest that R&D on subsequent vaccines should only be rewarded if it leads to

products with some superior characteristics.

        Along these lines, the Center for Global Development report (Barder et al., 2005)

recommends a mechanism similar to the “clinical superiority” clause embodied in the US Orphan

Drug Act. The US Orphan Drug Act, which went into effect in 1983, created a number of financial

incentives for biopharmaceutical companies to develop drugs for diseases such as Huntington’s,

ALS (Lou Gehrig’s disease), and muscular dystrophy – diseases which affect fewer than 200,000

people in the US and therefore have a limited market. The primary attraction for companies under

this legislation was a promise of seven years of market exclusivity – unless a follow-on product
                                                                                                          9




was approved that was deemed to be “clinically superior.” The legal interpretations of this clause

are beyond the scope of this paper, but in summary a product can be deemed clinically superior if it

has shown greater effectiveness on a clinically meaningful endpoint – the demonstration of which

most often requires direct comparative clinical trials.2 It is worth noting that the legal

interpretations of this superiority clause (in particular, the “same vs. different” issue of whether two

structurally similar drugs may be deemed “different” enough to justify multiple approvals for a

given disease) have at times been controversial – for example, in the case of two drugs approved

under the US Orphan Drug Act for human growth hormone (for legal analyses see Bohrer and

Prince, 1999; Rin-Laures and Janofsky, 1991).3 We here do not focus on such issues, but note that

they would need to be carefully crafted in the design of advance market contracts.

         This superiority clause approach accomplishes a number of the goals we discussed above:

first, it fashions incentives to appropriately reward development of the initial vaccine; second, it

creates incentives to improve on the original vaccine; and third, it delivers the best available

vaccines to patients.

         To obtain a sense of how such a clause has worked in practice and how frequently

clinically superior products have been approved, we examined the example of the US Orphan Drug

Act. As of January 2006, approximately 280 drugs have been approved under the Act4 – only

around three of which (two treatments for multiple sclerosis, one for coagulation factor IX) were

allowed as second entrants to markets for which a previous drug had been approved under the US


2
  For more information on the regulatory structure of the US Orphan Drug Act, see the website of the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)’s Office of Orphan Products
(http://www.fda.gov/orphan/lawsregs.html, accessed 30 May 2006).
3
  Rin-Laures and Janovsky (1991) note the following regarding clinical superiority in the context of the US
Orphan Drug Act: “A second drug is superior if it is (1) more effective, (2) safer, or (3) otherwise makes a
major contribution to patient care, such as providing an oral form of the drug that is usually administered
intravenously. This is an appropriate policy because it promotes research on safer or more effective versions
of a drug that would otherwise be chilled by the presumption of ‘sameness.’”
                                                                                                       10




Orphan Drug Act.5 These figures imply that over the entire period during which the US Orphan

Drug Act has been in place (that is, since 1983) only one percent of drugs that have been approved

were approved as subsequent market entrants anytime over the time period. In the next section we

examine how having such a clause in an advance market commitment would be taken into account

in estimating the necessary size of a market commitment.



3.      Estimates of the appropriate size of a vaccine market commitment6

        Before delving into the details of various approaches to calculating market size, it is worth

first noting that at least for vaccines that are currently in fairly early stages of development, and for

which no single firm has a clear lead, larger commitment sizes will in expectation lead more firms

to enter and more resources to be invested by each participating firm in the search for a vaccine. No

single magic commitment size is the “correct” amount needed to incentivize research, below which

no research will take place and above which further resources will be wasted. As in standard

markets, many different biotechnology and pharmaceutical firms will make a series of decisions

about which projects to pursue, how far to take them, whether to continue pursuing them in the face

of setbacks, and which personnel to assign to the projects. These decisions will be influenced by

the size of the commitment as well as by the number of competitors with whom a firm expects to

potentially share revenue. At least to a first approximation, new firms will enter (and existing firms

will invest more) until the net present value of investment for the marginal firm drops to zero. In

expectation, increases in commitment size will be competed away through additional entry while

more entry will on average increase the probability that a workable vaccine is developed and


4
  On drug approvals under the US Orphan Drug Act, see the website of the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)’s Office of Orphan Products (http://www.fda.gov/orphan/designat/list.htm, accessed
30 May 2006).
5
  Information on subsequent market entrants approved under the “clinically superior” clause was obtained by
a phone conversation with Peter Vaccari, RPh, RAC of the US Food and Drug Administration.
                                                                                                           11




increase the speed with which it is produced. Donors contemplating an increase in commitment

size must trade off the risk of inefficient duplication of effort against the benefit of a shortened

expected wait for a vaccine and the possibility of obtaining a better vaccine due to more entrants.

         Rather than attempt to guess how much it would cost to develop a vaccine for a disease

such as HIV, our strategy is therefore to ask how large a commitment would be needed to give

developers incentives comparable to product markets for diseases prevalent in rich countries. To

outline our approach as described in this section, we first estimate the net present value (NPV) of

revenues earned by a sample of recently launched commercial pharmaceutical products. We then

adjust this figure to account for the fact that developers of a vaccine under an advance market

commitment would likely have lower marketing costs, and thus require somewhat lower revenues

to generate the same incentive to invest in R&D.7 We also adjust for the fact that the revenue from

the commitment may potentially be shared between several successful developers (whereas our

revenue figures are for individual products).



Analysis of sales revenue data

         The most recent comprehensive evidence of sales revenues for biopharmaceutical products

is a paper by Grabowski et al. (2002) in which the authors report on 118 new chemical entities

(NCEs) that were introduced into the US pharmaceutical market between 1990 and 1994.8 An

important finding in the Grabowski et al. paper is that the revenue distribution over the sample set


6
  For details on the sales revenue data used in this section, see the Appendix. This data is also available upon
request from the authors.
7
  See Berndt et al. (2003)for other approaches and further discussion.
8
  Grabowski et al. (2002) note this is a comprehensive sample of the NCEs originating from and developed
by the pharmaceutical industry that were introduced into the US in the 1990 to 1994 time period. Due to data
limitations we are unable to address whether the sales revenues of this sample of self-originated NCEs is a
representative sample of the sales revenues of all commercial pharmaceutical products. Sales revenue data
from a larger sample of products is available from (for example) IMS Health or Scott Levin Associates, but is
very expensive. Further work could attempt to pursue this and other potential sources of larger samples of
sales revenue data.
                                                                                                         12




of products is not only widely distributed, but is also highly skewed.9 In particular, in the

Grabowski et al. sample the top selling 10 percent of products earn approximately half of the total

market revenues (in terms of worldwide sales). Using separate estimates of the cost of

pharmaceutical development, Grabowski et al. also find that sales revenues of the median NCE are

insufficient to break even, implying the mean sales revenue may provide a more reliable estimate

of what level of expected revenues may be effective in spurring industry investment.

        We obtained the sales revenue data compiled by Grabowski et al. (2002). The analysis

presented in Grabowski et al. utilized this sales data in combination with estimates on the cost of

pharmaceutical development in order to estimate total returns; we do not use those cost of

development estimates nor any other cost of development estimates in our benchmark market size

analysis. As discussed above, our strategy is to use sales revenue data alone to estimate the size of

commitment needed to generate a market comparable in size to the sales revenues of products in

the Grabowski et al. sample.

        To transform the revenue stream into a net present value, we assume an estimated industry-

wide real cost of capital (that is, earnings foregone on other investment opportunities) of eight

percent, close to the annual average return on the stock market (Siegal, 1998).10 This real rate of

eight percent is equivalent to a nominal cost of capital of eleven percent, assuming three percent

inflation. Using the sales revenue data together with this assumption of an eight percent real cost

of capital, the NPV of revenues (pre-tax, and gross of plant, equipment, promotion and marketing,




9
  This finding is consistent with the findings of analogous earlier work on products introduced in the 1980s,
such as that reported in Grabowski and Vernon (1990).
10
   Siegal (1998) estimates that the annual average return on the stock market over the time period from 1946-
1998 was 7.8 percent (p. 318). We approximate this to eight percent for our analysis. We do not use the
average return for pharmaceutical companies because – for a number of reasons – returns from an advance
market commitment (which is public sector sponsored) would likely differ from returns in other private
sector markets.
                                                                                                           13




production, and distribution costs) derived over the life cycle of the average product in the

Grabowski et al. sample is $3.44 billion (in 2004 dollars).11

         The revenues reported by Grabowski et al. (2002) are partially spent on marketing. Since

under a vaccine market commitment a potential vaccine manufacturer would likely need to spend

considerably less than average on marketing, we take this into account and consequently adjust

downward the above total revenue figure. Rosenthal et al. (2002) estimate that, relative to sales,

expenditures on promotion by US pharmaceutical companies have remained fairly constant at

about 15 percent of revenues, and have fallen slightly since 1998.12 It is plausible, however, that

promotion/sales ratios are lower in Europe and elsewhere globally. In this sense the 15 percent

number can be interpreted as an upper bound of what should be deducted from the overall market

commitment size. Furthermore, in the US the 15 percent ratio is partly the result of an accounting

nuance in which values of free samples given to physicians by drug representatives are assessed at

average retail price, not manufacturer's production costs. For most drugs, relative to average retail

price manufacturers' marginal drug production costs are quite low. Moreover, samples comprise

about 50 percent of drug manufacturer's total promotional costs in the US (see Rosenthal et al.,

2002). Given these considerations, reducing the commitment size by ten percent as a rough

adjustment for promotional/marketing expenditures seems appropriate. After this adjustment, the


11
   The appropriate level at which to set the cost of capital is somewhat controversial. Grabowski et al. (2002)
assume a real cost of capital of eleven percent, and previous analyses by two of the present authors (Kremer
and Glennerster, 2004) used this assumption in calculating the NPV of revenues from existing commercial
products. In this current work, our preferred estimates use an assumed eight percent real cost of capital for
two reasons. First, eight percent is close to the annual average return on the stock market (Siegal, 1998).
Second, this allows for consistency in our analysis between estimating the NPV of revenues of existing
products and estimating the NPV of revenues under a vaccine market commitment. With an eleven percent
real cost of capital, the NPV of revenues for the average product would be $2.81 billion rather than $3.44
billion.
12
   It is worth noting some argue that in fact marketing and related promotion expenditures are a much higher
percent of revenues; Angell (2004), for example, argues they may be as high as 36 percent of revenues.
While precise measurement of this ratio is inherently difficult (and controversial, given difficulties in
allocating some educational and R&D activities as partly promotional), we note that the larger percentages,
such as those cited by Angell, typically refer to total selling and general administrative (S&GA) expenses.
                                                                                                            14




program would need to pay out $3.1 billion to match the average revenue brought in by existing

NCEs.

         Although it is difficult to formalize into a rigorous analysis, a useful benchmarking

exercise for our market size estimate is provided by the rules of thumb venture capitalists and

pharmaceutical analysts say they use in thinking about new potential products. These opinions can

arguably serve as one rough check on our estimates as derived above. A common perception

among analysts and potential developers (as well as many in industry) is that large

biopharmaceutical companies need to anticipate annual sales of $500 million or more in years with

peak sales in order to be willing to invest in R&D for a new product (see Robbins-Roth, 2000).

Assuming the typical product life cycle as in Grabowski et al. (2002) and a real cost of capital of

eight percent, after adjusting down by ten percent for lower marketing costs this rule-of-thumb

corresponds to an NPV of about $3.38 billion, a number fairly close to that which our procedure

yields.13



Potential market size adjustments

         While revenues for existing products arguably give us a good sense of the market size

sufficient to generate the development of new products, there are several ways in which an advance

market commitment differs from a standard market, and in calculating the appropriate commitment

size sponsors may wish to adjust for some of these differences. In this sub-section we discuss

several potential adjustments – such as that some vaccines may have received substantial direct

public or philanthropic support, and the risk that a developer might have to share the market with

another product. Wherever possible we draw on the historical record in order to estimate how large


These S&GA expenditures include non-marketing related general administration, and therefore likely
overstate total marketing and related promotion expenditures.
13
   With an 11 percent real cost of capital (as in Grabowski et al., 2002), this figure changes from $3.38 billion
to $2.76 billion.
                                                                                                   15




an adjustment would be necessary to reflect these differences between an advance market

commitment and a standard market.

        While many biopharmaceutical products included in the Grabowski et al. (2002) data have

benefited from public and nonprofit investment in R&D in their development, certain diseases that

are likely to be the focus of advance market commitments may arguably have attracted more than

average attention from governmental and philanthropic sponsors. Research into a malaria vaccine,

for example, has received significant financial support from the Malaria Vaccine Initiative, which

in turn is supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Because this direct funding offsets

some of the costs of development, the appropriate commitment size would be smaller. The

magnitude of this adjustment would differ across diseases. A commitment could also potentially

be designed so as to explicitly adjust the reward based on the amount of direct funding that had

been received from various donors prior to the announcement of the advance market commitment.

(Subsequent funders could presumably work out – directly, with developers – arrangements they

felt were appropriate.)

        Similarly, the commitment size should take into account how far along in the development

pipeline a vaccine is—namely, the more developed a vaccine is, the lower the appropriate

commitment size relative to our revenue-based estimates. Again, this adjustment would be

calculated on a disease-by-disease basis. For products such as a rotavirus vaccine which are in

very advanced stages of development, the necessary size of a commitment could be much smaller;

for intermediate stage products such as a malaria vaccine (where, as we discuss in Section 4, there

are already candidate vaccines) the size of a commitment may need to be adjusted downward; and

for very early-stage vaccines such as for HIV or tuberculosis the benchmark market size estimates

we discuss here may be appropriate.
                                                                                                      16




        On the other hand, the revenue data we use (by its nature) covers existing products and

thus includes the “low-hanging fruit” of products that were relatively easier to develop. To the

extent that there is a general consensus that developing (for example) an HIV vaccine is more

technologically challenging than developing the typical product, the appropriate commitment size

would be greater. As no one knows how much it will cost to develop these vaccines, any

adjustment of this kind would necessarily involve considerable judgment calls.

        The Center for Global Development Working Group (Barder et al., 2005) recommended

setting a commitment comparable in size to the net present value of revenues for an average new

chemical entity. If the value of the market were set at this level, firms would be willing to enter

(assuming technological opportunities were similar to those for typical developed country

products) but would not be willing to accept a high risk of having to share the market, or a high risk

of being beaten to the market by another vaccine. Thus, in equilibrium we would expect entry, but

at a lower level than in average, standard markets.

        If sponsors wish to create incentives designed to generate the typical level of competition

in the vaccine market, a larger commitment would be needed. The more likely a commitment is to

be split between different products (i.e. the more subsequent entrants there are likely to be) the

larger the commitment needed to generate the same incentive for investing in R&D to develop a

vaccine.

        If sponsors wish to spur enough entry that multiple products are likely to be developed, it

may be appropriate to set the commitment size such that a successful vaccine developer could

anticipate receiving revenue similar to that in the Grabowski et al. (2002) revenue data even with

substantial competition and sharing of the market.

        The commitment size necessary to encourage a particular amount of entry (with the goal of

either advancing the date a vaccine is developed or leading to the development of superior
                                                                                                       17




vaccines) depends on the rules of the commitment regarding subsequent developers. One problem

is that in the absence of a superiority clause, a larger commitment size could potentially lead to

entry of firms aiming for an earlier vaccine or a better vaccine, but it could also lead to entry of

firms seeking merely to produce a “me too” product so as to obtain revenue that would otherwise

go to competitors. As discussed in Section 2, our benchmark assumption is based on the Center for

Global Development proposal (Barder et al., 2005), under which a commitment would allow

competition from subsequent entrants, but only if qualifying under a clinical superiority clause (for

at least some populations). Including a clinical superiority clause would accomplish the goals of

appropriately rewarding development of the initial vaccine, creating incentives to improve on the

original vaccine, and delivering the best available vaccines to patients. From the perspective of a

developer who perceives having a substantial chance either of being first or being superior, a

superiority clause has the advantage of reducing the likelihood of having to share the market with a

subsequent non-superior entrant. Under a commitment with a superiority clause a developer who is

far behind in a race and does not anticipate their product being superior for at least some

populations will drop out of the race. This is socially efficient because there is little value to society

of having a second vaccine that is no better than the first.

        To illustrate, suppose that sponsors wanted to generate sufficient entry such that each

potential developer would expect that if they succeed in developing a qualifying product, they

would be competing with one other qualifying product – either by sharing the market or by

engaging in a race to produce a licensed qualifying product with another firm that would ultimately

produce such a product. Suppose also that sponsors wanted to provide each firm with an amount of

revenue comparable to that obtained by the typical new chemical entity. In that case, it would be

necessary to apply an adjustment factor of two – thus offering twice the amount discussed above,

or slightly more than $6 billion.
                                                                                                          18




         Sponsors might reasonably wish to offer each successful developer expected revenues

similar to our $3.1 billion benchmark while also encouraging a similar degree of entry as currently

found in other vaccine markets. Below we examine the number and timing of entrants in the

markets for nine recently developed vaccines (hepatitis A, hepatitis B, haemophilus influenzae type

b [Hib], meningococcal, pneumococcal, varicella, rubella, measles and mumps).14 We calculate

how many vaccines were developed for a given disease within a six year window of the first

entrant being licensed, and how many of these subsequent entrants would likely have been

considered superior to the initial entrant. This allows us to examine the cost of inducing a certain

amount of entry of “high social utility” products (i.e. the original entrant in addition to superior

products) depending on the amount of revenue committed and the rules of the program.

         In our data, on average 2.3 vaccines were developed for each disease in the six year

window after approval of the first vaccine (or 2.6 if we use data from pre-1980, which is arguably

inappropriate given that in the 1960s and 1970s the vaccine industry was much less consolidated

than it is today). We use a somewhat arbitrary cut off of six years for two reasons. First, under an

advance market commitment the original developer need not worry about sharing the market with a

vaccine which will be approved six years later because the commitment will likely be exhausted by

that time; second, being six years behind in such a race would arguably deter subsequent

developers from undertaking heavy investments. Because a large proportion of development

expenditure occurs in the final few years before a vaccine is approved, a similar argument holds (to

a lesser degree) for years two through six as well.15



14
   We collected data from a number of sources (primarily historical documents from the US Centers for
Disease Control and US Food and Drug Administration) on vaccine approvals and characteristics (efficacy,
number of doses, etc.) that could be used to determine whether a given non-initial entrant would likely have
been considered superior. Documentation of our data and assumptions is available upon request from the
authors.
15
   For example, survey data suggests that Phase III clinical trials represent approximately two-thirds of the
costs of development (DiMasi et al., 2003).
                                                                                                           19




         For example, it seems likely that if a superiority clause is in place, a developer may be

unlikely to proceed with phase III trials if a vaccine has already been approved under an advance

market commitment and the developer does not believe its vaccine will qualify under a superiority

clause. This represents an efficiency gain and also means the commitment size need not be adjusted

upwards (because donors have no interest in stimulating another vaccine that is no better than the

first). In calculating our adjustment factor we therefore place a lower weight on entrants who enter

two to six years after the initial approval.16 Taking into account this weighting for products which

would likely have been considered non-superior, the average number of (weighted) entrants is 1.69

using data since the 1980s (or 2.14 including data from the 1960s and 1970s). In other words the

commitment size would have to be 69 (or, respectively, 114) percent larger in order to provide

revenues similar to that from the typical new chemical entity for each product while also generating

a level of competition historically associated with the vaccine industry.

         This calculation is also instructive is estimating the value of the superiority clause. Without

a superiority clause it would be necessary to compensate initial developers more for the risk of

sharing the market with a second, possibly non-superior entrant. Based on our data as described

above, without a superiority clause the adjustment factor would need to be 2.33 (using data from

the 1980s forward), relative to our 1.69 estimate with a superiority clause. On the base of a

benchmark $3.1 billion NPV revenues per product, this translates into a commitment size of $5.24

billion with a superiority clause and $7.22 billion without a superiority clause—implying that the

superiority clause may save donors $1.98 billion while creating the same incentive to develop the

first vaccine or vaccines judged likely to be superior.



16
  Specifically, a weight of 0.25 is applied to non-superior products entering between two and six years after
the initial entrant. This assumption was informed by estimates of the percentage of expenses spent on
various phases of clinical trials as well as the assumption that entrants less than two years out would likely
not abandon their late phase II and phase III trials which together are estimated to represent approximately
three-fourths of the costs of development (DiMasi et al., 2003).
                                                                                                          20




         On a separate point, it is also worth noting that if donors wish to encourage subsequent

market entrants (for example, to obtain a vaccine with a higher rate of efficacy), it would be

possible to add additional market commitments (for the same disease) at a later date with this goal

specifically in mind. Since we estimate that the bulk of the NPV of revenue associated with a

successful product under an advance market commitment comes within the first three to five years,

it is unlikely that the possibility of such subsequent commitments would substantially affect the

calculations.

         In Table 1, we report the necessary NPVs of sales that would make the total market for a

desired vaccine comparable to that of five different representative products from the Grabowski et

al. (2002) sample, corresponding to the averages of the five upper deciles of the sales distribution.17

(Specifically, in the first decile, the reported number represents the average among the top selling

10 percent of NCEs. For the second decile, it is the average of the next 10 percent, etc.).

         The average product lies in the fourth decile of sales, and it can be seen in the table that the

top two deciles of the distribution generate the largest portions of sales revenues. Therefore, if the

development of a vaccine were considered of very high social value it might be seen as appropriate

to attempt to create an incentive that matched some of the best selling drugs for rich country

diseases as a way to generate the multiple large scale research projects we observe for (for

example) diseases such as hypertension or cancer. The size of the commitment needed to match

these markets would need to be substantially increased given the skewed distribution of revenues

seen in the data.18


17
   Figures for the 1st decile, 2nd decile, and average product are taken directly from Grabowski et al.’s data.
Deriving the 3rd, 4th, and 5th decile figures required slight approximation due to data limitations. Details on
these calculations are available from the authors.
18
   It is noteworthy that very few of the products in the Grabowski et al. (2002) sample are likely to be
vaccines. Among existing vaccines, the hepatitis B vaccine may provide the best comparison to our
hypothetical malaria vaccine, as it is a relatively new antigen that has seen a widespread increase in demand
during the last decade. As evidence of a demand-induced R&D activity, Finkelstein (2004) reports an
increase in R&D investment on hepatitis B vaccines in response to the Advisory Committee on Immunization
                                                                                                            21




         To summarize our work in this section, an estimate of the net present value of revenues

that a vaccine advance market commitment would need to offer in order to match existing

commercial products would be $3.1 billion, in year 2004 dollars. Because the starting year of

purchases under the program is highly uncertain, the commitment should be indexed to account for

inflation; here we express all monetary values in 2004 dollars. In this section we also discussed

various reasons why donors may wish to adjust this benchmark figure upwards (for example,

because of potential subsequent, superior market entrants) or downwards (for example, because of

more directly-financed R&D than for a typical disease prevalent in developed countries); for the

remainder of this paper we focus on the benchmark $3.1 billion figure, but as we discuss in Section

4 readers can make calculations with adjusted figures using our web-based spreadsheet tool.



4.       Cost effectiveness of a vaccine advance market commitment

         We now consider the net present value of revenue and health cost-effectiveness estimates

that would be generated by a vaccine advance market commitment for three specific diseases

(malaria, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS) under various scenarios. These estimates have been

generated by a spreadsheet tool (available online at

http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/kremer/vaccine.html) that allows the user to manipulate

all relevant variables in a flexible way, thereby permitting the generation and analysis of a large

number of different scenarios.

         In the discussion below we provide details on the case of malaria as an illustration of the

type of calculations and assumptions that are necessary for this work. In Section 5, we also focus


Practice (ACIP) recommendation in 1991 to give hepatitis B immunization to US infants. Immunization rates
strongly increased thereafter, to almost 90 percent, and a significant number of additional clinical trials were
conducted. The worldwide market for hepatitis B vaccines currently lies at around $1 billion annually, which
makes the set of all hepatitis B vaccines comparable in market size to a single product with a NPV of sales
(assuming an eight percent real cost of capital) of approximately $6.49 billion. Details of this calculation are
available from the authors.
                                                                                                           22




on the example of malaria in illustrating to which parameters the cost effectiveness results are and

are not sensitive. We chose to focus on malaria since it is a disease for which it is relatively more

straightforward to make assumptions about who would be vaccinated and how, because (as we

discuss below) there are natural existing delivery systems through which to reach the two target

risk groups (namely, children under the age of five and woman pregnant for the first time). In

contrast, for diseases such as HIV and tuberculosis there are complex questions about who should

be vaccinated that are beyond the scope of this paper. However, as we make clear below, most of

the general conclusions below apply to vaccines for any of the three diseases.

         To obtain concrete cost effectiveness numbers we also need to consider a particular set of

contract provisions and vaccine characteristics including assumptions about which countries would

participate in the program, vaccine adoption rates, and sources of additional revenue to the vaccine

supplier (e.g. travelers’ or military purchases). These parameters and assumptions can be modified

in the spreadsheet, thus allowing the user to investigate the impact of alternative contract

parameters and different assumptions regarding take-up, disease burden, etc.            For example, the

spreadsheet allows the user to assess the revenue and cost-effectiveness consequences of different

combinations of price, quantity, and vaccine characteristics. Based on the user inputs as well as

recent data compiled on disease burden and population, the spreadsheet outputs the cost per

disability adjusted life year (DALY) saved by the program and the NPV of revenues that would

accrue to the vaccine supplier.19

         Since the values of revenues and cost per DALY saved are expressed in real terms at the

time the vaccine is developed, even though altering the years until a vaccine is developed will

change the nominal price paid, it will not alter the results of the calculations presented here.




19
   Disability adjusted life years, or DALYs, are a commonly used metric which attempt to account for both
life lost due to premature death and the loss of healthy life resulting from disease morbidity or disability.
                                                                                                            23




         The calculations presented in this section are intended to demonstrate that, once a vaccine

is developed, purchasing vaccine at the pre-specified price would be a very cost-effective

expenditure. In Section 5 we examine cost-effectiveness in the context of a somewhat more

complex issue – namely, the value of the commitment in accelerating the development and

distribution of a vaccine.

         As a benchmark for cost-effectiveness comparisons, we note that health interventions in

the poorest countries are generally regarded as highly cost effective if they cost less than $100 per

DALY saved (World Bank, 1993).20 More recently a country’s gross national product (GNP) per

capita has also been used as a benchmark (GAVI, 2004; WHO, 2000a) and in the United States, the

cost-effectiveness threshold is estimated to be as high as $50,000 to $100,000 per DALY saved

(Neumann et al., 2000). As an alternative benchmark, even at the lowest of recently negotiated

estimates of prices for antiretroviral drug treatments for HIV, the cost of purchasing and delivering

antiretrovirals using a directly observed treatment short-course (DOTS) is estimated to cost $613

per year of treatment.21

         To summarize our results, we find that under a reasonably conservative set of assumptions,

a commitment to pay $15 per person immunized for a malaria vaccine (or $5 per dose for a three-

dose vaccine) for the first 200 million people immunized (as recommended by the Center for

Global Development report [Barder et al., 2005]) would cost less than $15 per DALY saved,

including both purchase and delivery costs of the vaccine. Sales under the program would provide

about $3.2 billion in total NPV of revenues to the vaccine developer, comparable to the $3.1 billion


20
   In 2004 dollars, this would be approximately $128.
21
   Although estimates of the cost of antiretroviral treatment per year of life saved are sensitive to assumptions
about the cost of delivery and the epidemiological effects of treatment (which could be either positive or
negative, depending on behavioral response), the 2001 call by 133 Harvard faculty members for antiretroviral
treatment (Adams et al., 2001) estimated that purchasing and delivering antiretrovirals using a DOTS
approach would cost $1,100 per year. That analysis assumes an average cost of $650 per patient per year for
costs of antiretrovirals. Adjusting that analysis for the lowest of the recently negotiated estimates of
                                                                                                        24




in total NPV of revenues of the average product as discussed in Section 3. If sponsors wanted to

generate more competition, compensate developers for the risk that they might have to share the

market and increase the likelihood of a vaccine being developed more quickly, they could offer a

price of $28 per person immunized for the first 200,000,000 people immunized. Even in the

absence of potentially moving forward the date of vaccine development, this would generate a

market of $5.2 billion and cost less than $21 per DALY saved. This result is derived from baseline

assumptions which are detailed below for the case of malaria.

        Although we here do not focus on the details of our calculations for tuberculosis and

HIV/AIDS (these assumptions are described in detail in the spreadsheet tool), it is worth briefly

summarizing our main results for these diseases. For tuberculosis, under conservative assumptions

similar to those for malaria and a similar contract design, our simulations suggest that a

commitment to purchase a tuberculosis vaccine at $13 per person immunized for the first 200

million people immunized would cost $31 per DALY saved and would generate $3.3 billion in

total NPV of revenues to the vaccine developer.22 For the case allowing subsequent entrants under

a superiority clause, the analogous figures are a slightly higher but still modest cost per DALY

saved (less than $44) and $5.2 billion in total NPV of revenues to the vaccine developers.

        For HIV/AIDS, again using conservative assumptions and a similar contract (namely, $14

per person immunized for the first 200 million people immunized), our simulations suggest that a

commitment to purchase an HIV vaccine would cost less than $17 per DALY saved and would

generate about $3.3 billion in total NPV of revenues to the vaccine developer.23 For the case



antiretroviral costs, $140 per year (McNeil, 2004), suggests a cost per year of treatment of approximately
$613.
22
   Our simulated tuberculosis vaccine would protect with 60% efficacy for 20 years, and would be adopted at
rates consistent with current DPT3 rates among infants and a rate of 30% by older cohorts.
23
   Several important departures from the assumptions described below for the malaria vaccine simulation are
that we assume that the HIV vaccine would be delivered to school-age children at a cost of $2 per dose; that
adults would adopt the vaccine at a rate of 30% in countries in which the vaccine becomes available under
the program; and the vaccine would protect with 60% efficacy for 20 years.
                                                                                                      25




allowing subsequent entrants under a superiority clause, the analogous figures are $21 per DALY

saved and $5.2 billion in total NPV of revenues to the vaccine developers. Sensitivity analyses for

the malaria case are presented in Section 5, but we note that sensitivity analyses for the HIV/AIDS

and tuberculosis cases produce similar results.



Case study: Malaria

`         The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that more than 300 million people

contract clinical malaria every year, and that 1.1 million annually die of the disease (WHO, 2001).

Children who survive severe cases of malaria may suffer learning disorders and brain damage,

although those who reach age five acquire some immunity. Those with this limited natural

immunity rarely die from malaria, but often later in life they become weak and lethargic with the

disease, thus experiencing losses in welfare and productivity. Almost all malaria cases occur in

low-income countries, and about 90 percent of the victims live in sub-Saharan Africa (WHO,

2000b).

          The scientific challenges in developing an effective malaria vaccine are formidable, but in

recent years several candidate malaria vaccines have progressed to phase II clinical trials –

including at least three being studied in target (pediatric) populations in field settings (Ballou et al.,

2004). For example, a candidate vaccine from GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals (with support from

the Malaria Vaccine Initiative, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and the Mozambique

Ministry of Health) recently completed phase IIb trials, where the vaccine’s efficacy against severe

malaria disease was found to be 58 percent (Alonso et al., 2004). Two other candidate vaccines

currently being tested in pediatric populations include a vaccine candidate being led by the Walter

Reed Army Institute of Research (WRAIR), with support from the US Agency for International

Development (USAID), GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, and Statistics Collaborative Inc.; as well as
                                                                                                    26




a vaccine candidate being assessed by the University of Oxford, with support from the Gates

Malaria Partnership at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and the Wellcome

Trust.24

           Many steps remain before these or other candidate malaria vaccines would be ready for

widespread use. Vaccine advance market commitments can provide financial incentives to pull

these candidate vaccines through costly phase III clinical trials and other steps required for

licensure, towards final delivery.

           As discussed in Section 2, the appropriate size of an advance market commitment would

vary by disease depending on a number of factors, including how much R&D on candidate

products is being funded through directly-financed mechanisms. For the case of malaria, obviously

it is impossible to predict whether the leading GlaxoSmithKline candidate vaccine will be

successful in clinical trials. If the GlaxoSmithKline candidate vaccine is successful, a market size

commitment smaller than our benchmark size of $3.1 billion would likely be appropriate in light of

extensive directly financed R&D. On the other hand, in the case in which this GlaxoSmithKline

candidate vaccine is not successful, donors may wish to have an advance market commitment in

place to encourage the development of other candidate products – and in that case, the benchmark

commitment size of $3.1 billion may be appropriate. Such a commitment could be put in place

either now or after the realization of (for example) Phase III outcomes on the GlaxoSmithKline

candidate vaccine. Such design issues are beyond the scope of this paper, so here we simply

analyze the case in which the GlaxoSmithKline candidate vaccine is not successful, for which the

benchmark $3.1 billion commitment size may be appropriate.




24
  For details on these and other candidate malaria vaccines, see Ballou et al. (2004), the World Health
Organization’s website (http://www.who.int/vaccine_research/documents/en/malaria_table.pdf, accessed 30
May 2006), and the Malaria Vaccine Initiative (MVI) website (http://www.malariavaccine.org/ab-
current_projects.htm, accessed 30 May 2006).
                                                                                                        27




Contract provisions

        We consider a commitment that would offer an initial price of $15 per person (in 2004

dollars) for the first 200 million people immunized, after which the price would drop to $1 per

person immunized.

        Following the public health literature, we apply a default annual discount rate of three

percent to future DALYs saved and future expenses to the program sponsor. Firms, however, may

discount future revenues at a higher rate reflecting the cost of capital. We consider a real rate of

eight percent, close to the annual average return on the stock market (Siegal, 1998).



Vaccine characteristics

        In our base case, we consider a three-dose, 60 percent effective vaccine that would protect

for five years and could be added to the standard package of vaccines that are delivered under the

WHO’s Expanded Programme on Immunization (EPI). That package, which includes three

contacts with each child, costs $15, or $5 for every contact (World Bank, 1993). The majority of

this cost is due to delivery costs, as the price of the six traditional EPI vaccines is very low. The

World Bank estimated that adding the one-dose yellow fever vaccine and the fairly expensive

three-dose hepatitis B vaccine to the EPI package would increase the cost of the package by 15

percent, or $2.25, including both the purchase price and the delivery cost (World Bank, 1993).

Both yellow fever and hepatitis B were expensive vaccines, so we assume that the incremental cost

of adding a three-dose vaccine to the EPI package would be no more than $0.75. However, as

discussed in the sensitivity analysis below, even at several multiples of this cost, delivery would

still be quite inexpensive. (Note that in the spreadsheet tool, extra delivery costs can be specified

for vaccines that are not compatible with the EPI schedule, but in the base case for malaria

discussed here we consider vaccines that are in conformity with the EPI schedule.)
                                                                                                       28




        Vaccine efficacy reflects the percentage of infections that are prevented by immunization,

and defaults to 60 percent. The duration of protection reflects the number of years after

immunization that the vaccine protects against infection, and defaults to five years.



Countries covered

        An important set of assumptions concerns the countries that will participate in the program,

i.e. the populations for which the vaccine doses will be purchased. This selection has a

considerable impact on the effectiveness of the program, because the burden of malaria and vaccine

adoptions rates differ widely across countries. In the spreadsheet tool, we allow selection by

several different criteria, including a gross national income (GNI) per capita cutoff ($1000, the

cutoff currently used by the Vaccine Fund25, is the default), a ‘manual’ selection of countries, and a

minimum disease prevalence cutoff. In the baseline case presented here we use the $1000 GNI per

capita cutoff to define eligibility, and from there assume that eligible countries will participate if

vaccination is cost-effective (i.e. less than $100 per DALY saved) at delivery cost in that country.

That is, we assume that countries in which vaccination would not be cost-effective at delivery cost

would not participate in the program. In addition, China is not included in the program because its

GNI will soon surpass the $1000 cutoff, and because falciparum malaria, the most deadly form of

malaria, is only a problem for a tiny fraction (less than 1 percent) of China’s population.



Adoption

        Obtaining cost-effectiveness estimates for a vaccine requires us to make additional

assumptions about the adoption patterns for the vaccine. Because there is little historical data to


25
  The Vaccine Fund is the financing arm to the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI).
The Vaccine Fund offers support to qualifying governments of the world’s poorest countries for: (1) new and
under-used vaccines; (2) funding to help governments strengthen their basic immunization services; and (3)
                                                                                                        29




guide assumptions, in general we make conservative assumptions about take-up rates. In addition,

the robustness checks we will present in Section 5 suggest our estimates are relatively insensitive to

assumptions about adoption.

        Adoption of the vaccine will likely gradually increase over several years and eventually

reach a steady-state level. In our base case scenario we consider a linearly increasing take-up path

that takes seven years to reach the steady state. In this base case, the uptake rates for new cohorts

(infants) are set to the country-by-country immunization rates for the diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus

three-dose vaccine (DPT3) reported by the WHO (2002), plus five percentage points. This

assumes that the immunization rates would be at least as high as the current DPT3 rates if the

vaccine could be added to the EPI schedule. We argue it is appropriate to assume the addition of

five percentage points to the current DPT3 rates for several reasons, including the likely increase in

immunization rates that will result from the recent influx of financial support for immunizations

(for example, from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation), economic development that will likely

increase immunization rates (for example, due to increased urbanization), and immunization rates

that may be higher if parents value immunization more if a malaria vaccine were available. The

spreadsheet also allows the user to base uptake rates on diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus first-dose

(DPT1) or measles coverage rates, or to specify a single rate for all countries.

        In the transition years of the program, there may be backlog immunizations of children

who have not yet acquired natural immunity to the disease. Given that expanding the program

beyond those relatively easy to reach will be difficult, we assume that only a minority of this

population will be reached. Specifically, we assume that 10 percent of the children aged 0-4 will

be immunized.




safe injection equipment in the form of auto-disable syringes and safe disposal boxes. More information is
available online at http://www.vaccinealliance.org (accessed 30 May 2006).
                                                                                                             30




         Women temporarily lose their natural immunity to malaria during their first pregnancy, and

thus we include some immunizations of pregnant women. The number of pregnant women who are

in their first pregnancy and thus need to be vaccinated is approximated by taking one fourth of

annual births.26 The default immunization rate for this population is set to the tetanus toxoid (TT2)

rate reported by the WHO (2002) plus five percentage points (for reasons described above). The

tetanus toxoid vaccine is already given to pregnant women and thus can serve as a proxy for the

access to and demand for vaccinations in that subpopulation.



Additional revenues

         The vaccine developer would also receive revenue outside of program purchases, such as

private purchases in covered countries and purchases in non-covered countries (such as the

travelers’ and military markets in high-income countries, as well as middle-income countries where

malaria is prevalent).

         In the base case we project a total market of $750 million in NPV of revenues (2004

dollars) in high- and middle-income countries. This estimate is based on annual purchases of

malaria prophylaxis drugs, as presumably people would be willing to pay comparable amounts for

a malaria vaccine as for malaria prophylaxis drugs. An estimate from the popular press (Reuters,

2003) and correspondence with Pfizer suggest that the annual market for malaria prophylaxis drugs

from sales to travelers and tourists from industrialized countries and the military could be as much

as $200 million, but others cite much lower figures. If a vaccine captured $100 million in peak

sales and the profile of sales over time followed that of a typical pharmaceutical in the Grabowski

et al. (2002) sample, the total net present value of those sales would be about $750.7 million.27


26
   The average fertility rate (births per woman) in low-income countries in 2002 was four (World Bank,
2005), hence our assumption of one-fourth of total births being first pregnancies.
27
   With an 11 percent real cost of capital (as in Grabowski et al., 2002), this figure changes from $750.7
million to $613.9 million. Note that for both of these figures, we have not subtracted out 10 percent for
                                                                                                        31




Adding in $100 million of additional revenues from private sales in low- and middle-income

countries yields a default of $850 million in net present value of revenues outside the commitment

program.



Baseline results

        Given the assumptions outlined above, along with a recent collection of data from the

World Health Organization (1997) and the US Bureau of the Census (2002) on disease burden and

fertility, as well as estimates of the distribution of the burden of disease by age and gender, the

spreadsheet tool projects the total discounted number of DALYs that would be saved by the

program. It also calculates the total cost, including delivery costs, and the revenues to the vaccine

supplier from purchases at the initial (high) price. The purchases at the subsequent lower price are

ignored for the NPV calculations because the low price would presumably be close to the marginal

cost of production and because for later sales it is increasingly less likely that the supplier would

remain the same.

        We then calculate the expected number of DALYs that would be saved by the program

each year by multiplying the number of immunizations by vaccine efficacy and by the DALY

burden of disease faced by members of the population immunized over their lifetime or the lifetime

of the vaccine. The cost of the program in each year is calculated as the number of vaccinations

multiplied by the total cost of each vaccination (purchase price and delivery cost). As discussed

above, we follow the public health literature and discount both future DALYs saved and future

expenditures to the program sponsor at a real discount rate of three percent. The total discounted

revenue to the supplier in each year is calculated as the number of purchases at the initial price

multiplied by the initial price, discounted at the real cost of capital of eight percent. In order to


lower marketing expenditures, as we did for our previous work, as that correction would here seem
inappropriate.
                                                                                                    32




evaluate the appropriateness of the size of the price commitment, one can then compare the NPV of

revenues from a new vaccine to the adjusted distribution of revenues from a sample of existing

commercial products, as detailed in Section 3.

        These calculations may underestimate the cost-effectiveness of the vaccine. For example,

these calculations do not include any epidemiological “herd” benefits—that is, vaccinating a

significant fraction of the population may slow the spread of a disease, and thus benefits may spill

over to the unvaccinated. They also do not include health benefits to people in middle- and high-

income countries, or benefits to adults in low-income countries who purchase a vaccine privately.

They assume that the vaccine would be given randomly throughout a country and thus do not factor

in any benefits of targeting vaccine delivery within countries to areas that have the most severe

disease problems. Finally, these calculations do not include the benefits of increasing vaccination

rates for other diseases that might result from parents bringing their children into clinics to

vaccinate them against malaria.

        For a given set of specified assumptions, the main outputs of the spreadsheet tool are the

total NPV of revenues that would accrue to the vaccine supplier and the cost per DALY of the

vaccine, both in 2004 dollars. Under the base case assumptions described above, a commitment to

pay $15 per person immunized for the first 200 million individuals immunized would produce a

total NPV of revenue of $3.2 billion (in 2004 dollars), comparable to the $3.1 billion benchmark

for the average existing NCE as discussed in Section 3.

        The spreadsheet tool also reports the annual number of vaccinations in the steady state, the

annual number of DALYs saved in the steady state, and the overall cost per DALY saved. Under

the baseline assumptions, over 54 million people would be immunized annually, saving almost 14

million DALYs per year in the steady state. Overall, the program would cost less than $15 per
                                                                                                    33




DALY saved, which is highly cost effective relative to, for example, the $100 per DALY cost-

effectiveness standard.



5.      Sensitivity analyses

        In this section, we discuss the cost-effectiveness of a vaccine market commitment program

when the base case assumptions are varied. The sensitivity analyses reported below also highlight

the key aspects of a vaccine that make it cost effective and that therefore should be carefully

considered in the choice of eligibility criteria for a product to be purchased under the program.

        The cost-effectiveness of the vaccine is relatively insensitive to changes in assumptions

about efficacy, take-up rates, and the per immunized-person price offered. For example, a malaria

vaccine that was only 50 percent effective would still cost less than $20 per DALY. Figure 1 shows

the relationship between efficacy and cost per DALY, holding constant all other inputs, including

the set of countries participating in the program. Even a 30 percent effective vaccine would be

highly cost-effective.

        If adoption of the vaccine is very slow, the program would still remain very cost-effective

from a public health perspective and would still provide a considerable amount of revenue to the

vaccine developer – although somewhat less revenue than in the case of a more rapidly adopted

vaccine, since under this type of contract the value of payments for the high-price vaccine doses

declines as a result of discounting when these vaccinations are pushed further into the future. If it

takes fifteen years for adoption to reach steady-state levels and adoption only reached levels 10

percentage points below the DPT3 rates, the program would still cost less than $20 per DALY

saved and would generate $2.7 billion in NPV of revenue for biopharmaceutical companies (in

2004 dollars).
                                                                                                   34




        A vaccine commitment would also be cost-effective at the time of vaccine development

under a wide range of contract provisions. For example, to match the revenues of drugs falling

between the 70th and 80th percentile and generating a market roughly comparable to $3.61 billion in

net present value of sales, a commitment could offer $17 per person immunized for the first 200

million people immunized, at a cost of about $16 per DALY saved. To match the revenues of drugs

falling between the 80th and 90th percentile and generating a market roughly comparable to $5.73

billion in net present value of sales, a commitment could offer $25 per person immunized for the

first 250 million people immunized, at a cost of about $23 per DALY saved. As discussed below,

if raising the price offered per person immunized accelerated the vaccine development time, a

larger commitment might prove more attractive than a smaller one.

        Cost-effectiveness is sensitive to assumptions about the number of doses and the duration

of protection. Vaccines with relatively low efficacy will still be cost effective if they can be

delivered with the current (three-dose) EPI vaccine package, because adding one additional vaccine

to this package is relatively inexpensive. In the baseline case, we have assumed a $0.75 cost of

adding a three-dose vaccine, although even at several multiples of this the delivery would be quite

inexpensive. For example, assuming an incremental delivery cost of triple that amount ($2.25 per

person immunized) increases the cost per DALY saved to about $20 if the set of countries included

is held fixed, and augments the cost per DALY by only pennies if we assume that only countries in

which the vaccine would be cost-effective at delivery cost adopt the vaccine. In contrast, delivery

outside the EPI schedule would be relatively costly. For example, at our assumed cost of $5 per

dose, adding two doses outside of the EPI schedule would bring the cost per DALY to about $60

per DALY saved if the set of participating countries is held constant, or about $25 per DALY if

countries with low disease burdens opt out because delivery of the vaccine would not be cost-

effective.
                                                                                                    35




        Similarly, cost-effectiveness is sensitive to changing assumptions about the duration of

protection. Because malaria primarily kills children under the age of five who have not yet gained

natural immunity, the cost per DALY increases rapidly for vaccines that provide less than five

years of protection. For example, if a vaccine provided only two years of protection, the cost per

DALY saved would rise to $26. A lesson to be learned from these sensitivity analyses is that,

when specifying the product profile, any vaccine commitment for malaria should take these dosing

and protection duration issues into account.



Cost-effectiveness in the case of accelerated development and distribution

        The above calculations demonstrate that once a vaccine is developed, purchasing vaccine

at the pre-specified price would be a very cost-effective expenditure. There is little reason to fear,

therefore, that a vaccine commitment would tie donors to future purchases that would not be

worthwhile, if a vaccine were developed. We now examine a somewhat more complex issue –

namely, the value of the commitment in accelerating the development and distribution of a

vaccine. To assess this, we need to make assumptions about what would have happened in the

absence of a commitment.

        In the absence of a price commitment both development and adoption of the vaccine could

be pushed further into the future. Although it is difficult to know how much a vaccine commitment

would speed up vaccine development, one indication that the effect may be substantial comes from

the Orphan Drug Act. While only ten new orphan drugs were discovered in the decade prior to the

Orphan Drug Act, 200 were discovered in the next decade (Grabowski, 2003). A vaccine

commitment is also likely to substantially accelerate access in the poorest countries since the

sponsor’s price is paid on a per-person immunized basis. In contrast, when the hepatitis B vaccine

was introduced at $30 per dose, it was rarely used in low-income countries (Muraskin, 1995;
                                                                                                          36




Galambos, 1995). More generally, the historical record suggests adoption of new vaccines in poor

countries could be delayed by 10 to 15 years in the absence of a market commitment.28 Given the

substantial burdens of diseases such as HIV, malaria, and tuberculosis, the health benefits of

speeding development and adoption of such vaccines would be considerable.

         If a vaccine market commitment advanced vaccine development by ten years and

accelerated access in poor countries by ten years, it would still cost only about $23 per additional

DALY saved. Even in the extreme case in which a price commitment accelerated vaccine

development by only one year and adoption in poor countries by only two years, the program

would cost about $80-$90 per additional DALY saved—still slightly less than the oft-cited $100

per DALY cost-effectiveness threshold for the poorest countries. The analogous figures for the

larger commitment size we derived in the presence of a superiority clause are $38 per additional

DALY saved if the commitment advanced vaccine development by ten years and accelerated

access in poor countries by ten years, and $163 per additional DALY saved if the commitment

accelerated vaccine development by only one year and adoption in poor countries by only two

years. (These figures are all relative to the absence of any commitment.)

         By a similar line of reasoning, if increases in the size of the commitment accelerated

development of a vaccine, it may be worthwhile to undertake a larger commitment. As previously

discussed, paying $25 per person for the first 250 million people immunized rather than $15 per

person for the first 200 million people would roughly meet the average net present value of


28
  We estimate delays in access based on the historical record, but one could argue that the circumstances
would be different now or in the future. However, if one believes that even in the absence of a commitment,
donors would immediately buy a vaccine and distribute it at an on-patent price comparable to the initial price
offered under the vaccine commitment, then the cost of purchasing and distributing the vaccine would be the
same with or without a vaccine commitment, and any benefits of accelerated development associated with
announcing a commitment in advance would be without cost in the ultimate price tag for a vaccine. In this
case, if the money will be spent on the vaccine anyway, it is clearly more cost-effective to reap the benefits
of faster development by announcing this policy in advance and entering into a vaccine commitment.
Conversely, if one believes that companies would have to give away a vaccine in poor countries at cost, it is
difficult to argue that a vaccine commitment would not be critical in advancing vaccine development.
                                                                                                    37




products between the 80th and 90th percentiles of existing commercial products. The larger

commitment would cost less than $100 per additional DALY saved if it advanced development and

adoption by only three years relative to the smaller commitment, and would cost about $23 per

DALY saved overall.

        It is also possible to ask what benefits -- in terms of faster vaccine development or gains in

efficacy -- would make our larger market size estimate (with a superiority clause, $5.24 billion)

“worth it” in terms of the additional DALYs saved costing less than $100. We estimate that a 10%

increase in our benchmark efficacy assumption (that is, moving from 60% to 70% efficacy) would

be worth it in this sense. Alternatively, if development and adoption of the vaccine were speeded

by three years this larger market size would in this sense also be worthwhile.



6.       Conclusions

        A variety of simulations suggest that under a wide range of values, an advance market

vaccine commitment may be sufficient to stimulate substantial research towards a desired vaccine,

and from a public health perspective still be extremely cost-effective. Our estimates suggest that a

commitment of $3.1 billion in 2004 dollars in net present value of sales would be comparable to

the value of sales earned by the average of a sample of recently launched commercial products,

adjusted for lower marketing costs. Of course in expectation, the larger the commitment, the more

biopharmaceutical firms will enter the search for a vaccine, and the faster a vaccine is likely to be

developed. We have also discussed a number of other factors (such as the stage of product

development, or the amount of R&D which has been financed directly) that donors may want to

consider when designing the appropriate size of an advance market commitment.

        We have focused here on the example of a malaria vaccine; however, as discussed

throughout our general analysis applies more broadly. In particular, estimates for HIV and
                                                                                             38




tuberculosis vaccines analogous to those presented here for malaria can be derived via the

downloadable spreadsheet tool.
                                                                                                                  39




Table 1. Net present value (NPV) of sales


                                                                 Average
    Typical             Typical              Typical            product in           Typical             Typical
   product in          product in           product in         entire sample        product in          product in
   1st decile          2nd decile           3rd decile                              4th decile          5th decile

 15.80 billion         5.73 billion        3.61 billion        3.09 billion        2.48 billion         1.34 billion

Notes: All figures are in 2004 dollars. Figures have been adjusted down 10 percent for lower marketing costs.

Source: Grabowski et al. (2002) data, authors’ calculations.
                                                                                            40




Figure 1.


                                            Vaccine efficacy and cost-effectiveness

                                  35
   Cost per DALY saved (2004 $)




                                  30

                                  25

                                  20
                                  15

                                  10

                                   5

                                   0
                                       20        40           60              80      100
                                                          Percent effective
                                                                                                                     41




Appendix

This table presents the sales revenue data underlying our analysis in Section 3. Special thanks to
Henry Grabowski for generously sharing this data with us.


                                  Mean Product                                    Product in Top Decile

Year                  Sales       NPV of Sales NPV of Sales               Sales        NPV of Sales NPV of Sales
                                  (8% real cost (11% real cost                         (8% real cost (11% real cost
                                    of capital)   of capital)                            of capital)   of capital)

t = -1                     0.0                0.0               0.0              0.0               0.0              0.0
t=0                        0.0                0.0               0.0              0.0               0.0              0.0
t = 1 (launch)            83.0               83.0              83.0            293.5             293.5            293.5
t=2                      155.6              144.1             140.2            545.6             505.2            491.5
t=3                      211.6              181.4             171.7            791.0             678.2            642.0
t=4                      267.6              212.4             195.7           1094.8             869.1            800.5
t=5                      325.7              239.4             214.5           1447.7            1064.1            953.6
t=6                      371.6              252.9             220.5           1729.4            1177.0           1026.3
t=7                      414.7              261.3             221.7           2000.4            1260.6           1069.5
t=8                      434.5              253.5             209.3           2200.5            1284.0           1059.9
t=9                      457.4              247.1             198.5           2381.2            1286.5           1033.3
t = 10                   457.8              229.0             179.0           2503.5            1252.4            978.7
t = 11                   444.4              205.8             156.5           2539.2            1176.1            894.3
t = 12                   441.4              189.3             140.0           2587.2            1109.6            820.9
t = 13                   416.2              165.3             119.0           2582.1            1025.4            738.1
t = 14                   391.8              144.1             100.9           2565.9             943.5            660.8
t = 15                   307.8              104.8              71.4           1989.8             677.4            461.6
t = 16                   232.1               73.2              48.5           1486.0             468.4            310.6
t = 17                   185.7               54.2              35.0           1188.8             347.0            223.8
t = 18                   148.5               40.1              25.2            951.0             257.0            161.3
t = 19                   118.8               29.7              18.2            760.8             190.4            116.3
t = 20                    95.1               22.0              13.1            608.6             141.0             83.8
sum                     5961.3             3132.8            2561.8          32247.0           16006.4          12820.2
Sum in 2004$            6539.4             3436.6            2810.3          35374.3           17558.7          14063.5
Less 10%                5885.5             3092.9            2529.3          31836.9           15802.8          12657.2
(for lower
marketing
expenditures)

Notes: All figures are in millions of year 2000 dollars, except as noted otherwise. The sales distribution for the mean
product, as presented above, was scaled for several cases discussed in this paper such that the peak (year 10) sales were
equal to the following: $500 million for the “industry outsider” estimate, $100 million for the outside-of-program
purchases market estimate, and $865.2 million for the hepatitis B vaccine market estimate. Details of these calculations
are available upon request from the authors.
                                                                                               42




References

Adams G et al. “Consensus Statement on Antiretroviral Treatment for AIDS in Poor Countries.”
2001. Available online: http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/bioethics/pdf/consensus_aids_therapy.pdf
[accessed 30 May 2006]

Alonso P et al. “Efficacy of the RTS, S/AS02A Vaccine Against Plasmodium Falciparum Infection
and Disease in Young African Children: Randomised Controlled Trial.” Lancet 2004, 364(9443):
1411-1420.

Angell M. The Truth About Drug Companies. Random House: New York, NY, 2004.

Ballou W et al. “Update on the clinical development of candidate malaria vaccines.” American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 2004, 71(2 Supplement): 239-247.

Barder O et al. Making Markets for Vaccines. Center for Global Development: Washington, DC,
2005. Available online: http://www.cgdev.org/section/initiatives/_active/vaccinedevelopment/
[accessed 30 May 2006]

Berndt E, Hurvitz J. “Vaccine advance-purchase agreements for low-income countries: Practical
issues.” Health Affairs 2005, 24(3): 653-665.

Berndt E et al. “Estimating the Required Volume of a Malaria Vaccine Commitment.” Mimeo:
Cambridge, MA, 2003.

Bohrer R, Prince J “A tale of two proteins: The FDA's uncertain interpretation of the Orphan Drug
Act.” Harvard Journal of Law & Technology 1999, 12(2): 364-417.

Brown G. “Speech by the RT Gordon Brown MP, Chancellor of the Exchequer at the BBC World
Service Trust conference.” 24 November, 2004. Available online: http://www.hm-
treasury.gov.uk./newsroom_and_speeches/press/2004/press_94_04.cfm [accessed 30 May 2006]

DiMasi J et al. “The Price of Innovation: New Estimates of Drug Development Costs.” Journal of
Health Economics 2003, 22: 151-185.

Finkelstein A. “Static and Dynamic Effects of Health Policy: Evidence from the Vaccine Industry.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 2004, 119(2): 527-564.

G8 Information Centre. “G7/G8 Summit Meetings, St. Petersburg Summit Documents: Fight
Against Infectious Disease.” 2006. Available online:
http://www.g7.utoronto.ca/summit/2006stpetersburg/infdis.html [accessed 23 July 2006]

Galambos L. Networks of Innovation: Vaccine Development at Merck, Sharp & Dohme, and
Mulford, 1895-1995. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1995.

Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI). “Health, Immunization, and Economic
Growth, Research Briefing #2, Vaccines are Cost-effective: A Summary of Recent Research.”
2004. Available online:
                                                                                                  43




http://www.gavialliance.org/General_Information/Immunization_informa/Economic_Impact/vacc_
cost.php [accessed 30 May 2006]

Grabowski H. “Increasing R&D Incentives for Neglected Diseases – Lessons from the Orphan
Drug Act.” Mimeo: Duke University, 2003.

Grabowski H, Vernon J. “A New Look at the Returns and Risks to Pharmaceutical R&D.”
Management Science 1990, 36: 804-821.

Grabowski H, Vernon J, DiMasi J. “Returns on Research and Development for 1990s New Drug
Introductions.” PharmacoEconomics 2002, 20 (Supplement 3): 11-29.

HM Treasury. “Statement by G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors.”2-3 December,
2005. Available online: http://www.hm-
treasury.gov.uk/otherhmtsites/g7/news/g7_statement_031205.cfm [accessed 30 May 2006]

Kremer M, Glennerster R. Strong Medicine: Creating Incentives for Pharmaceutical Research on
Neglected Diseases. Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, 2004.

McNeil D. “Plan to Bring Generic AIDS Drugs to Poor Nations.” New York Times 2004, April 6:
F06.

Muraskin W. The War Against Hepatitis B: A History of the International Task Force on Hepatitis
B Immunization. University of Pennsylvania Press: Philadelphia, PA, 1995.

Neumann P et al. “Are Pharmaceuticals Cost-Effective? A Review of the Evidence.” Health Affairs
2000, 19(2): 92-109.

Reuters. “Pfizer Announces Potential Malaria Discovery.” June 17, 2003.

Rin-Laures L-H, Janofsky D “Recent developments concerning the Orphan Drug Act.” Harvard
Journal of Law & Technology 1991, 4(Spring): 269-299.

Robbins-Roth C. From Alchemy to IPO: The Business of Biotechnology. Perseus Publishing:
Boulder, CO, 2000.

Rosenthal M et al. “Promotion of Prescription Drugs to Consumers.” New England Journal of
Medicine 2002, 346(7): 498-505.

Siegal J. Stocks for the Long Run. McGraw Hill: New York, NY, 1998.

United States Bureau of the Census. International Data Base, Table 028: “Age-Specific Fertility
Rates and Selected Derived Measures.” 2000. Available online:
http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/idbnew.html [accessed 30 May 2006]

World Bank. Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries. Oxford Medical Publications,
Oxford University Press for the World Bank: New York, NY, 1993.
                                                                                                44




World Bank. World Development Indicators. World Bank: Washington, DC, 2005.

World Health Organization (WHO). Investing in Health Research and Development: Report of the
Ad Hoc Committee on Health Research Relating to Future Intervention Options. WHO: Geneva,
1996.

World Health Organization (WHO). “World Malaria Situation in 1994, Part I.” Weekly
Epidemiological Record 1997, 72(36): 269-274.

World Health Organization (WHO). “Less-Used Vaccines against Major Diseases Are Cost-
Effective, Researchers Conclude.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 2000, 78(2): 274.

World Health Organization (WHO). World Health Report 2000. WHO: Geneva, 2000.

World Health Organization (WHO). World Health Report 2001. WHO: Geneva, 2001.

World Health Organization. “Vaccines, Immunizations, and Biologicals: Statistics and Graphs.”
2002. Available online: http://www.who.int/vaccines-surveillance/StatsAndGraphs.htm [accessed
31 March 2006]
