                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              MY POLICIES OR YOURS:
                   DOES OECD SUPPORT FOR AGRICULTURE INCREASE
                        POVERTY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES?

                                          Margaret McMillan
                                          Alix Peterson Zwane
                                              Nava Ashraf

                                         Working Paper 11289
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11289


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2005




We thank Pongrat Aroonvatanaporn, Shilpa Phadke, Demian Sanchez and Jesse Tack for excellent research
assistance and Mitali Das, Bill Easterly, Will Masters, Demian Sanchez, Matthias Schuendeln participants
in the NBER conferences, and especially Ann Harrison for helpful comments and suggestions. All remaining
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Nava Ashraf, Margaret McMillan, and Alix Peterson Zwane. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
My Policies or Yours: Have OECD Agricultural Policies Affected Incomes in Developing Countries?
Nava Ashraf, Margaret McMillan, and Alix Peterson Zwane
NBER Working Paper No. 11289
April 2005, Revised January 2006
JEL No. F0, O0, Q0

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the impact of rich-country agricultural support on the poor. Using
non-parametric analysis we establish that the majority of poor countries are consistently net
importers of food products that are heavily supported by OECD governments. Using a cross-country
regression framework we measure the overall impact of agricultural support policies in rich countries
on poverty and average incomes in poor countries. We find no support in the cross-country analysis
for the claim that OECD polices worsen poverty in developing countries. To better understand what
might drive these results, we turn to national employment and household consumption and
expenditure surveys from Mexico. There are four important findings from the country case study:
(1) the majority of the poorest corn farmers in Mexico report that they never sell any corn, (2)
Mexico's own policies (signing NAFTA) have dramatically reduced the Mexican producer price of
corn, (3) US corn subsidies have had a limited impact on this price and, (4) domestic policies have
largely cushioned Mexican corn farmers from the drop in corn prices. Taken together, the evidence
suggests that a reduction in rich-country agricultural support that raises world food prices is likely
to hurt the poorest countries but may have little impact at all on the poorest farmers within these

countries.

Margaret McMillan                                     Nava Ashraf
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Tufts University                                      Harvard University
Medford, MA 02155                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
mmcmilla@tufts.edu                                    ashraf@fas.harvard.edu

Alix Peterson Zwane
Department of Agricultural and Resource
Economics
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
zwane@are.berkeley.edu
“The rural poor [in Mexico] growing maize for subsistence saw their livelihoods
destroyed by a flood of cheap US imports.”
      -Oxfam briefing on agricultural subsidies, 2002

“It must be acknowledged that unqualified assertions by many, including the heads of
some multilateral institutions, that subsidies and other interventions in agriculture in the
OECD countries are hurting the poor countries are not grounded in facts… The claim
that the change will bring net gains to the least developed countries as a whole is at best
questionable and at worst outright wrong.”
        - Economist Arvind Panagariya, 2002

1    Introduction

        Rich countries are under increasing pressure from around the world to end support
to agriculture. Agricultural subsidies and price supports allow Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries to sell their agricultural products on
world markets at prices that are below the cost of production. 1 Critics claim that these
policies inflict harm on poor countries by depressing world commodity prices. 2                 3


Further, they argue that these policies are likely to hurt the poorest residents of the poor
countries because poor people are often farmers. Thus, eliminating support for rich
country farmers will raise world prices and the incomes of the poor. Our goal in this
paper is to evaluate these claims systematically by measuring the impact of OECD
agricultural policies on poverty in developing countries.
        Because of the diversity both within and among developing countries, the extent
to which rich country support policies translate into lower incomes in developing
countries is an empirical question. Many least developed countries, especially in Africa,
are net importers of food. As net food importers, they may be hurt by higher commodity
prices (Panagariya 2002, 2004, Valdes and McCalla 1999). Some countries may import

1
  Transfers to agricultural producers from consumers and taxpayers as a result of income and price support
policies equaled $21,000 per farmer in the United States (US) and $16,000 per farmer in the European
Union (EU) in 1998-2000 (OECD 2001). This is almost one hundred times greater than per capita incomes
in the least developed countries.
2
  Some also argue that these subsidies increase the volatility of commodity prices since support policies
that are counter-cyclical with respect to domestic prices or shocks provide incentives for increased
production when world prices are relatively low.
3
  James D. Wolfensohn, president of the World Bank, has stated that rich countries are “squandering” $1
billion a day on farm subsidies that hurt farmers in Latin America and Africa. Stanley Fischer, who was the
IMF’s deputy managing director in the 1990’s, has said the United States, Europe, and Japan pursue
agricultural protection policies that are “scandalous” because of the harm they inflict on poor countries
(New York Times, September 30, 2002).


                                                                                                     2
cereals, such as maize and rice, but export other agricultural products such as sugar or
cotton. Higher prices for exports and imports will have net effects that are difficult to
predict ex ante. Even within importing countries, the poorest members of society may be
net sellers of food.
         We begin our analysis with an investigation into the relationship between income
per capita and the value of net cereal, food, and agricultural (food plus non-food) exports
for each of the three decades leading up to 2000. We find that – on average - the poorest
countries have historically been net importers of cereals and food, the products most
heavily supported by the OECD countries, just as they are today. That this pattern has not
changed over the past thirty years casts some doubt on the notion that “dumping” turned
exporters into importers. We also find that the poorest countries are – on average - net
exporters of all agricultural products. However, with the important exception of cotton,
the non-food agricultural products are typically not the products supported by the
OECD. 4
         What about the poor people in poor countries? To determine whether OECD
policy hurts the poorest residents of the poor countries, we use a cross-country regression
framework in which the head-count poverty rate (or average income) is the dependent
variable 5 . Our innovation is to include as an explanatory variable a measure of rich-
country support for the agricultural products produced in the developing country in
question. To our knowledge, this is the first use of this strategy to quantify the impacts of
rich-country agricultural support policies on poor countries. 6 Also using this framework,
we assess the relative importance of own-country characteristics and policies. We find no



4
  Panagariya (Financial Times 2004) has recently made a similar point.
5
  We introduce a new variable into a standard cross-country regression framework previously employed by
others including Easterly and Levine (2003), Rodrik, Subramanian and Trebi (2002), and Acemoglu,
Johnson, and Robinson (2001), and Frankel and Romer (1999).
6
  There is some evidence that terms of trade can affect incomes and poverty in developing countries. Sarel
(1997) presents evidence that improvements in terms of trade are significantly negatively correlated with
changes in income inequality in an OLS regression. He argues that since “policies can rarely affect directly
terms of trade dynamics,” the implications of this finding are limited. However, policy changes in the
OECD can directly affect the magnitude and nature of agricultural support, which in term may affect
commodity prices and developing countries’ terms of trade. Acemoglu and Ventura (2002) present
evidence that terms of trade may be quantitatively important for explaining cross-country income
differences using an instrumental variables approach to account for the endogenous relationship between
growth and changes in terms of trade.


                                                                                                      3
support in the cross-country analysis for the claim that – on average - OECD polices
worsen poverty in developing countries.
        To better understand the within-country distributional implications of rich-country
agricultural subsidies, we complement our macro work with a case study of Mexican corn
farmers using data at the farmer and household level. This case is instructive for several
reasons. First, Mexico is often offered as a cautionary example of the impacts of
agricultural trade liberalization on rural poverty. Second, the case of Mexico raises a
number of issues, such as the importance of domestic policy, which can help to inform
our cross-country analysis. Finally, we choose Mexico because rich, nationally
representative and previously unexploited data sets are available. 7
        Evidence from Mexico confirms the importance of domestic policies relative to
international policies that affect commodity border prices, and highlights the importance
of distributional issues masked by the cross-country analysis. In the mid-1990s the
Mexican government initiated the liberalization of the corn sector in Mexico. As
anticipated, this liberalization lead to a sharp decrease in the producer price of corn and
an increase in Mexican corn imports from the US. Because this liberalization took place
in the context of US corn subsidies that lower border prices, the US is sometimes held
responsible for the price decline and increased poverty among Mexican corn farmers.
Contrary to this popular view, our evidence suggests that US corn subsidies have had a
limited impact on the border price of corn. In addition, because the majority of the
poorest corn farmers do not sell corn in the market, their incomes were not directly
affected by the decline in the producer price of corn. By contrast, a majority of the
medium and large corn farmers do participate in the market. Medium-sized corn farmers
experienced a sharp decline in real income while the income of the largest corn farmers
actually increased. Transfer payments to all corn farmers – also part of the corn market
“liberalization” - increased but were structured so that benefits went disproportionately to
the rich farmers.


7
  Our data on Mexico come from INEGI (the Mexican Statistical Agency) and are drawn from two different
surveys, the Encuesta Nacional de Empleo (ENE), an individual-level national employment survey,
including a rich agricultural supplement, and the Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares
(ENIGH), a household-level income and expenditure survey Both surveys were conducted both pre and
post NAFTA though not always for the same years


                                                                                                 4
        Our results stand in stark contrast with the large body of literature that has been
devoted to examining the potential impact of agricultural trade liberalization on
developing countries using computable general equilibrium (CGE) models. 8 While the
magnitudes of CGE estimates vary, agricultural trade liberalization is typically predicted
to increase world commodity prices to the overall benefit of developing countries. For
example, Beghin et al. (2002) estimate that the removal of all agricultural subsidies and
trade barriers could increase rural value added in low- and middle-income countries by
$60 billion per year, which, as they note, exceeds most targets for development assistance
by some 20 percent. Probably the most important reason for the differences in results is
that other studies have not focused explicitly on poverty but rather on developing
countries as a whole. Additionally, as pointed out by Panagariya (Financial Times 2004),
many studies combine liberalization by developing countries with liberalization by
developed countries when estimating welfare impacts. We focus solely on the impacts of
rich country polices on poor countries and the poor residents of these countries.
        In interpreting our results, a few caveats are in order. First, our measure of OECD
policy is effectively the production-weighted average implicit export subsidy faced by
each country in our sample. A variety of other OECD actions such as support for minor
crops, import tariffs on products not produced domestically (e.g., coffee), phytosanitary
regulations, and discretionary protection applied when imports rise may also be important
for developing countries but are beyond the scope of this paper. Second, our measure of
OECD policy does not include cotton, a key non-food product that is heavily subsidized
by the US in a way that harms some very poor countries. Cotton is not included because
the OECD calculates support only for the major commodities that make up the first 70
percent of the total value of agricultural production. However, in our view, the inclusion
of cotton is unlikely to change our overall findings because it is only exported by a
handful of the poorest countries and makes up a relatively small share of these countries’
total agricultural production. Third, while we find that on average OECD support does
not increase poverty and that the majority of poor Mexican corn farmers do not


8
 See for example, OECD 2002, ERS/USDA 2002, Trueblood and Shapouri 1999, Hoekman, Ng, and
Olarreaga 2002, Beghin, Roland-Holst, and van der Mensbrugghe 2002. Note that some CGE-based studies
of the Uruguay Round agreement found results consistent with the focus of this paper, such as Hertel,
Masters and Elbehri (1998).


                                                                                               5
participate in the market, it may still be the case that many poor people are made poorer
by these policies. Roughly sixty percent of the poorest Mexican corn farmers do not
participate in the market. This means that forty percent of the poorest corn farmers do
participate in the market. For these people, the conclusions about the impacts of
depressed corn prices are different. Such nuances help us to understand why different
groups may have very different perspectives on these issues.
        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 establishes the
relationships between net exporter status and income for developing countries over time
and in the cross-section. Section 3 describes the data and estimation strategy used in the
cross-country analysis and presents these results. Section 4 presents an analysis of the
impact of a reduction in the price of corn on Mexico’s corn farmers. Section 5 concludes.


2.      Are the Poorest Countries Hurt by OECD Support for Agriculture?


        We begin with an investigation into the relationship between income per capita
(measured in constant 1985 dollars at PPP exchange rates and collected from the Penn
World Tables version 6.1) and the value of net cereal, net food, and net agricultural
exports including non-food products as a share of GDP (measured at current prices). This
can be thought of as the fraction of current income earned from the sale of these products
or spent to purchase these products. Because there is time-series data on agricultural
imports and exports, as well as income, it is possible to track the behavior of the cohort of
developing countries over time. 9
        We identify the countries that may have been most affected historically by OECD
agricultural policy as those that have spent (earned) the greatest fraction of income on
imports (exports) of supported products. We are particularly interested in comparing how
cereal importers differ from food or non-food agricultural exporters because cereals
prices are depressed by OECD agricultural support policies, while the prices of most
other food products (with the important exceptions of dairy and sugar) and non-food



9
 Other authors have also presented data to highlight the diverse agricultural trade profile of developing
countries (Valdes and McCalla 1999, Panagariya 2002, 2004), but have emphasized cross-sectional patterns
only. This snapshot of countries’ trade positions may obscure long-run patterns in the data.


                                                                                                   6
products (with the important exception of cotton) are largely unaffected by OECD
support.
           Figures 1, 2, and 3, present data on income earned from agricultural exports in
three different ways. First, we use data from the FAO to calculate the value of annual net
cereal exports as a percentage of GDP for a sample of 99 developing countries 10 and take
the average value of this number for the period 1970-1979, 1980-1989, and 1990-2000. 11
We show the cross-sectional income profile for these three time periods in Figure 1 by
using a locally-weighted regression of decadal average cereal export share on the decadal
average of the log of income per capita (bandwidth = 0.8). We run the same regressions
for food export share and present those results in Figure 2. Figure 3 shows the regressions
for agricultural export shares (including non-food products such as green coffee and
fibers).
           Figure 1 shows that, in each decade, the poorest countries spend the largest
fraction of their incomes on cereal imports, suggesting that they may experience net
benefits as a result of depressed cereal prices. In fact, so few developing countries are net
cereal exporters in any decade that the predicted net cereal export share is negative even
at the highest income levels observed in the data. 12
           Since 1970 the poorest countries have also experienced the smallest reduction in
net expenditures on cereal exports as a share of GDP. To trace the average cereal export
share of a given country experiencing economic growth, points should not be connected
within years, but across the regression lines, linking up the experience and behavior of a
like country in the following decade. Thus, the fact that the regression lines are very close
to each other at the lowest levels of income suggests that net export increases experienced
at higher income levels largely bypassed the poorest countries in the post-colonial era.
           These data suggest that depressed prices for food products may hurt middle-
income countries but help the poorest and richest developing countries. As shown in

10
   The sample includes three transition economies: Poland, Romania, and Hungary.
11
   The FAO definition of cereals include wheat, paddy rice, barley, maize, pop corn, rye, oats, millet,
sorghum, buckwheat, quinoa, fonio, triticale, canary seed, and mixed grains.
12
   Among countries for which data is available, Thailand, Argentina, Nepal, Zimbabwe, South Africa,
Uruguay, Pakistan, Kenya and Guyana had positive average net export earnings from cereals in the 1970s.
This list expanded to include Vietnam, in the 1980s, but lost Nepal and Kenya. In the 1990s, Guyana,
Argentina, Thailand, Vietnam, Hungary, Paraguay, India, and Pakistan had positive net export earnings
from cereals.


                                                                                                  7
Figure 2, and unlike in the case of cereals alone, among non-OECD countries only
middle-income countries earn income from food exports. The cross-sectional relationship
between net earnings from all food exports as a share of GDP is non-monotonic. This
production category includes non-cereal products that receive high levels of support in
the OECD, including sugar, beef, and dairy products, as well as unsubsidized products
such as cocoa and most fruits and vegetables.
         The cross-sectional relationship between food export earnings share and income
appears to be flattening over time. In the 1970s, a country with an income of $1,100 is
predicted to have positive net food exports. A country with this level of income in the
1980s or 1990s is predicted to be a net food importer. The trend in this data appears to be
towards zero net earnings from food exports. Though not shown here, this impression is
even stronger when the sample size is enlarged to include 21 high-income OECD
member countries.
         Poor countries are most likely to be net exporters of agricultural products in total,
as shown in Figure 3. 13 We run the same regressions to create this figure, but consider all
agricultural products, including fibers, industrial seeds, green coffee, and tobacco. In this
case we find a downward-sloping relationship between net export earnings and income.
Relatively well-off developing countries import agricultural products as a whole. This
suggests that depressed prices for non-food agricultural products like cotton are
particularly damaging to the poorest countries.
         Figures 1, 2, and 3 together provide evidence that many poor countries import
cereals but export agricultural products as a whole, and have been in this position
throughout the post-colonial era. As we show in Table 1, which ranks countries by
current income per capita and summarizes the data from the latest decade that is
presented graphically in Figures 1 through 3, many poor countries, and even many
middle-income countries, that export food products import cereals, particularly in the
1990s. Depressed commodity prices as a result of domestic support for agriculture in the

13
   In particular, this category of products includes cotton, an important export crop for several West African
countries as well as Brazil, China, and India. Cotton is excluded from our regression analysis because,
although production data is available from the FAO, support levels are not calculated for this crop. This
support is certainly not trivial; about $2.3 million was provided as assistance to US cotton growers in 2001-
02 (International Cotton Advisory Committee 2002). The OECD calculates support only for the major
commodities that make up the first 70 percent of the total value of agricultural production.


                                                                                                        8
OECD could lower the value of both imported products and exported products for these
countries. While it is true that a majority of poor countries are net exporters of
agricultural products today (see Table 1), among the non-food products cotton stands out
as the only non-food commodity whose price is likely to be significantly depressed by
OECD agricultural support.
       Of course the experience of developing countries is diverse and, because they are
regressions, Figures 1 through 3 obscure differences in countries’ experiences at any
income level. However, these results suggest that it is unlikely that broad agricultural
liberalization, which is likely to result in higher world prices for cereals as well as dairy,
sugar, and cotton, will benefit the majority of the poorest countries.
        Country-level average values of net cereals or food exports tell us little about
what happens to the poor within a country. Even in countries that are net importers of
food, the poor may be net exporters of food. Thus, a poor country might be hurt by higher
food prices while the poor within that country benefit from higher food prices. The
remainder of the paper is devoted to this issue.


3.     Does OECD Support Hurt the Poorest People in Poor Countries?
       Even if the poorest countries are net importers of products protected and
subsidized by OECD governments, it is possible that the poorest people within these
countries are net sellers of these cheap imports. If this were the case, then OECD support
that benefits the country as a whole could increase poverty in that same country. In fact,
this is a common assumption based on the observation that poverty tends to be
concentrated in rural areas. We begin this section by describing our approach to testing
this hypothesis in a cross-country regression framework. This is followed by a
description of our methodology for obtaining country-specific measures of OECD
support and a description of our data. We conclude with a presentation of results.



3.1    Empirical Strategy
       To test the claim that OECD support for agriculture hurts the poor, we begin by
estimating the following equation:



                                                                                          9
(1)    log HPit = α i + γ log OECDPOLICYit + ε it ,



where HP is the headcount poverty rate for country i at time t based on the $1 a day
poverty line, αit is a country fixed effect, and OECDPOLICY is a country-specific
measure of OECD support that varies over time and whose construction we discuss in the
next sub-section. This simple specification allows us to preserve the largest number of
observations for which data on poverty and OECD support is available. In this
specification, γ represents the elasticity of poverty with respect to OECD support. Critics
of OECD agricultural policy would expect γ to be positive and significant. To this basic
equation, we add additional controls for comparability with previous work and to test the
notion that own country policies are more important than OECD support as determinants
of poverty.
       One potential problem with this specification has to do with the endogeneity
between OECD support and world commodity prices. OECD support is a function of
commodity price fluctuations and domestic political considerations. Commodity price
fluctuations can in turn be affected by OECD policy. Thus, in principal, we need to take
care in the interpretation of γ. In other words, we could mistakenly attribute to OECD
policy changes in poverty that are being driven purely by changes in commodity prices.
Practically, this is a moot issue since we find no significant relationship between OECD
policy and poverty.
       A second problem with this approach is the limited availability of the intersection
of poverty data and data on OECD support to agriculture. Because these data are sparse
and since there is a strong association between average income and poverty reduction, we
also consider the impact of OECD support on average income in developing countries by
estimating the following equation:


(2)     log y it = δ i + β log OECDPOLICYit + σ it


The only difference between equation (2) and equation (1) is that in equation (2) we now
insert average income per capita as the dependent variable.




                                                                                       10
        One advantage to estimating equations (1) and (2) is that the time-invariant
factors that affect poverty and income such as institutions, geography, and structural
measures of integration are subsumed in the country fixed effects. We also control for
time-variant global trends that may affect incomes, such as global weather shocks and
energy prices using time fixed effects.


3.2     Data
        Our main innovation is in constructing OECDPOLICY, a country- and year-
specific measure of OECD support to agriculture. Therefore, we devote the majority of
this section to describing both how the OECD computes commodity- and year-specific
measures of distortionary support and how we aggregate these data into variables that can
be included in the regression analysis. We then briefly describe the other variables used
in our analysis.
        Since 1987 the OECD has tracked support, by commodity, for agriculture in
member countries. The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has calculated
support by commodity and country for the period 1982-1990. In order to use these data to
develop the variable OECDPOLICY, we need to select a measure of domestic support
and identify a means of aggregating support measures across commodities to develop a
country-specific measure of other countries’ agricultural polices.
        The Producer Support Estimate (PSE) is the most commonly used measure of
domestic support for agriculture. The PSE measures the annual monetary value, at the
farm gate, of gross transfers from consumers and taxpayers to agricultural producers
arising from policy measures to support agriculture. 14 The PSE for a commodity is
usually presented as a fraction of the value of total gross farm receipts for the commodity.
This is referred to as the “percent PSE” and measures the portion of farmer receipts
attributable to policy. 15

14
   The PSE includes domestic subsidies to agriculture, barriers to market access, and export subsidies. It
does not include food aid (OECD 2001). The PSE includes implicit payments, such as those that arise from
commodity-specific price gaps created by trade barriers, but excludes gaps between domestic and border
prices that may arise because of transportation costs, quality differences, or marketing margins.
15
   The percent PSE has several potential shortcomings when considering how it might be used in
econometric analysis (Masters 1993,Wise 2004). It is possible that total support for agricultural producers
as measured by the PSE could be increased by policy changes, while the distortionary effects of support are
reduced by changes in the policy mix used to support agriculture (e.g., if export subsidies were replaced


                                                                                                   11
        An alternative definition of trade-distorting support is the producer nominal
protection coefficient (NPC), which is defined as the ratio between the average price
received by producers (at farm gate) and the border price (net of transportation costs and
marketing margins). This is conceptually equivalent to the implicit export subsidy
necessary to export the observed quantity produced. An NPC equal to one implies that
producers receive border prices for their output after adjusting for transportation costs
and thus do not receive production-distorting signals from agricultural support policies.
The NPC is calculated on a commodity-by-commodity basis for the OECD as a whole by
taking a production-weighted average of producer prices and a common border price.
        A third measure of support calculated by the OECD is the producer nominal
assistance coefficient (NAC) which is defined as the ratio of the value of total gross farm
receipts, including support, and production valued at world market prices, without
support. The NAC is related to the PSE, but calculates support independent of exchange
rate effects. When the NAC is equal to one, receipts are entirely derived from the market.
        All three measures of support for agriculture are highly correlated within
countries, and correlated across countries, both in aggregate and by commodity. In the
main regression specifications discussed in this paper, we measure support for agriculture
in the OECD by commodity using the NPC. However, our results are robust to alternative
measures of support. Figure 4 reports the NPC by commodity for the OECD for the
periods 1986-88 and 2000-02. Milk, sugar, and rice receive the highest levels of
production-distorting support.
        In order to estimate equations (1) and (2), we must identify which OECD support
policies are relevant to country i in period t by matching support policies to countries in a
way that reflects the relative importance of support by commodity for each country. That
is, for a non-OECD country i, we must identify a set of weights to use to combine
measures of the NPC for the following products: wheat, maize, rice, other grains,
oilseeds, sugar, milk, beef, sheepmeat, wool, pigmeat, poultry, and eggs. These are the
products for which the NPC is calculated by the OECD and USDA. We must also


with decoupled income or production support). This is because the PSE is made up of several categories of
transfers that have differing impacts on production, consumption, and trade. Thus, the most common
measure of support may not be the most appropriate for our analysis; we do not expect policies that do not
affect trade to impact developing countries.


                                                                                                   12
appropriately account for the fact that countries produce other agricultural products for
which the NPC is equal to one.
         We create the variable OECDPOLICY as a weighted average of support provided
by rich country governments to growers of these products (or similar commodities that
are likely substitutes for it) in each year for the period 1982-2000, where weights are
defined by the share of each product in the developing country’s agricultural output in
1970. 16 This approach should avoid the problem that current production choices are partly
determined by current subsidy levels. In addition, some African countries have severely
discriminated against agriculture in the past; we want to consider their potential exports
(as measured by their sectoral structure in 1970) rather than their actual exports or
production. For commodities that have a calculated NPC we use FAO data on 1970 total
production of the following products: wheat, maize, rice, other grains (calculated as total
cereals less wheat, maize, and rice), oilseeds (including cake and meal), sugar (refined,
cane, and beet), milk (condensed, dry, and fresh), beef and veal, sheepmeat (fresh), wool
(greasy), pigmeat, poultrymeat, and eggs. For vegetables and melons, all roots and tubers,
all fibers, coffee, cocoa, and all fruits, we set the NPC equal to one. 17
         African countries, which have a relatively large fraction of historical agricultural
production in roots and tubers and coffee and cocoa tend to have low levels of
OECDPOLICY. Small countries that import essentially all their food needs also have low
values of OECDPOLICY. Conversely, rice producers have high values of
OECDPOLICY. Grain and oilseed exporters, such as Brazil, tend to have values of
OECDPOLICY that fall in the middle of the distribution.
         We note in Table 1 the countries included in our regression analysis – a subset of
the countries included in Figures 1 through 3. Our largest sample includes 75 developing


16
   Ideally, this approach would use developing country agricultural sectoral composition in 1930-- before
the architecture of modern OECD farm policy was put in place. Data from this period may be of poor
quality however, to the extent that it exists.
17
   By assuming an NPC of one for fibers we underestimate the value of OECDPOLICY for cotton
producers. Even excluding cotton, bound tariffs for these products are not uniformly equal to zero in
developed countries. Thus, our approach underestimates OECDPOLICY. However, tariffs for these
products are much lower than bound tariffs for so-called program crops and those commodities for which
the OECD calculates an NPC. There are also relatively few mega-tariffs for these products. For example,
WTO bound tariffs reported by the US include 19 tariffs of 100 percent or higher. Only six of these are for
products for which we assume an NPC of one and these are minor products in the nuts and tobacco
commodity group.


                                                                                                    13
countries for the period 1982-2001.We also identify the countries that are members of the
Cairns Group, currently considered to be among the most competitive agricultural
exporters. Far more countries in our sample are net food and cereal importers than
exporters, which is consistent with our discussion in section 2 of the experience of a
larger sample of developing countries. Notably however, the Cairns Group countries are
not all historical exporters; Bolivia, Chile, and Indonesia were net importers of food and
cereals in the 1970s, for example.
        Our data on income per capita, measured in 1996 purchasing power parity (PPP)
dollars come from the Penn World Tables, version 6.1. To control for global weather
shocks that impact commodity prices we use a common measure of the El Nino-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) severity called the Southern Oscillation Index (SOI) anomaly. 18
Recent research has shown that ENSO severity can explain as much as 20 percent of
annual commodity price variation (Brunner 2002). There is also a positive correlation
between ENSO, as measured by the SOI anomaly, and GDP growth. Thus, we expect the
coefficient on this variable to be positive.
        Table 2 reports summary statistics for all of the variables used to estimate
equations (1) and (2). We report these statistics for the entire sample and then separately
for the Cairns Group and for historical food importers. 19 We define countries that were
food and cereal exporters or importers based on data for the 1970s, the decade prior to
our analysis. Food-importing countries have higher average incomes than the Cairns
Group food exporters because several well-off island countries (e.g., Hong Kong and
Singapore) are food importers. However, the variance of incomes in the Cairns Group is
significantly lower among food importers. None of the poorest countries in the sample
are in this group. These patterns are stable across the two decades that we consider.
        Because our specification includes country dummies, our measures of a country’s
own policies were chosen to reflect trade and macro policies that vary significantly over
time within countries. Therefore, the variables we use to control for “own country
policies” are trade share (exports plus imports divided by GDP) and inflation. Table 2

18
  The SOI anomaly measures deviations between air pressure differentials in the South Pacific and
historical averages. For each year, we take the average of the SOI anomaly as measured in January and
June. This data is available from the NOAA.




                                                                                                  14
shows that the Cairns Group of countries are richer than the rest of the countries in the
sample. They also have a significantly smaller share of the population below the poverty
line. The trade share of GDP is actually lower for the Cairns Group which is likely to be
explained by the differences in GDP. OECDPOLICY is slightly higher for the Cairns
Group implying that these countries are slightly more vulnerable to OECD subsidies. The
rate of inflation in the Cairns Group is nearly double that in the rest of the sample. This is
because 9 of the 14 Cairns Group countries are in Latin America where inflation has been
notoriously problematic


3.3      Results
         Tables 3 and 4 present the results of estimating equations (1) and (2) respectively.
In both tables, the estimates are separated into three panels. Panel A presents results for
the entire sample. There is good reason to believe that the coefficient on OECDPOLICY
will vary across countries. Specifically, the effect of changes in commodity prices on
poverty (income) is likely to depend on whether a country is a net importer or net
exporter of the product in question. Therefore, in panels B and C we relax the assumption
of a constant elasticity of poverty (income) with respect to OECD policy. In Panel B we
estimate equations (1) and (2) for members of the Cairns Group and in Panel C we
estimate these equations for countries that are historical net food importers.
         We begin by looking at the results of the estimation of equation (1) for the entire
sample. The regressions in columns 1 and 2 report the simple correlation between
OECDPOLICY and poverty. In column (1) we control only for country fixed effects – in
column (2) we add time fixed effects. In columns (3) through (6) we add a measure of
average income and a measure of weather fluctuations and in columns (5) and (6) we add
two measures of domestic policy – trade as a share of GDP and the log of inflation. The
only robust result across specifications is the relationship between average income and
poverty documented by Besley and Burgess (2003).
         Imposing the assumption of a constant elasticity across countries is one reason
that we might not find any relationship between OECD policy and poverty. We check


19
  In Table 2 and in the regression analysis, Bolivia, Chile, and Indonesia are included only in the Cairns
Group sample. They are not included in the historical food importers sample.


                                                                                                     15
this by estimating equation (1) separately in panel B for the Cairns group, the group of
countries pushing for agricultural liberalization and most expected to benefit from
agricultural liberalization. The results in Panel B are not much different from those in
Panel A. We turn next to the group of countries expected to lose as a result of higher food
prices, historical food importers. Once again, the coefficient on OECD policy is
insignificantly different from zero. For this sub-sample of countries, reducing inflation is
associated with poverty reduction.
       Why do we find no relationship between OECD policy and poverty? The most
obvious explanation is the lack of data. Our entire sample consists of a little over 200
observations and for most countries because the poverty data is only available for two or
three years. We can partially address this issue by redefining our dependent variable to be
average income per capita. To obtain the link between OECD policy and poverty, we can
then rely on the link between average income and poverty documented by Besley and
Burgess (2003) and evident in our Table 3.
       Table 4 reports the results of estimating equation (2). In Panel A we report
estimates for the whole sample. Like in Table 3, there is no evidence of any robust
relationship between OECD policy and average income per capita in developing
countries. We do find that good weather has a small effect on average income (as
previously documented by Brunner 2002) In Panel B of Table 4 we present the same
sequence of regression results for the smaller sample of Cairns Group countries. Recall
that some of these countries were actually food importers in the 1970s. These are the
countries for which we predict a negative correlation between OECDPOLICY and
income per capita. Again, the sign on OECDPOLICY is opposite to what we’d predict but
the coefficient is so imprecisely measured that we cannot distinguish it from zero. We
examine the impact of OECDPOLICY on historical food importers in Panel C. This is the
group for which we predicted a positive relationship between OECDPOLICY and income
per capita. The sign on OECDPOLICY is as predicted but again the result is
insignificantly distinguishable from zero in all but one instance. There is a dichotomy
between the Cairns group sample and the historical food importers in that trade share is
positively correlated with income for the Cairns group but has no relationship to income
for the historical food importers. By contrast, inflation is negatively correlated with



                                                                                          16
income for historical food importers and does not appear to matter for the Cairns group
countries.


3.4       Discussion
      In summary, we find no evidence in our regression analysis that – on average –
OECD policies help or hurt the poor. Several caveats are in order. First, for each country,
we are looking at a package of policies that includes all of the products produced by the
developing country. It is possible for a country to be a net exporter of one commodity and
a net importer of a second commodity both subsidized by the OECD countries. The
effects of a price decline would have different effects in the different sectors and we are
unable to capture this in our current framework, which focuses on aggregate effects.
Second, looking at average income might be misleading if – as many of the advocates for
the poor suggest – the poor are the net sellers of these products and the relatively well off
are the net consumers of these same products. In this case, OECD policy, by depressing
commodity prices, could make the poor worse off and the rich better off leaving average
income unchanged. We would capture this in our poverty regressions but, as we
mentioned, these data are sparse. Finally, the poverty data are likely to include
government transfers in some cases and not in others. This is problematic because it
makes it difficult to isolate the impact of OECD policy on poverty.


4     Do US Corn Subsidies Hurt Poor Mexican Corn Farmers?
         In this section of the paper, we evaluate the claim that US support to corn
farmers – by depressing Mexican producer prices – has been largely responsible for the
increase in rural poverty in Mexico. 20 We begin by documenting the decline in the
Mexican producer price of corn. Next we consider the reasons for this decline – was it
primarily Mexican policy or US policy? We also consider the possibility that the majority
of corn farmers living far from the border in states like Chiapas are sheltered from


20
  For example, in a recent policy brief Oxfam (2003) argues that NAFTA has been responsible for a surge
in US corn exports to Mexico and the associated decline in the real producer price of corn. Moreover, the
brief argues that Mexican corn farmers are at a distinct disadvantage vis a vis US corn farmers because of
the huge subsidies paid out by the US government. The result of this flood of cheap US imports has been an
increase in poverty of the 15 million Mexicans who depend on corn as a source of income.


                                                                                                  17
changes in the world price of corn. Finally, we analyze the impact of the decline in
producer prices on Mexican corn farmers and their families.
         Mexican corn is an ideal case study for our purposes for a number of reasons.
Mexico is an importer of corn and has been for several decades. Corn is also a product
heavily subsidized by the OECD countries and in particular the US, a major trading
partner of Mexico. We have national employment surveys and household data that
includes detailed information on corn expenditures and sources of income including
income received in the form of government transfers. These data are available for the
period 1990 to 2000 – the period over which the real Mexican producer price of corn
declined by more than fifty percent. Thus, we can learn a great deal about the impact of
depressed commodity prices on the poor by studying the case of Mexico. We also have
time series data on regional producer prices and reference prices that allow us to explore
the determinants of the decline in producer prices including the extent to which producer
prices move with world prices. We rely on existing work that examines the link between
world corn prices and US corn subsidies to estimate the relative importance of US corn
subsidies as a determinant of the Mexican producer price of corn.
         As we discussed extensively in the first half of this paper, the impact of a price
decline on poverty depends on whether the poor are net buyers or net sellers of the
commodity in question. This is as true for households as it is for countries, but has largely
been ignored in discussions of the impact of corn trade liberalization on Mexico (see, for
example Nadal 2001 and World Bank 2004). 21
         Using nationally representative survey data for the years 1991 through 2000, we
study the actual impact of a reduction in the price of corn on poverty among corn farmers
in Mexico. Like De Janvry, Sadoulet and de Anda (1995), we are interested in identifying
net sellers of corn. Because detailed data on income and expenditure are not recorded in

21
   Two papers written prior to the implementation of NAFTA do consider the possibility that poor Mexican
corn farmers might actually be net consumers of corn. Using household survey data from 1990 for three
states in Mexico, de Janvry, Sadoulet and de Anda (1995) find that the majority of small and medium sized
corn producers do not produce for the market. They predict therefore that most corn farmers’ income will
not be directly affected by the decline in the price of corn associated with NAFTA, while a significant share
will benefit as consumers. Using a general equilibrium framework, Levy and Van Wijnbergen (1995)
quantify the impact on household welfare, labor and land markets of liberalizing the Mexican corn sector.
This paper makes the important point that even subsistence farmers who do not sell corn are likely to sell
labor. Thus, to the extent that the drop in corn prices reduces rural wages, subsistence farmers are likely to
be hurt by the liberalization of the corn sector.


                                                                                                      18
the same survey, making it difficult to identify households that are net sellers, we use
information from the National Employment Survey to document over time by measures
of living standard (size of land holdings) the share of corn farmers who report that they
sell corn and the changes in these farmers’ income. This exercise allows us to determine
the share of the poorest corn farmers whose income has been directly affected by changes
in the price of corn because they sell corn.
         Of course, even if individual farmer’s earnings from corn farming have fallen, it
could be that total household expenditures on corn products have fallen by even more, in
which case the household to which the corn farmer belongs would be a net beneficiary of
the reduction in the price of corn. Since the National Employment Survey only tracks
income from the respondents’ primary job, we use household survey data to document,
by measures of living standard, changes in income and expenditure on corn products of
families with family members who report that their primary or secondary source of
income is corn farming. While the household survey does not specifically ask for the
amount of income derived from corn farming, it does ask whether the household
members’ primary source of income is corn farming. In addition, the survey asks each
individual member of the household whether their income is derived from labor (work
income), from business (profit income), from remittances both domestic and international
(income from remittances), from government programs (income from transfers) or other
sources such as rental income (other income). For those households who report that their
primary source of income is corn farming, the work and profit share of income reported is
derived primarily from corn farming. Thus, a comparison between changes in income and
changes in expenditure on corn products allows us to determine whether households that
rely on corn farming as a primary or secondary source of income (and in particular, the
poorest corn farmers) have on net benefited from a reduction in the price of corn. 22
         To determine the relative impact of domestic policy and international policy on
the producer price of corn, we examine extent to which US subsidies have depressed
Mexican producer prices and we study the pattern of corn prices across time and across
states. Our primary goal here is to determine the reason for the dramatic decline in the


22
  One complication which we do not address is the fact that corn is purchased in many different forms.
Thus, it is harder to argue that the expenditure patterns are attributable solely or even primarily to NAFTA.


                                                                                                      19
producer price of corn over the period 1986-2002. First, we consider the impact of
domestic policy (“my policies”) on the producer price by comparing Mexican producer
prices to border prices pre- and post- 1994, the year the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA) between Canada, Mexico and the US was signed. We focus on
NAFTA because it marks the beginning of the liberalization of the corn market.
Importantly, NAFTA encompasses both policies designed to align Mexican producer
prices with world prices (such as tariff liberalization) and domestic policies designed to
soften the negative consequences of this liberalization. We extend this analysis to a
comparison of prices at the state level to determine whether – as some claim - states
furthest from the border have been shielded from trade liberalization. To obtain an
estimate of the impact of US subsidies on border prices, or how much higher border price
would be in the absence of US subsidies (“your policies”), we rely on a recent survey of
this issue by Wise (2004).
        One important caveat is in order. Our data do not track the same households over
time and therefore, we are unable to document what has happened to the income of
farmers and households who relied heavily on corn farming prior to liberalization and
who then switched out of corn farming into some other activity. To understand whether
in fact our results suffer from a serious selection bias, we examine farmer (and corn-
farming household) characteristics over time to determine whether these have changed
substantially. In future work, we will use regression analysis and correct for selection
bias.
        The remainder of this case study is organized as follows. We first describe the
policy environment in Mexico. Next we assess the relative importance of “my policies”
(NAFTA) or “your policies” (US corn subsidies) in determining the Mexican producer
price of corn. We then consider the impact of these policies on poverty among Mexican
corn farmers. We conclude with outstanding issues and directions for future research.


4.1     The Policy Environment in Mexico
        This section of the paper is devoted to describing the package of policies known
as NAFTA. NAFTA – the critics claim – has exposed poor Mexican corn farmers to
cheap US imports. However, it is important to remember that NAFTA included several



                                                                                        20
policy reforms beyond the removal of tariffs. It is also worth noting that NAFTA was
freely agreed to by the Mexican government and thus, should be counted among “my
policies” in the parlance of this paper.
           Since the implementation of NAFTA, tariffs on imported corn have been
dramatically reduced. The Mexican over-quota bound tariff on corn has been reduced
from 206.4 percent to 72.6 percent and the tariff-rate quota (TRQ) has increased from 2.5
million metric tons to 3.36 million metric tons. At the same time, Mexico has converted
its import licensing system to a transitional tariff-rate quota that will remain effective
until 2008 with a three percent annual increase in quantity. Over the first six years of the
agreement, an aggregate 24 percent of the tariff was eliminated. The remainder will be
phased out by 2008.
             NAFTA included several policy reforms, beyond the removal of tariffs that
affected corn farmers. The reforms in the agricultural sector that most directly affected
corn farmers are the removal of price supports and the implementation of direct income
transfers. Other reforms that would have had an impact on corn farmers are an extension
program aimed at raising productivity, changes in credit and land reform. We discuss
each of these below, drawing on a recent evaluation of the effect of NAFTA on Mexico’s
agricultural sector (Yunez-Naude and Paredes 2002).
           According to Yunez-Naude and Paredes (2002), it is widely agreed that the most
important domestic policy reform has been the elimination of price supports to producers
of basic crops. The producer price of corn was supported through government
procurement by CONASUPO (the National Basic Foods Company). The 1991 nominal
rate of protection to corn was 77percent and the producer subsidy equivalent (PSE)
amounted to $92 per tonne for white corn and $71 per tonne for yellow corn, compared to
$28 in the US and $21 in Canada. Consumer prices were also subsidized, but mainly for
urban consumers through access to CONASUPO stores. In these government-run stores,
consumers could purchase cheaper corn that the government had acquired from producers
at inflated prices. However, few farmers live close enough to such stores so as to sell corn
at the high support price and then buy their consumption needs at the low subsidized
prices. 23

23
     De Janvry, Sadoulet and de Anda (1995).


                                                                                         21
        CONASUPO’s role in the corn market was substantially diminished in 1995 as a
result of the Mexican peso crisis. The peso devaluation in 1995 allowed the Zedillo
government to transform CONASUPO into a buyer of last resort and eliminate price
supports to corn farmers. However, because of the drop in corn prices in 1996, the
government of Mexico reinstated an intermediate scheme of price fixing whereby prices
were fixed on a regional basis at a level between the guaranteed price and the
international price. This scheme was abolished in 1999. 24
        Some Mexican corn producers currently receive a fixed subsidy per ton of
marketable surplus under the Marketing Support Program. In order to participate in this
program, producers must have a marketable surplus. Relatively few farmers (around 10
percent) fit this description (Zahaniser et al. 2004). PROCAMPO was initiated in the
winter of 1993/94, a few months before the beginning of NAFTA. The program was
designed to supplement farmers’ income and moved support in the direction of income
transfers. Payments were based on area under cultivation. Its main purpose was to help
farmers facing stiff competition from US and Canadian farmers make a transition to more
competitive crops. It is intended to last until 2008 when full trade liberalization under
NAFTA will be complete.
        There are several other reforms that took place during the 1990s not specifically
aimed at corn farmers but that would nevertheless impact them. The first is the Alliance
for the Countryside (Alianza para el Campo). It includes PROCAMPO as well as other
programs. One of the most important programs is PRODUCE which is an extension
program designed to increased productivity via improved technology. Liberalization of
the agricultural sector also entailed the elimination of subsidized inputs such as seeds
fertilizer and credit. Finally, the Salinas government amended the constitution in 1991 to
liberalize property rights in the ejidal sector. Until this time, peasants that benefited from
land redistribution, ejidatarios, were by law not allowed to associate, rent or sell their
land. The constitutional amendment abolished this provision and is expected to develop
rural land markets by allowing farmers to participate in private credit markets and by
promoting direct investment.


24
 CONASUPO also subsidized tortilla processors and maize millers by selling to these processors the
maize purchased from farmers at a price that would allow the processors a “reasonable” profit.


                                                                                                22
        Based on the preceding discussion, it should now be clear that when we refer to
NAFTA, we are not simply referring to a removal of tarrifs on imported corn. NAFTA
was much broader than that. In what follows, we use NAFTA to represent domestic
policy changes (“my policies”) that impact the Mexican producer price of corn.


4.2     What Determines the Mexican Producer Price of Corn: My Policies or
      Yours?
        There is no doubt that NAFTA is having an impact on US-Mexico corn trade.
Figure 5 confirms the findings of others that US corn exports to Mexico (the US is the
only country that exports significant amounts of corn to Mexico) have increased
dramatically since the signing of NAFTA. 25 Moreover, prior to NAFTA, the US exported
virtually no white corn – the type of corn typically grown by Mexican corn farmers - to
Mexico. However, as Figure 5 shows, the amounts of both yellow and white corn
exported from the US to Mexico increased substantially after the signing of NAFTA. 26
As a share of Mexican corn production, US imports increased from an average of 8.4
percent of total production in the eight years leading up to NAFTA to an average of 32.6
percent of total production in the eight years following NAFTA.
        Figure 6 shows that the average real price paid to producers of corn in Mexico
dropped significantly between the period 1986 and 2002. Part of the drop in Mexican
producer prices has to do with the drop in the world price of corn; the Mexican producer
price follows fairly closely the border price. In Figure 6 we plot the annual average
Mexican producer price in real 1994 pesos against the annual average border price also
reported in real 1994 pesos. The border price was obtained from the OECD’s Producer
Support Estimate database and reflects the cost of importing US corn at the border
including freight charges to the border but not within Mexico. US dollars are converted to
pesos using an annual average of the official exchange rate. Both series are converted to
1994 pesos using the national consumer price index.

25
  See, for example Zahniser and Coyle (2004).
26
  The distinction between yellow corn and white corn is an important one. Mexican corn farmers primarily
grow white corn which is used to make food products. Yellow corn is typically used to feed animals.
However, there is some substitutability between yellow and white corn. Food-grade yellow corn is used to
make corn flakes, chips, beer and other foods and white corn can be used as animal feed (Zahniser and
Coyle 2004).


                                                                                                 23
        There are two important pieces of evidence to take away from Figure 6. First,
while the two price series moved closely together throughout the 1990s, 1996 was an
exception. In 1996, the two series diverge as US prices increase and Mexican prices drop.
Indeed in 1996, Mexican producers were actually taxed, and were receiving only 88
percent of the US price for their product. Thereafter, the two series continue to move
closely together. Second, prior to NAFTA, the gap between the Mexican price and the
US price is significantly greater than the gap post-NAFTA. Indeed, the average nominal
protection coefficient (ratio of the Mexican producer price to the border price) for the
period 1986-1995 is 1.61 while the average nominal protection coefficient for the period
1996-2002 is 1.17. 27
        We test the patterns suggested by Figure 6 more formally in a regression
framework and report these results in Tables 5 and 6. For US prices, we use the same
price series shown in Figure 6. For Mexican producer prices, we now use a separate price
series for each of Mexico’s 32 states. Our time series covers only 1991-2000 since these
are the years for which we have price data at the state level. Also in Tables 5 and 6, we
explore the possibility that states further from the border where the poorest corn farmers
live are less affected by changes in world prices and NAFTA. Following Nicita (2004),
we assign states to four groups depending on their distance from the US border.28
        Table 5 presents the results of regressions of the real Mexican producer price for
each state on real border prices. To eliminate the common time trend, we first difference
both price series. In column (1) we report the results of the simple correlation between
Mexican and US prices. Not surprisingly, the correlation is positive. In column (2) we
test whether this relationship has changed significantly as a result of NAFTA. The weak
and negative sign on the interaction term is counterintuitive and suggests that the
relationship between Mexican and US prices weakened after NAFTA. However, in
column (3), we introduce a control for the sudden shift in policy in 1996 and find that the
coefficients on the NAFTA terms are now insignificantly different from zero. We

27
   The results are even more pronounced if we do not include 1995 in the pre-NAFTA average.
28
   Border states are Baja California, Sonora, Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Leon, and Tamaulipas. Northern
states are Sinaloa, Nayarit, Zacatecas, Aguascalientes, San Luis Potosi, and Durango. Central states are
Jalisco, Colima, Michoacan, Guanajuato, Queretaro, Estado de Mexico, Hidalgo, Distrito Federal, Tlaxcala,
Morelos, Puebla, and Veracruz. Southern states are Guerrero, Oaxaca, Chiapas, Tabasco, Campeche,
Yucatan and Quintana Roo.


                                                                                                 24
interpret this as evidence that, except in 1996, Mexican and US prices moved closely
together both before and after NAFTA. In column (4), we restrict the sample by dropping
1996 and test for the possibility that Mexican prices might follow more closely the world
price in states closer to the border – we find no evidence of this.
         In Table 6, we test whether a relaxation of tariffs on imported corn reduced the
wedge between the Mexican producer price of corn and the border price. In column (1),
we do this by regressing the ratio of the Mexican price to the US price on a NAFTA
dummy. The results indicate that prior to NAFTA, Mexican prices were 1.62 times the
US price and that post NAFTA Mexican prices were only 1.18 times the US price. These
numbers are consistent with the simple calculations based on the annual data used to plot
Figure 6. In column (2) we test whether this differential is any smaller for states closer to
the border and find no evidence of this. In column (3) we test whether the differential
changed more (less) in states close (far) from the border. Since the only term of any
significance is the NAFTA dummy, we conclude that this is not the case. 29
         These results suggest that while the Mexican producer price has always moved in
tandem with the world price, NAFTA squeezed the differential between Mexican
producer prices and border prices. How much higher would the border price be if the US
were not subsidizing corn? Unfortunately, there is no consensus on this issue, as
commodity prices are notoriously difficult to predict. However, though the estimates vary
depending on the methodology, the bottom line seems to be that the magnitude of the
price difference would actually be quite small. Wise (2004) summarizes these results and
reports that the largest estimate of 2.9 percent comes from a study by IFPRI. The

29
   Since these results are at odds with a recent publication by the World Bank (Fiess and Lederman, 2004),
we note a few differences between our study and the Bank study. The Bank study performs a co-integration
analysis using monthly price data at the national level. They report that the results are unchanged if they
use annual data. Similar to us, they find a high degree of co-movement between US prices and Mexican
prices. However, unlike us, they report that the differential between Mexican and US prices is the same pre
and post NAFTA. They also plot their prices series but a comparison between our Figure 6 and their Figure
4 is difficult because they take logs of nominal prices whereas we plot levels of real prices. The most
confusing thing about the Bank study is the fact that they report that their results do not hold unless they
include a dummy variable for the periods 1995-1997. They justify this on the grounds that this was a period
of severe drought during which Mexico imported record amounts of US corn. There are at least two
problems with this. First, while it is true that Mexico imported record amounts of corn in 1996, this is not
the case for 1995 nor is it the case for 1997 (see Figure 1). Therefore, it is unclear why the dummy should
take a value of one in 1995 and 1997. Second, the dummy variable captures half the post-NAFTA period
and so to include it but not incorporate it in the constant term that the authors report to be the price
differential seems misleading.


                                                                                                    25
smallest estimate ( -3.0 percent ) is from a study by APAC and implies that removing US
subsidies would actually raise producer prices! In 2000, a 3 percent increase in the
producer price of corn would increase the poorest farmers’ monthly income by at most 6
pesos (USD 0.63). 30
         In summary, the sharp drop in Mexican producer prices over the period 1990-
2000 corresponds almost exactly to NAFTA’s effective date. Though it is possible that
Mexican producer prices would be higher if the US did not subsidize corn, the magnitude
of this effect seems small both in comparison with the effect of trade liberalization and in
absolute terms. In addition, since there was no dramatic change in US farm policy over
this period, Mexican prices would have been higher throughout the entire period. Thus, it
seems unlikely that US corn subsidies are driving poverty in Mexico unless one takes the
stand that US corn farmers as an interest group were largely responsible for NAFTA.


4.3      How Did the Drop in Mexican Producer Prices Affect Poor Corn Farmers?
      In this section we turn to analyzing the distributional consequences of the drop in
producer prices that we documented in section 4.2. We can think of this analysis as
answering two distinct questions. First, the focus of this paper – who in poor countries
bears the brunt of rich country support to agriculture? And second, the focus of this
volume – how does trade liberalization affect the poor?


Data
         Our data on corn farmers comes from the agricultural supplement of the Encuesta
Nacional de Empleo (ENE) collected by the Instituto Nacional de Estadística, Geografía
e Informática (INEGI) in Mexico. This survey covers 453,503 individuals in rural areas,


30
  Finally, we consider the possibility that the steep decline in the real producer price might be partially due
to the large devaluation of the Mexican peso in 1995. The direct effect of the devaluation would have been
to offset the decline in tariffs on imported corn thus protecting Mexican corn farmers. However, there are
two indirect effects that must be considered. First, there is the inflation that was a byproduct of the
devaluation. Second is the strain on the government budget. We note that the average rate of inflation over
the period 1986-1994 was 43 percent while the average rate of inflation from 1995-2000 was only 22
percent. Therefore, it is difficult to argue that the inflation was the root cause of farmers’ problems.
Additionally, the government has continued to support corn farmers albeit not directly. These programs are
expensive and have managed to keep farmers’ real income (including transfers) from falling dramatically
over the period 1990-2000. Based on this evidence, we conclude that the change in farmers’ income from
corn farming is directly tied to the changes in the price of corn at least partially brought on by NAFTA.


                                                                                                       26
is nationally representative, and was undertaken in 1991, 1993, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998,
1999 and 2000. The agricultural supplement is rich in detail about crop production, land
quality and size, wages, hired labor, dwelling characteristics, and total farm output-- thus
it provides a detailed description of the production side of corn farming-- as well as
containing demographic, employment and income information from the broader
employment survey. This dataset has rarely been exploited and this study is the first, to
our knowledge, to use the ENE agricultural component to analyze welfare effects on
Mexico’s rural sector. The dataset is not a panel, as each subject is only interviewed once
but is a repeated cross-section. INEGI did not, however, alter its sampling procedures
over the years in question so it is relatively safe to conclude that changes we see among
sectors is due to compositional changes in the population, as opposed to compositional
changes in the sample
         The ENE data, however, only includes income from the respondents’ primary
occupation and does not include consumption data. To allow a broader analysis of
welfare, we complement the ENE data with data from the Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos
y Gastos de los Hogares (ENIGH). This survey covers 21,117 rural households and
covers the years 1992, 1994, 1996, 1998 and 2000. These data are also nationally
representative repeated cross sections and do not follow the same households over time. 31
At the household level, the survey asks for a measure of total household income and
income from transfers including remittances (domestic and international), and subsidies
from PROCAMPO and other government programs. At the individual level, the survey
asks each member of the household how much he/she earns and whether it is derived
from wages, the individuals’ own business enterprise, or other sources such as rental
income. We aggregate individual incomes by household to come up with the following
breakdown of the household’s total income: profit income, work or labor income, income
from remittances, income from transfers and other. In addition, the survey asks whether a

31
  For the years 1992-2000, the conceptual framework of the survey is the same. Therefore, we are able to
compare results across years. The survey is a stratified sample according to urban and rural location and
sampling is done to ensure that households are representative of geographic clusters with the probability of
being included proportional to cluster size. However, a comparison of national accounts data and the
ENIGH survey data suggests that up to 60 percent of income goes unreported in the ENIGH survey.
However, Damian (2000) and others report that this problem derives primarily from the difficulty of
including the very wealthy Mexicans in the survey. Since our analysis focuses largely on the rural poor, we
believe that our results are not significantly affected by this problem (Salas 2003).


                                                                                                     27
household’s primary or secondary source of income is corn farming. The survey also has
a detailed consumption module, which recounts household expenditure on food,
including corn and corn products, education, health, housing, clothing, etc.

        Table 7 presents means of socio-economic characteristics of the rural population
from ENE for the entire sample period. All means were computed adjusting for
population weights. For purposes of comparing corn farmers with the rest of the rural
population, we have divided our summary statistics into four panels. Panel A reports
statistics for all rural dwellers. Panel B reports statistics for all rural dwellers involved in
agriculture. These are identified as those respondents who report that the industry of their
primary occupation is agriculture and includes farm laborers as well as those who own or
rent the land. Panel C reports statistics for farmers where farmer is defined as someone
who takes part in agricultural activities and owns, occupies, or rents land (as opposed to
agricultural laborer). Finally, Panel D reports statistics for a subset of the farmers in Panel
C who report that their primary occupation is the cultivation of corn and beans. In each
panel, we report mean monthly income in real 1994 pesos. Income is defined as total
household income and the majority of respondents (97.5 percent) report that their income
comes in the form of profits and family consumption. The measure of income in ENE
does not include remittances or transfers. We also report mean age, years of schooling,
hours worked and total usable land occupied by the respondent. To determine the relative
importance of corn farming, we report the percent of respondents in each year who claim
that their primary occupation is corn farming (Corn Occupation), that their primary crop
for subsistence is corn (Corn Subsistence) and that their main crop for selling is corn
(Corn Selling).
        These data highlight several important facts. The share of the rural population that
consider themselves farmers has fallen from 14 percent of the rural population in 1991 to
9 percent of the rural population in 2000. Corn farmers make up 20 percent of the rural
population in 1991 and only 10 percent of the rural population in 2000. Among farmers, a
majority are corn farmers – though this dropped from 62 percent in 1991 to 54 percent in
2000. Three quarters of all farmers say they grow corn as their primary crop for
subsistence. However, very few farmers (between 12 percent and 22 percent) say that
corn is their primary crop for selling.


                                                                                          28
        Thus, most farmers are corn farmers and this has not changed very much over the
past ten years. This is important because it implies that there has not been a significant
amount of diversification into other farming activities away from corn farming. Corn
farmers have on average more land than the average rural dweller and are poorer than
other farmers and than the rest of the population. The average real monthly income from
corn farming in 2000 was only 206 pesos or $21.79 or $261.48 per year. 32 Finally, corn
farmers also have less schooling and work longer hours than the rest of the rural
population.
        Table 8 presents means of real household variables for families in which at least
one individual identifies his or her primary occupation as the cultivation of corn and
beans. In the top panel of Table 9, we report real monthly household expenditure on corn,
expenditure on corn as a share of total food expenditure, expenditure on corn as a share
of total expenditure and the quantity of corn purchased. Corn includes corn tortillas,
grain, flour, masa, and starch and corn consumption includes corn purchases, corn
produced for household consumption and in-kind payments and gifts of corn. There are
two important aspects of these data worth mentioning: First, we are not looking only at
expenditure on corn grain but expenditure on corn grain and all derivative products,
allowing us to capture the impact of imported grain on all of these products. In particular,
our expenditure data includes corn tortillas whose price went up sharply during the 1990s
for reasons unrelated to NAFTA. We include tortillas on the grounds that prices would
have risen even more had the price of corn grain not fallen. Second, both our income and
expenditure data includes the value of home consumption, in-kind payments, and gifts.
Therefore, the change in consumption expenditure can be viewed as an upper bound on
the increase in real income associated with the drop in the price of corn.
        In the bottom panel of Table 8, we report total real monthly household income as
well as real monthly income derived from work (labor income), profits, government
transfers and remittances. Since the income reported in Table 8 is household income and
the income in Table 7 is income derived from the respondents’ primary occupation or
individual income, the two numbers are not directly comparable. However, the income


32
  The average annual exchange rates (Mexican pesos per dollar) beginning in 1990 are: 2.84, 3.02, 3.1,
3.12, 3.39, 6.42, 7.6, 7.92, 9.15, 9.55, and 9.45.


                                                                                                   29
data from the national employment survey (ENE) derives primarily from profits and
home consumption and would fall under “income from profits” at the household level.
Therefore, by comparing the national employment survey income data with the ENIGH
household survey income data we can get a sense both for how important profits from
corn farming are and also how important supplementary sources of income are to corn
farming families. For example, in 1996, the profit share of income for corn farming
families was roughly 327 pesos per month. According to the national employment survey
data, the average real income earned from corn farming by the corn farmer was roughly
268 pesos per month. This is equal to 82 percent of the profit share of income reported in
the household data or 32 percent of the average corn farming families’ total real monthly
income. Thus, profits from corn farming are on average the most important source of
income for families of corn farmers but work income and income from transfers are also
important at 23 percent and 19 percent of total income respectively.
       The means in Table 8 reveal that – for the average corn-farming family –
aggregate corn consumption and aggregate income have not changed remarkably between
1992 and 2000. Real monthly expenditure on corn fluctuates between 77 and 55 pesos
per month. The average family spends around 19 percent of its food budget on corn
products and around 10 percent of its total budget on corn products. The average family’s
real monthly income was 907 pesos (USD 292) in 1992 and 856 pesos (USD 90.58) in
2000. Note that, to the extent that these families purchase imported products, the peso
values understate the drop in real income.
       While expenditure on corn did not change significantly following NAFTA for the
average corn-farming family, there has been a marked change in the composition of
income. In 1992, the profit share of income was roughly 53 percent and this fell to around
39 percent in 2000. The work share of income also fell from around 24 percent in 1992 to
around 20 percent in 2000. The drop in these two sources of income was largely offset by
an increase in income from transfers (11 percent in 1992 and 23 percent in 2000).
       In the next two sections, we examine the data from the national employment
surveys (ENE) and the household surveys (ENIGH) on corn farmers and families with
corn farmers by standard of living, as measured by land holdings. Our primary goal is to




                                                                                      30
determine how the drop in the price of corn has impacted the poorest corn farmers and
the poorest corn farming families in Mexico.


Results from the National Employment Surveys (ENE)
        Here we analyze in more detail the sub-group of the rural population who identify
themselves as corn farmers. Recall that these are individuals who own, occupy, or rent
land (as opposed to agricultural laborers), and who claim that their primary occupation is
the “cultivation of maize and beans.” We recognize that farm laborers are an important
group of rural dwellers whose wages are likely to be affected by changes in the price of
corn. We do not attempt to consider the welfare of these individuals here. Rather, our
goal is to determine how the drop in the price of corn affected the poorest corn farmers in
Mexico. To do this, we divide corn farmers into three groups – small, medium and large -
depending upon the size of the farmers land. We then determine whether a majority of the
poorest corn farmers, those with the smallest land holdings, are net buyers or net sellers
of corn.
        Table 9 reports corn farmer characteristics by total land holding across time. 33
The mean landholding of the smallest corn farmers (those with less than 5 hectares of
land) is roughly 2 hectares. This corresponds to the average land held by the poorest corn
farmers identified by De Janvry, Sadoulet and de Anda (1995) as “non-participants in the
market” and by Levy and Van Wijnbergen (1995) as “subsistence” who primarily farm
rain-fed land. The mean land holding of the medium-sized corn farmers (those with
between 5 and 15 hectares of land) is roughly 8.5 hectares. The mean land holding of the
largest corn farmers (those with more than 15 hectares of land) is roughly 35 hectares.
For small, medium and large corn farmers we report means of real income, age, years of
schooling, hours worked and land holding over time. In addition, we report the percent of
the population who say that their main crop for subsistence is corn (Corn Subsistence),
the percent of the population who say that their main crop for selling is corn (Corn Main

33
  The advantages of splitting the sample based on landholding are that we do not have to worry about
measurement issues associated with income and that we can directly compare our results to others who also
classify corn farmers by landholding. In Appendix Table 2, we report income based, monthly per capita
measures of poverty. By Mexican standards, only our average small corn farmer is classified as extremely
poor. The medium corn farmers earn enough montly income from corn farming to place them above both




                                                                                                  31
Crop for Selling Selling) and the percent of the population who say that they do not
produce a crop to sell in the market (Do Not Produce to Sell). 34
        For the poorest farmers (those with less than 5 hectares of land), we report
statistics for two additional variable. We do this because we are concerned that the
poorest farmers (often called subsistence farmers) may occasionally sell corn but
nevertheless report that they do not produce corn with the intent of selling. To determine
the extent to which this takes place, we first report the percentage of poor farmers who
answer the question “which of your subsitence crops do you sell?” with corn. We label
this “Occasionally Sell Corn”. Next we determine the percentage of respondents who
report that they never sell corn as the fraction of the poorest who report that they do not
produce to sell but nevertheless answer that they sometimes sell the corn they grow for
subsistence. We label this variable “Never Sell Corn”. There is no need to do this for the
medium and large corn farmers because we already know that a majority of these farmers
do sell corn in the market.
        A majority of the poor report that they do not produce to sell. In 1991, 67 percent
of the small corn farmers reported that they did not produce to sell in the market. This
figure peaks at 77 percent in 1993 and falls to 63 percent in 2000. An overwhelming
majority of these same farmers, 89 percent in 1991 and 92 percent in 2000, do say that
corn is their primary crop for subsistence. Once we allow for the possibility that some of
these farmers may sell corn on occasion, the percentages fall and we are left with a
somewhat stronger conclusion. The majority of the poor report that they never sell corn
in all of the 8 years for which we have data. For example in 1991 56 percent of the
poorest farmers report that they never produce to sell and in 2000 57 percent report that
they never produce to sell.
        By contrast, only around 33 percent of the medium-sized farmers and 16 percent
of the large farmers say that they do not produce to sell. Therefore, the drop in the price
of corn associated with NAFTA does not directly affect the income of the majority of the
poorest corn farmers while it negatively impacts the income of a majority of the medium-

the extreme poverty line and the moderate or asset based poverty line. However, in 2000, by international
standards, the medium corn farmers would be considered moderately poor.




                                                                                                   32
and large-scale corn farmers. Though the employment survey does not ask about
expenditure, those farmers who report that they do not sell are most certainly net buyers
of corn. It is almost impossible to be completely self-sufficient because of the vagaries of
the weather. Thus, among the poorest corn farmers, the majority are net buyers of corn
and have thus benefited from any reduction in the price of corn associated with NAFTA.
The opposite is true for the medium- and large-scale corn farmers.
         Though not shown in the tables, we also analyzed the summary statistics by
splitting the samples in panels A, B, and C into those who sell and those who do not sell.
In all three cases, the corn farmers who report that they do not produce to sell are poorer,
older, less well educated, and have less land than the farmers who do produce to sell.
Additionally, the corn farmers who report that they do not produce to sell also report that
the majority of their income comes in the form of family consumption while those who
do produce to sell report that the majority of their income comes in the form of profits.
With only one exception, all groups and sub-groups of corn farmers saw their real income
decline substantially between 1991 and 2000. Only large corn farmers experienced a
substantial increase in their income between 1995 and 2000. If we split large farmers into
those who produce to sell and those who do not produce to sell, we find that the larger
corn farmers who do not produce to sell actually experienced a decline in their real
income over the period 1991 to 2000. However, the increase in the incomes of those large
farmers who do produce to sell is even more dramatic (684 pesos per month to 1162
pesos per month) once we remove the large corn farmers who do not produce to sell.
         In Table 11, we check whether there has been a significant change in the
characteristics and real income of corn farmers pre- and post-NAFTA. In terms of both
magnitude and statistical significance, the most striking changes are the reduction in the
real income of small farmers and the increase in the real income of large farmers.
Between 1991 and 2000, small farmers real monthly income dropped by roughly 285
pesos while large farmers’ real income increased by around 100 pesos. Between 1995 and
2000, small farmers real income dropped by roughly 93 pesos while large farmers’ real
monthly income increased by around 300 pesos.

34
  To keep the tables clear and manageable, we leave out the percent of the population who report that they
do not sell any of their subsistence crop. An analysis of this variable leads to the same conclusion that the
majority of the poor report that they do not sell any of their subsistence crop.


                                                                                                      33
       The drop in the real income of the small farmers can be explained by the
reduction in the price of corn. Though the majority of these farmers do not participate in
the market, they do report that their most important source of income from their primary
occupation is the value of home consumption. Thus, even for those farmers who do not
participate in the market the imputed value of real income will have fallen.
       The increase in the income of the large farmers is somewhat more puzzling.
However, this could be explained by a number of factors. For example, it is consistent
with Levy and Van Wijnbergen’s (1995) argument that irrigated farmers would
experience an increase in net income because the gain they experience as a result of the
drop in rural wages outweighs the loss they experience as a result of the reduction in the
price of corn. We hope to explore in more detail the reasons for the gain in large farmers’
real income in future work.
       In summary, the majority of the poorest corn farmers did not sell corn in the
market prior to NAFTA. Therefore, their income will not have been directly affected by
the forces of globalization associated with NAFTA and the devaluation of the peso. By
contrast, a majority of the medium and large corn farmers did sell corn in the market
prior to NAFTA and continued to do so after the implementation of NAFTA. Thus, we
conclude that the medium-sized corn farmers experienced a sharp decline in real income
as a result of NAFTA. The income of the largest corn farmers has increased. Without
additional information, it is not possible to attribute the increase in the incomes of the
large corn farmers to globalization.


Results from the Household Surveys (ENIGH)
       We turn now to the families of those individuals who identify their primary
occupation as the cultivation of corn and beans. Specifically, we examine household
expenditure on corn products and the sources of total household income. Ideally, we
would like to have this information for the same individuals interviewed in the
employment survey. This would allow us to understand whether the poorest families who
say they do not sell any corn rely on other sources of income that might be indirectly
affected by the price of corn such as wage income derived from working on other
peoples’ corn farms. Unfortunately, the surveys were not conducted in this fashion.



                                                                                        34
Therefore, we split our sample into three groups based on income from profits on the
grounds that income from profits are very closely correlated with the size of the land
holding. Thus, we take the families in the bottom tercile of the distribution of income
from profits as the “representative families” of the corn farmers with less than 5 hectares
of land. Similarly, those in the middle of the distribution represent the families of the
medium-sized corn farmers and those in the top third of the distribution represent the
families of the largest corn farmers (those with more than 15 ha. of land).
       Panel A of Table 12 reveals that for the average low-income corn farming family
real monthly expenditure on corn decreased by around 20 pesos per month over the
period 1994-2000. This amounts to around USD 2 per month or USD 24 per year for the
poorest corn farming families. We noted in the discussion of these data that this would be
an upper bound on the benefits to the poorest corn farming families as a result of the drop
in the price of corn. This is because these families are so poor that they often cannot
afford to buy corn and so will go without and because the consumption figures include
the value of home consumption. For the poorest corn farming families, the share of corn
in food expenditure stayed roughly constant at around 25 percent and the share of corn
expenditure in total expenditure stayed roughly constant at around 15 percent.
       On the income side, the big changes for the poorest families over the period are
the drop in the profit share of income and the increase in transfers. Monthly income from
profits was around 130 pesos higher in 1992 and 1994 than it was in 2000. On the other
hand, transfer income increased threefold over this same period. The share of income
derived from corn farming drops only slightly. Since expenditure on corn changed only
marginally and since work income was hardly affected, we conclude that the welfare of
those families who do not sell corn in the market – the majority of the poorest corn
farmers - has been largely unaffected by the drop in the price of corn. Moreover, these
families have benefited from the income support programs associated with NAFTA.
       Panel B of Table 12 reveals a different story; the drop in the price of corn
negatively impacted the majority of middle-income families. This is because the majority
of these farmers do sell corn in the market. Total monthly expenditure on corn for these
farmers has barely changed over time. Like the poorest corn farmers, work income has
also not changed much over time. The profit share of income for the middle-income corn



                                                                                       35
farmers fell by 276 pesos between 1992 and 2000 and by 177 pesos between 1994 and
2000. This represents a reduction in real income of almost 50 percent. This was almost
entirely offset by the increase in government transfers (128 pesos) and the increase in
remittances (33 pesos).
       Panel C of Table 12 demonstrates that both profit income and income from
transfers increased substantially over this same time period. Other sources of income
were largely unaffected. Income from profits for the high-income corn farmers increased
by 190 pesos between 1992 and 2000 and by 208 pesos between 1994 and 2000. This
amounts to an increase in real income of roughly 33 percent. Thus, the majority of the
high income families benefited from changes in the Mexican corn market.
       There are several other interesting trends that stand out in Table 12. First,
households from all income groups witnessed an increase in income associated with
government transfers from programs like PROGRESA and PROCAMPO. The largest
percentage increase was given to the poorest corn farmer families whose income from
transfers increased by 200 percent going from 44 pesos a month to 122 pesos a month
between 1992 and 2000. Though transfers to the middle- and upper-income corn farmer
families increased by less in percentage terms (100 percent), in absolute terms these
families receive substantially more than the poorest corn farmer families in transfer
payments from the government. For example, in 2000, the average middle-income family
received a monthly payment of 215 pesos while the average upper income family
received a monthly payment of almost 300 pesos roughly three times what the poor
household received.
       Second, the increase in transfer payments may explain part of the "mysterious"
increase in corn production even though the real price of corn has fallen dramatically.
Levy and Van Wijnbergen (1995) discuss this possibility in great detail. Liberalization of
the corn sector under NAFTA creates an incentive problem. Because many corn farmers
will be hurt, the government has an incentive to compensate these farmers for their
losses. Levy and Van Wijnbergen estimate that the efficiency gains associated with
NAFTA would be substantial and that this revenue could be used to compensate the
losers. However, compensating farmers pro rata to their corn production will create an
incentive to continue to grow corn even in the face of falling market prices.



                                                                                        36
4.4    Discussion
      While thought provoking, our analysis suffers from two important shortcomings.
First, we consider only the first-order effects of price changes on income and
consumption expenditure while ignoring both the partial equilibrium effects of food price
changes on quantities demanded and supplied and the general equilibrium effects of the
price changes on employment patterns, wages, the price of other factors and
technological innovation. Thus, our analysis is best thought of as a good approximation
to what happened in the short run (see Panagariya 2000, Barett 1996).
      We focus here on short-run impacts of “globalization” for two related reasons.
First, using short-run changes seems to be most appropriate for studying the impact of
price changes on the poor, who, as Barrett and Dorosh (1996) say, are "likely to be
teetering on the brink of survival" and less able to take advantage of supply-side effects
of price changes. And second, our primary goal is to understand whether globalization
has affected the poorest corn farmers. In future work, we will incorporate the general
equilibrium effects of changes in the price of corn. In particular, an important group that
we have not considered here are farm workers. Though not technically corn farmers,
these people are likely to be among the poorest of the rural population and their
livelihoods significantly impacted by changes in the price of corn.
       We are also – in part - limited by our data. Since our datasets are not panels but
are repeated cross-sections, there is a concern that our results might suffer from selection
bias. The composition of small, medium and large corn farmers could be changing over
time, as could the structure of the larger corn-farming sector. This means that we could
be picking up a compositional effect rather than the effect of globalization. It is clear
from Table 7 that the absolute number of families in which at least one person reports
that his primary occupation is corn farming has fallen over the past decade. Therefore, it
is possible that some poor corn farmers left corn farming for other, better paying jobs and
that those particular corn farmers could have been the most able, educated ones. Thus,
the negative impact on corn farmers that we observe in the cross sectional data over time
could be partially a result of the corn farmers with the best outside opportunities
(something which likely correlates well with present income) leaving corn farming. Any



                                                                                       37
complete statement about changes in the overall welfare of corn farmers would need to
take selection into account, and to correct for it when studying the impact of globalization
on poor corn farmers. It is also independently interesting to study which corn farmers
were able to adjust and leave corn farming when the price of corn decreased, and which
were not able to leave, but adjusted in other ways, possibly by increasing their production
of corn.
           However, our conclusion that the majority of the poorest corn farmers and their
families have not been hurt by globalization is likely to hold regardless of the
shortcomings of our analysis. This is because these people were so poor to begin with
that it is hard to imagine them worse off as a result of globalization. They were not
selling corn in the market and they did not rely heavily on income from work. Hence, for
these people there is really only upside potential.

5          Conclusion
           This paper documents the historical impacts of OECD agricultural policies on
developing countries. We first provide evidence that the majority of poor countries are
net importers of both cereals and food but net exporters of agricultural products as a
whole. This has been true throughout the post-colonial era. Even middle-income
countries that export food products are net importers of cereals, particularly in the 1990s.
Thus, to the extent that OECD support policies depress the price of cereals and food,
these programs benefit consumers in poor countries. Of course, even if a country is a net
importer, competition from subsidized imports will hurt the net sellers of these products
within the importing countries. However, there is a growing body of evidence –
consistent with our evidence from Mexico – indicating that the poorest individuals in the
poorest countries are actually net buyers of cereals and food and therefore benefit from
lower food prices. 35
           Our econometric results are consistent with this evidence and suggest that in
many food-importing developing countries, OECD support polices are not correlated
with the poverty rate or with income, even after controlling for domestic policies such as
openness to trade. Consequently, the results suggest that OECD agricultural policies do


35
     See for example, Levinsohn and McMillan’s piece on Ethiopia in this volume.


                                                                                        38
not have a uniform impact on developing country incomes; net food importing countries
are likely to gain, while food exporters are likely to be hurt.
       In the high-profile case of Mexico, we find that NAFTA reduced the wedge
between the real producer price and the border price, making corn production less
profitable. We also find that the poorest corn farmers are net food buyers, since they have
little land per person, and so are forced to earn cash income in other ways in order to buy
food. Therefore, the reduction in corn prices was unambiguously good for the majority
of the poorest corn farmers. However, we also find that middle-income corn farmers have
been hit hard as their real income from corn farming fell by more than fifty percent while
the average income of the largest corn farmers increased by almost forty percent. Though
the price of corn is no longer directly supported by the Mexican government, transfer
payments to corn farmers at all levels of income increased substantially between 1991
and 2000. Because these payments are often tied to amount of land cultivated with corn,
their increase may explain the “puzzle” of increasing corn production in the face of
falling corn prices.
       Our findings may be taken as a note of caution in the context of arguments for
wholesale multilateral agricultural trade liberalization in industrial countries as a means
of alleviating poverty in developing countries. The aggregate efficiency gains associated
with trade liberalization, a topic not addressed in this paper, may mask negative impacts
for many developing countries, particularly the poorest. Trade negotiators may need to
consider means of protecting these countries from the negative effects of higher
commodity prices, at least in the short run, and developing countries may find it
advantageous to advocate for more far-reaching liberalization in the cotton, dairy, and
sugar markets rather than in the markets for bulk grain commodities that they import.




                                                                                       39
References

Acemoglu, D. and J. Ventura (2002), “The world distribution of income,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, May: 659-94.


Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J.A. Robinson (2001), “The colonial origins of
   comparative development: An empirical investigation,” American Economic Review
   91(5): 1369-1401.

Barrett, C. B. and Dorosh, P. A. (1996), “Nonparametric evidence from rice in
   Madagascar,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 78:656-669.


Beghin, J., D. Roland-Holst, and D. van der Mensbrugghe (2002), "Global agricultural
   trade and the Doha Round: What are the stakes for North and South,” OECD mimeo
   2002.


Besley, T. and R. Burgess (2003), “Halving global poverty”, Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, 17(3).


Brunner, A.D. (2002), “El Nino and world commodity prices: Warm water or hot air?”
   Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(1):176-83.


de Janvry, A., E. Sadoulet and G. Gordillo de Anda (1995), “NAFTA and Mexico’s
    maize producers,” World Development, 23(8):349-1362.

Diao, X., A. Somwaru and T. Roe, 2001. “A global analysis of agricultural reform in
   WTO member countries,” in Burfisher, ed., The Road Ahead: Agricultural Policy
   Reform in the WTO, Economic Research Service, USDA, AER No. 802.


Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2003), "Tropics, germs, and crops: How endowments
   influence economic development," Journal of Monetary Economics, 50:3-39.


Fiess, N. and D. Lederman, “Mexican corn: The effects of NAFTA,” (2004), Trade Note
    18, International Trade Department, The World Bank, September 24.

Financial Times (2004), “The tide of free trade will not float all boats,” August 3.


Frankel, J., and D. Romer (1999), "Does trade cause growth?" American Economic
   Review 89(3):379-399.




                                                                                       40
Hertel, T. W., W. A. Masters, and A. Elbehri, (1998) “The Uruguay Round and Africa: A
   Global, General Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of African Economies 7(2): 208-234


Hoekman, B., F., Ng, and M. Olarreaga (2002), "Reducing agricultural tariffs versus
   domestic support: What's more important for developing countries?" World Bank
   Policy Research Paper 2918.


International Cotton Advisory Committee (2002), “Production and trade policies
    affecting the cotton industry,” ICAC: Washington, D.C..


Levy, S. and S. van-Wijnbergen (1995), “Transition problems in economic reform:
   Agriculture in the North American Free Trade Agreement,” American Economic
   Review, 85(4), 738-54.


Masters, W.A. (1993) "Measuring Protection in Agriculture: the Producer Subsidy
  Equivalent Revisited," Oxford Agrarian Studies 21(2): 133-142.


Nadal, A. (2001), “The environmental and social impacts of economic liberalization on
   corn production in Mexico,” Oxfam, UK.


New York Times (2002), "Rich nations are criticized for enforcing trade barriers,"
  September 30.


OECD (Organization for economic cooperation and development) (2001), Agricultural
  policies in OECD countries: Monitoring and evaluation, OECD: Paris.


OECD (2002), "The medium-term impacts of trade liberalization in OECD countries on
  the food security of non-member countries," COM/AGR/TD/WP(2001)74/FINAL.

Oxfam (2002), “Boxing match in agricultural trade.” Oxfam Briefing Paper 32, London:
   Oxfam.

Oxfam (2003), “Dumping without borders: How US agricultural policies are destroying
   the livelihoods of Mexican corn farmers,” Oxfam Briefing Paper 50, London: Oxfam.

Panagariya, A. (2002), “Trade and food security: Conceptualizing the linkages.” Paper
   prepared for presentation at the Conference on Trade, Agricultural Development, and
   Food Security: The Impact of Recent Economic and Trade Policy Reform, Food and
   Agricultural Organization, Rome, July 11-12.




                                                                                     41
Panagariya, A. (2004), “Comments on subsidies and trade barriers,” Copenhagen
   Consensus Opponent Note.


Ramey, G., and V. Ramey, (1995), “Cross-country evidence on the link between
  volatility and growth,” American Economic Review, 85(5):1138-51.


Rodrik, D., A. Subramanian, and F. Trebbi (2002), “Institutions Rule: The primacy of
   institutions over geography and integration in economic development,” Harvard
   University mimeo, October.


Sarel, M. (1997), “How macroeconomic factors affect income distribution: The cross-
   country evidence,” IMF Working Paper WP/97/152.


Trueblood, M. and S. Shapouri (1999), "Trade liberalization and the sub-Saharan African
   countries," ERS/USDA Food Security Assessment document GFA-11.


Valdes, A. and A.F. McCalla (1999), “Issues, interests and options of developing
   countries,” World Bank: Washington, D.C..

Wise, T. A. (2004), “The paradox of agricultural subsidies: Measurement issues,
   agricultural dumping, and policy reform,” Global Development and Environment
   Institute, Working Paper No. 04-02.

World Bank (2004), World Development Indicators. CD-Rom.

Yunez-Naude, A, and F. Barceinas Paredes, (2002), “Lessons from NAFTA: The case of
   Mexico’s agricultural sector,” Final Report to the World Bank, December.

Salas, J.M., (2003), “Poverty in Mexico in the 1990s,” Maxwell School of Citizenship
   and Public Affairs, Working Paper No. 257, Syracuse, New York.

Zahniser, S. and W. Coyle, (2004), “US-Mexico corn trade during the NAFTA era: New
   twists to an old story,” United States Department of Agriculture, May.




                                                                                 42
Figure 1: Net cereal exports and income per capita, 1970-2000
                                                                     Average income and net cereal exports by decade
  Net cereal exports value / GDP at current prices (%)



                                                                    in a repeated cross section of developing countries
         -.7    -.6    -.5    -.4    -.3    -.2




                                                              6               7                  8                   9                10
                                                                     Decade average income per capita (log scale, $1985 PPP)

                                                                  Average fraction of income spent on cereal net exports 1970-80
                                                                  Average fraction of income spent on cereal net exports 1980-90
                                                                  Average fraction of income spent on cereal net exports 1990-2000



Figure 2: Net food exports and income per capita, 1970-2000
                                                                     Average income and net food exports by decade
  Net food exports value / GDP at current prices (%)




                                                                    in a repeated cross section of developing countries
        -2       -1        0       1        2




                                                              6               7                  8                   9                10
                                                                     Decade average income per capita (log scale, $1985 PPP)

                                                                   Average fraction of income spent on food net exports 1970-80
                                                                   Average fraction of income spent on food net exports 1980-90
                                                                   Average fraction of income spent on food net exports 1990-2000



Figure 3: Net agricultural exports and income per capita, 1970-2000
  Net agriculture exports value / GDP at current prices (%)




                                                                  Average income and net agriculture exports by decade
                                                                   in a repeated cross section of developing countries
               -2         0         2          4




                                                              6              7                  8                   9                 10
                                                                    Decade average income per capita (log scale, $1985 PPP)

                                                                  Average fraction of income spent on agriculture net exports 1970-80
                                                                  Average fraction of income spent on agriculture net exports 1980-90
                                                                  Average fraction of income spent on agriculture net exports 1990-2000
Figure 4 Producer nominal protection coefficients by commodity

                                         OECD producer nominal protection coefficent by commodity

                          Beef

                          Eggs

                          Milk

              Other commodites

                   Other grains

                      Oilseeds
  Commodity




                       Poultry                                                                                  2000-2002
                          Rice                                                                                  1986-88

                       Pigmeat

                 Refined sugar

                    Sheepmeat

                         Wool

                        Wheat

                         Maize

                                  0.00        1.00        2.00           3.00            4.00     5.00   6.00
                                                        Producer nominal protection coefficient
                    Table 1: Agricultural Trade Positions by Country (Sorted by Income)
                          Income per       Fraction pop.          1990 - 2000 Average percentage of
                         capita 2000       below $1/day                    income earned on
                         ($1996 ppp) (most recent year)                      net exports of:
                                                             Cereals All food All ag. (food + non-food)
Congo, Dem. Rep.             322a                          -0.54      -1.31             -0.88
Tanzania                      482           0.49           -0.49      -0.50              1.50
Burundi+                      523           0.55           -0.16      -0.61             0.98
Ethiopia+                     635           0.23           -0.43      -0.52
Guinea-Bissau                 688                          -2.23      -0.47             -0.88
Nigeria+                      707           0.70           -0.32      -0.70             -0.68
Malawi+                       784           0.42           -1.22      -1.11             4.70
Yemen, Rep.                   817           0.10           -2.24      -5.29             -5.74
Madagascar+                   836           0.49           -0.27      0.27              0.75
Togo+                         870                          -0.36      -0.72             1.08
Niger                         875           0.61           -0.47      -0.48             -0.66
Sierra Leone                 889a                          -1.64      -2.63             -2.64
Zambia+                       892           0.64           -0.59      -0.65             -0.51
Rwanda                        895           0.36           -0.26      -1.03             -0.42
Chad                          909                          -0.21      0.28              1.67
Uganda+                       941           0.85           -0.07      -0.34             1.36
Burkina Faso+                 957           0.45           -0.66      -1.04             -0.71
Mali+                         969           0.72           -0.25      0.10              1.95
Central African Rep. +       992b           0.67           -0.24      -0.54             -0.24
Mozambique+                 1,037           0.38           -0.75      -1.21             -1.47
Benin+                      1,214                          -1.21      -1.97             -0.29
Gambia, The+                1,217           0.26           -1.94      -4.38             -5.51
Kenya+                      1,244           0.23           -0.31      -0.19             2.03
Angola                     1,253a                          -0.51      -2.22             -3.08
Cambodia                   1,272c           0.34           -0.13      -0.57             -1.40
Sao Tome & Principe        1,314a                                     -1.27             -2.86
Mauritania                 1,315c           0.26                      -3.27             -4.06
Ghana+                      1,351           0.45           -0.36      1.14              1.11
Nepal+                      1,459           0.39           -0.02      -0.26             -0.49
Vietnam                    1,522a           0.04           0.43       0.54              0.71
Comoros+                    1,578                          -1.17      -1.29             -1.51
Lesotho                     1,592           0.36           -1.10      -5.07             -5.85
Senegal+                    1,622           0.22           -1.30      -2.42             -2.43
Bangladesh+                 1,684           0.36           -0.19      -0.48             -0.52
Nicaragua+                  1,767           0.59           -0.59      -0.36             0.84
Congo, Rep. +               1,808                          -0.65      -2.22             -2.44
Cote d'Ivoire+              1,869           0.16           -0.61      4.07              5.93
Pakistan+                   2,008           0.13           0.02       -0.29             -0.33
Cameroon+                   2,042           0.32           -0.22      0.29              1.15
Honduras+                   2,050           0.21           -0.42      1.06              2.85
Haiti+                     2,349b                          -1.30      -2.87             -2.91
India+                      2,479           0.45           0.04       0.03              0.12
Zimbabwe+                   2,486           0.56           -0.06      0.26              2.25
Bolivia*+                   2,724           0.14           -0.33      0.14              0.58
Guinea+                     2,831                          -0.40      -0.74             -0.76
Papua New Guinea+     2,922c          -0.53   -0.11   0.80
Sri Lanka+             3,300   0.07   -0.35   -0.78   0.22
Philippines*+          3,425   0.15   -0.25   -0.09   -0.21
Ecuador+               3,468   0.18   -0.18   1.98    2.41
Equatorial Guinea      3,604                  -0.68   -1.58
Guyana                3,613c   0.03   1.97    6.36    6.18
Indonesia*+            3,642   0.07   -0.16   -0.02   0.17
Jamaica+               3,693   0.00   -0.90   -0.91   -0.65
Morocco+               3,717   0.01   -0.44   -0.32   -0.63
China+                 3,747   0.17   -0.06   0.04    0.01
Jordan+                3,895   0.00   -1.66   -3.52   -3.91
Guatemala*+            3,914   0.16   -0.23   0.80    2.02
Cape Verde+            4,027          -1.34   -4.81   -5.73
Syria+                 4,094          -0.28   -0.21   -0.09
Egypt+                 4,184   0.03   -0.56   -1.09   -1.30
Romania+               4,285   0.02   -0.06   -0.28   -0.55
El Salvador+           4,435   0.31   -0.30   -0.71   0.29
Namibia               4,459c   0.35   -0.46   0.66    0.77
Peru+                  4,589   0.18   -0.49   -0.74   -0.60
Paraguay*+             4,684   0.15   0.05    1.29    1.39
Algeria+               4,896   0.01   -0.80   -1.85   -2.16
Cuba                  5,087a          -0.52   1.75    1.68
Swaziland              5,227   0.08   -0.37    4.49    3.80
Dominican Republic+    5,270   0.00   -0.46   -0.18   0.03
Colombia*+             5,383   0.08   -0.19   0.03    1.02
Fiji+                 5,442c          -0.73   2.61    2.39
Lebanon                5,786          -0.72   -4.45   -6.11
Costa Rica*+           5,870   0.02   -0.53   4.10    6.51
Iran                   5,995   0.00   -0.39   -0.59   -0.70
Panama+                6,066   0.07   -0.29   0.48    0.35
Grenada+               6,178          -0.66   -3.72   -4.27
St. Lucia              6,330   0.25   -0.80   -0.15   -1.09
Venezuela+             6,420   0.14   -0.20   -0.54   -0.67
Belize                 6,591          -0.35    5.16    4.37
Tunisia+               6,776   0.00   -0.45   -0.34   -0.65
Thailand*+             6,857   0.02   0.46    1.07    1.41
St. Vincent+           7,148          0.40    2.70    2.09
Brazil*+               7,190   0.08   -0.13   0.30    0.75
Dominica+              7,379          -0.65   2.80    0.25
South Africa*+         7,541   0.11   -0.04   0.18    0.20
Botswana              7,550c   0.31   -0.58   -1.90   -2.67
Gabon+                 8,402          -0.24   -1.27   -1.52
Mexico+                8,762   0.10   -0.17   -0.28   -0.28
Poland+                9,217   0.01   -0.08   0.14    -0.15
Uruguay*+              9,622   0.00   0.63    2.27    2.31
Malaysia*+             9,919   0.00   -0.40   1.36    1.89
Chile*+                9,926   0.01   -0.13   0.84    1.00
Seychelles+           10,241          -0.90   -5.14   -6.16
Hungary+              10,439   0.00   0.29    1.89    1.83
Argentina*+           11,006   0.08   0.56    1.82    2.42
Trinidad & Tobago+          11,175         0.04          -0.41   -1.09   -0.87
St. Kitts & Nevis           13,666                               -1.06   -1.95
Mauritius+                  13,932                       -0.41   1.43    1.08
Cyprus+                    16,063b         0.00          -0.72   -0.58   -0.32
Barbados+                   16,415         0.00          -0.36   -1.30   -1.61
Singapore+                 22,642 b        0.00          -0.22   -1.75   -1.39
                   +
Hong Kong, China            26,699         0.00          -0.15   -2.23   -2.87
Source: FAO Stat, Penn World Tables, World Bank PovertyNet.
Notes: (a) 1995, (b) 1998, (c) 1999.
* Cairns Group member.
+
  Country included in regression analysis.
Table 2: Summary statistics for cross-country regressions
       All developing countries is sample in pooled cross section 1982-2001
                                          Obs    Mean Std. Dev.           Min           Max
Head count poverty rate ($1/day,
$1985 PPP)                                 225    20.23        20.61         0.00         87.67
Income per capita ($1985 PPP)            1485     3,357        3,098          341        20,591
OECDNPC                                  1503       1.57        0.48         0.99          3.64
Log consumer price index                 1377       0.19        0.43        -0.12          4.77
Exports + Imports / GDP                  1461       0.68        0.39         0.06          2.95
                 Cairns Group in pooled cross section 1982-2001
                                          Obs    Mean Std. Dev.           Min           Max
Head count poverty rate ($1/day,
$1985 PPP)                                  72      9.85        8.87         0.00         47.04
Income per capita ($1985 PPP)              281    4,105        1,702        1,580         8,724
OECDNPC                                    281      1.80        0.45         1.17          3.20
Log consumer price index                   281      0.31        0.63        -0.01          4.77
Exports + Imports / GDP                    281      0.56        0.35         0.12          2.29
           Cereal and food importers in pooled cross section 1982-2001
                                          Obs    Mean       Std. Dev.      Min          Max
Head count poverty rate ($1/day,
$1985 PPP)                                  74    24.20          26.11       0.00         87.67
Income per capita ($1985 PPP)              613    3,834          4,065        437        20,591
OECDNPC                                    621      1.52           0.52      0.99          3.64
Log consumer price index                   554      0.14           0.30     -0.12          4.33
Exports + Imports / GDP                    591      0.71           0.44      0.16          2.95
           Other developing countries in pooled cross section 1982-2001
                                          Obs    Mean       Std. Dev.      Min          Max
Head count poverty rate ($1/day,
$1985 PPP)                                  85    25.41          18.58       0.00         72.29
Income per capita ($1985 PPP)              611    2,500          2,064        341        11,783
OECDNPC                                    621      1.55           0.45      1.01          3.30
Log consumer price index                   562      0.17           0.39     -0.10          4.64
Exports + Imports / GDP                    609      0.71           0.32      0.06          1.59
Source: World Development Indicators (trade share and CPI), Penn World Tables (income),
and World Bank PovertyNet (headcount), FAOSTAT and SourceOECD (OECDNPC).
 Note: Cereal and food importers defined as countries that had negative values of net exports of
cereals and food on average in 1970s.
The average Southern Oscillation Index anomaly has an average value of –0.58 (std. dev.
1.18).
Table 3: Poverty and OECD Agricultural Support: Cross-Country Evidence
Panel A: All Developing Countries
                            (1)             (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
Ln OECDPOLICY              0.140           2.439              3.036             3.036             2.203              2.120
                          [0.885]         [1.684]           [1.446]*           [1.746]           [1.544]            [1.691]
Ln GDP per capita                                            -4.300            -4.300             -5.093             -5.135
                                                            [2.104]*          [2.104]*          [2.426]*           [2.487]*
SOI Anomaly                                                                     -0.326            -0.291             -0.291
                                                                              [0.155]*           [0.169]            [0.168]
Ln inflation                                                                                      -0.382             -0.395
                                                                                                 [0.286]            [0.296]
Trade share                                                                                                          0.375
                                                                                                                    [1.244]
Observations                223            223                217               217               211                 211
R-squared                   0.67           0.69               0.72              0.72              0.73                0.73

Panel B: Cairns Group Only
Ln OECDPOLICY             1.307            1.427             1.346              1.346             0.931             0.464
                         [1.781]          [1.693]           [0.976]            [0.976]           [1.081]           [1.361]
Ln GDP per capita                                            -3.570             -3.570            -3.590            -3.766
                                                            [3.148]            [3.148]           [3.189]           [3.142]
SOI Anomaly                                                                     -0.142            -0.135            -0.112
                                                                               [0.186]           [0.189]           [0.190]
Ln inflation                                                                                      -0.330            -0.347
                                                                                                 [0.411]           [0.426]
Trade share                                                                                                         0.574
                                                                                                                   [0.981]
Observations                 70             70                 69                69                69                 69
R-squared                   0.55           0.67               0.69              0.69              0.69               0.70

Panel C: Historical Food Importers Only
Ln OECDPOLICY               -1.372         1.448              1.130             1.130              0.471              0.512
                           [1.254]        [2.163]            [2.776]           [2.776]            [2.678]            [2.586]
Ln GDP per capita                                             -4.154           -4.154              -4.816             -4.842
                                                            [2.088]*          [2.088]*          [2.031]**          [2.069]**
SOI Anomaly                                                                     0.715              0.739              0.686
                                                                               [0.643]            [0.619]            [0.563]
Ln inflation                                                                                       -0.622             -0.647
                                                                                                 [0.229]*           [0.228]*
Trade share                                                                                                           1.042
                                                                                                                     [1.340]
Observations                 74               74               74                 74                72                  72
R-squared                   0.83             0.88             0.91               0.91              0.92                0.92
Robust standard errors in brackets * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level All estimates include country fixed
effects. Estimates in columns (2)-(6) also include year dummies.
Table 4: Income and OECD Agricultural Support: Cross-Country Evidence
Panel A: All Developing Countries
                            (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)
Ln OECDPOLICY              0.102             0.136              0.136               0.131               0.128
                         [0.043]*           [0.082]            [0.082]             [0.085]             [0.082]
SOI Anomaly                                                     0.033               0.033               0.030
                                                              [0.012]**           [0.012]**           [0.013]*
Ln inflation                                                                        -0.006              -0.007
                                                                                   [0.022]             [0.023]
Trade share                                                                                             0.032
                                                                                                       [0.118]
Observations               1410              1410               1410                1299                 1282
R-squared                  0.97              0.98               0.98                0.98                 0.98


Panel B: Cairns Group Only
Ln OECDPOLICY             0.176              0.469              0.469               0.462              0.323
                         [0.117]            [0.256]            [0.256]             [0.255]            [0.243]
SOI Anomaly                                                     0.015               0.016              0.018
                                                               [0.041]             [0.042]            [0.042]
Ln inflation                                                                        0.010              0.000
                                                                                   [0.027]            [0.027]
Trade share                                                                                            0.263
                                                                                                     [0.116]**
Observations               267               267                 267                267                 267
R-squared                  0.87              0.94                0.94               0.94                0.94


Panel C: Historical Food Importers
Ln OECDPOLICY               0.123            0.168               0.168              0.204                 0.213
                          [0.060]*          [0.090]             [0.090]            [0.101]              [0.113]
SOI Anomaly                                                      0.036              0.023                 0.018
                                                               [0.016]*           [0.011]**             [0.013]
Ln inflation                                                                        -0.048               -0.045
                                                                                  [0.021]**           [0.022]**
Trade share                                                                                              -0.062
                                                                                                        [0.135]
Observations                582               582                 582                524                   507
R-squared                   0.98              0.98                0.98               0.98                  0.98
Robust standard errors in brackets * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level All estimates include
country fixed effects. Estimates in columns (2)-(5) also include year dummies.
             Figure 5

                                                                                            U.S. Corn Exports to Mexico

                                                              7
                                    Millions of Metric Tons




                                                              6
                                                              5
                                                              4                                                                                                   White Corn
                                                              3                                                                                                   Yellow Corn
                                                              2
                                                              1
                                                              0




                                                                 99

                                                                 00
                                                                91

                                                                92

                                                                93

                                                                94

                                                                95

                                                                96

                                                                97

                                                                98
                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              20
                                                              Source: USDA, www://www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/Corn/trade.htm

             Figure 6

                                                                                      Corn Producer Prices and World Prices
                                       1400
Real (1994) Mexican Pesos Per Ton




                                       1200

                                       1000                                                                                                          Nafta Effective

                                                   800

                                                   600

                                                   400

                                                   200

                                                              0
                                                                  6

                                                                        7

                                                                               8

                                                                                       9

                                                                                              0

                                                                                                     1

                                                                                                            2

                                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                                          4

                                                                                                                                 5

                                                                                                                                        6

                                                                                                                                               7

                                                                                                                                                      8

                                                                                                                                                             9

                                                                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                 8

                                                                         8

                                                                                8

                                                                                        8

                                                                                               9

                                                                                                      9

                                                                                                             9

                                                                                                                    9

                                                                                                                           9

                                                                                                                                  9

                                                                                                                                         9

                                                                                                                                                9

                                                                                                                                                       9

                                                                                                                                                              9

                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                              19

                                                                      19

                                                                             19

                                                                                     19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                    Real Producer Price                  Real Reference Price


             Source: OECD PSE database
Table 5: Is Globalization Driving the Trends in Mexican Producer Prices?
                                 1991-2000
Dependent Variable: Mexican Producer Price in First Differences
                   (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
Real US Price      0.204         0.322         0.322          0.313
                   (4.00)**      (5.40)**      (5.37)**       (2.22)
USPrice*Nafta                    -0.177        -0.045
                                 (1.63)        (0.10)
Nafta                            37.142        64.000
                                 (2.17)*       (2.71)**
USPrice*Break                                  -0.706
                                               (2.01)
Breakdum                                       -10.272
                                               (0.09)
USPrice*North                                                 0.068
                                                              (0.38)
USPrice*Central                                               0.095
                                                              (0.55)
USPrice*South                                                 0.013
                                                              (0.07)
North                                                         23.243
                                                              (0.85)
Central                                                       30.863
                                                              (1.15)
South                                                         17.821
                                                              (0.66)
Constant           -63.912       -95.931       -95.931        -76.424
                   (7.38)**      (8.86)**      (8.82)**       (3.39)**
Observations       224           224           224            192
R-squared          0.08          0.11          0.14           0.16
Notes: Robust t-statistics in parentheses. Mexican producer prices are
annual by state and were obtained from SAGARPA. They were deflated to real
1994 prices using the national CPI. United States prices were obtained
from the OECD Producer Support Estimate database and are the c.i.f. import
price of corn not including transport or processing costs from the Mexican
border to Mexican consumers. US prices were converted to Mexican pesos
using the annual average official exchange rate. Mexican and US prices are
in first differences to eliminate the common time trend. NAFTA is a dummy
equal to one for the years 1996-2000. Results are robust to defining the
NAFTA dummy equal to one also in 1995. The omitted category is Border
states. These are: Baja California, Sonora, Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo
Leon, and Tamaulipas. Northern states are: Sinaloa, Nayarit, Zacatecas,
Aguascalientes, San Luis Potosi, and Durango. Central states are: Jalisco,
Colima, Michoacan, Guanajuato, Queretaro, Estado de Mexico, Hidalgo,
Distrito Federal, Tlaxcala, Morelos, Puebla, and Veracruz. Southern states
are: Guerrero, Oaxaca, Chiapas, Tabasco, Campeche, Yucatan and Quintana
Roo.
Table 6: Is Globalization Driving the Differential Between
Mexican and U.S. Corn Prices?
                                 1991-2000
Dependent Variable: Ratio Mexican to US Corn Price
                    (1)            (2)          (3)
Nafta               -0.440                      -0.493
                    (9.42)**                    (6.37)**
North                              -0.019       -0.078
                                   (0.35)       (0.79)
Central                            0.033        -0.010
                                   (0.53)       (0.10)
South                              0.020        0.001
                                   (0.22)       (0.09)
North*Nafta                                     0.093
                                                (0.87)
Cenral*Nafta                                    0.069
                                                (0.58)
South*Nafta                                     0.001
                                                (0.02)
Constant            1.619          1.339        1.647
                    (38.82)**      (32.49)**    (23.01)**
Observations        256            256          256
R-squared           0.30           0.00         0.31
Notes: Robust t-statistics in parentheses. Mexican producer
prices are annual by state and were obtained from SAGARPA.
United States prices were obtained from the OECD Producer
Support Estimate database and are the c.i.f. import price
of corn not including transport or processing costs from
the Mexican border to Mexican consumers. US prices were
converted to Mexican pesos using the annual average
official exchange rate. NAFTA is a dummy equal to one for
the years 1996-2000. Results are robust to defining the
NAFTA dummy equal to one also in 1995. The omitted category
is Border states. These are: Baja California, Sonora,
Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Leon, and Tamaulipas. Northern
states are: Sinaloa, Nayarit, Zacatecas, Aguascalientes,
San Luis Potosi, and Durango. Central states are: Jalisco,
Colima, Michoacan, Guanajuato, Queretaro, Estado de Mexico,
Hidalgo, Distrito Federal, Tlaxcala, Morelos, Puebla, and
Veracruz. Southern states are: Guerrero, Oaxaca, Chiapas,
Tabasco, Campeche, Yucatan and Quintana Roo.
                             Table 7: Means of Socio-Economic Characteristics of Rural Dwellers Across Time*
                                                         Panel A: All Rural Dwellers
                                         1991          1993       1995        1996               1997          1998          1999          2000
# Observations                          15,216        15,017        20,861       100,411       28,967        95,321        76,441        99,901
Real Income (1994 Peso)                 702.75        637.66        657.29       595.91        576.26        581.80        554.01        649.50
Age                                     33.18         33.77         33.82         33.60         34.34         34.31         34.72         34.60
Years of Schooling                       4.63          4.66          5.17          5.57          5.74          5.74          5.48          5.87
Hours Worked                            33.94         33.94         20.94         22.33         22.97         22.52         22.80         21.90
Total Land (in ha)                       0.98          0.89          0.67          0.71          0.58          0.68          0.73          0.50
Involved in Agriculture                  0.32          0.32          0.28          0.26          0.28          0.27          0.28          0.24
Farmer                                   0.14          0.14          0.11          0.10          0.10          0.10          0.09          0.09
Corn Occupation                          0.20          0.15          0.15          0.13          0.14          0.13          0.14          0.10
Corn Subsistence                         0.11          0.12          0.09          0.08          0.07          0.08          0.08          0.07
Corn Selling                             0.02          0.02          0.02          0.02          0.02          0.02          0.02          0.01
                                              Panel B: Rural Dwellers Involved in Agriculture
                                         1991        1993      1995          1996         1997                 1998          1999          2000
# Observations                          5,134         5,074         6,467        25,977         6,858        25,735        18,538        22,887
Real Income (1994 Peso)                 585.04        495.31        502.94       434.60        427.04        411.30        405.81        425.72
Age                                     35.25         35.74         35.73         35.58         36.32         36.04         36.40         36.67
Years of Schooling                       3.81          3.75          3.96          4.23          4.46          4.38          4.30          4.42
Hours Worked                            33.73         33.41         35.14         38.13         38.33         34.80         37.85         35.54
Total Land (in ha)                       3.04          2.75          2.37          2.72          2.07          2.47          2.64          2.08
Corn Occupation                          0.63          0.46          0.54          0.50          0.49         0.48          0.50          0.40
Corn Subsistence                         0.35          0.36          0.32          0.30          0.26         0.29          0.29          0.27
Corn Selling                             0.05          0.05          0.06          0.08          0.08         0.07          0.07          0.06
                                                            Panel C: All Farmers
                                         1991          1993       1995        1996               1997          1998          1999          2000
# Observations                           2258          2241          2596         10420          2504          9888          7011          8703
Real Income (1994 Peso)                 582.81        480.74        515.13       450.81        447.93        415.38        389.37        394.70
Age                                     46.56         47.67         46.79         47.11         48.82         48.20         47.98         48.50
Years of Schooling                       2.78          2.63          3.05          3.34          3.54          3.38          3.48          3.46
Hours Worked                            37.96         37.02         40.36         43.87         45.27         41.34         44.50         40.87
Total Land (in ha)                       7.10          6.21          5.91          7.00          5.63          6.63          6.95          5.59
Corn Occupation                          0.62          0.46          0.64          0.59          0.60         0.60          0.61          0.54
Corn Subsistence                         0.81          0.82          0.80          0.76          0.72         0.78          0.75          0.73
Corn Selling                             0.12          0.12          0.14          0.20          0.22         0.19          0.18          0.16
                                                          Panel D: All Corn Farmers
                                         1991          1993        1995       1996               1997          1998          1999          2000
# Observations                          1,420         1,003         1,628         6,047         1,481         6,017         4,185         4,900
Real Income (1994 Peso)                 516.81        349.63        277.89       267.68        270.01        256.84        207.64        206.35
Age                                     47.85         48.73         47.35         47.58         50.11         48.97         48.50         49.23
Years of Schooling                       2.44          2.22          2.62          2.79          2.93          2.79          2.98          2.94
Hours Worked                            37.11         36.09         39.66         43.93         45.70         41.05         45.23         40.18
Total Land (in ha)                       6.25          3.85          4.09          4.40          4.16          4.94          4.09          3.90
Corn Occupation                          1.00          1.00          1.00          1.00          1.00         1.00          1.00          1.00
Corn Subsistence                         0.86          0.90          0.91          0.85          0.84         0.90          0.87          0.88
Corn Selling                             0.15          0.16          0.16          0.25          0.27         0.23          0.24          0.22

Notes: Farmer is defined as someone who takes part in agricultural activities and owns, occupies, or rents land (as opposed to agricultural
laborer).Corn farmer is defined as a farmer who identifies his primary occupation as the cultivation of maiz and beans. Corn subsistence is the
percent of farmers who respond that their primary crop for subsistence is maiz and beans. Corn selling is the percent of farmers who respond that
their main crop for selling is corn. Source: ENE 1991-2000. Medians are not reported because they are virtually identical to means.
                   Table 8: Summary Statistics for Families with Corn Farmers
Real Monthly Corn Consumption                1992         1994       1996                1998        2000
Value (1994 Pesos)                                    77.50       62.87        73.44       61.05        55.20
As a share of food expenditures                        0.20         0.16        0.19         0.19        0.17
As a share of total expenditures                       0.10         0.07        0.11         0.10        0.09
Quantity (kilograms)                                  16.39       15.30        16.21       15.61        17.10
Real Monthly Income                                1992         1994        1996         1998        2000
Income from Work                                     221.57      228.14       209.99      172.43       179.98
Income from Profits                                  479.06      420.24       327.12      339.03       355.92
Income Other                                          21.93         6.62       10.90       10.32        13.11
Income from Transfers (Other)                        102.19      143.43       175.70      145.97       206.64
Income from Transfers (Remittances)                   83.14       98.99       109.97       88.13       100.69
# Observations                                    1,141,718 1,249,234 1,368,191 1,204,051             990,784
Notes: Consumption figures include corn purchases, corn produced for household's consumption, and in-kind
payments and gifts of corn Cornfarmer is defined as someone who reports that his/her primary occupation is the
cultivation of corn and beans. Source: ENIGH 1992-2000
                  Table 9:Means of Corn Farmer Characteristics by Standard of Living Across Time*
                                     Panel A: Small Corn Farmers (<5ha land)
                                         1991          1993          1995          1996          1997          1998          1999          2000
# Observations                            920           813          1260          4768          1135          4810          3252          3976
Real Income (1994 Peso)                 437.51        323.17        245.26        199.77        205.61        162.49        155.19        152.79
Age                                     46.64         48.98         46.51         46.90         49.77         48.56         48.05         48.52
Years of Schooling                       2.37          2.22          2.60          2.75          2.81          2.67          2.83          2.86
Hours Worked                            36.32         35.59         39.46         43.37         45.20         39.90         44.93         39.77
Total Land (in ha)                       2.39          2.23          2.10          2.20          2.17          2.19          2.12          2.08
Corn Subsistence                         0.89          0.92          0.93          0.89          0.88          0.93          0.92          0.92
Corn Main Crop for Selling               0.10          0.11          0.11          0.19          0.23          0.18          0.19          0.19
Do Not Produce to Sell                   0.67          0.77          0.73          0.65          0.68          0.68          0.63          0.63
Occasionally Sell Corn                   0.16          0.13          0.12          0.13          0.13          0.12          0.10          0.10
Never Sell Corn                          0.56          0.67          0.64          0.57          0.59          0.60          0.57          0.57
                                           Panel B: Medium Corn Farmers (5-15ha land)
                                         1991      1993    1995     1996      1997                             1998          1999          2000
# Observations                            387       173     288     1010       264                              948          714           731
Real Income (1994 Peso)                 636.55        452.16        367.47        485.34        485.46        477.46        376.56        364.76
Age                                     51.55         47.56         52.71         50.44         50.91         51.19         50.50         52.52
Years of Schooling                       2.58          1.86          2.65          2.81          3.36          2.97          3.43          3.24
Hours Worked                            36.59         37.74         40.83         45.50         47.54         43.71         47.05         42.53
Total Land (in ha)                       8.59          8.26          8.55          8.32          8.36          8.35          8.43          8.52
Corn Subsistence                         0.80          0.84          0.83          0.70          0.73          0.79          0.67          0.70
Corn Main Crop for Selling               0.27          0.31          0.39          0.46          0.42          0.41          0.47          0.37
Do Not Produce to Sell                   0.33          0.47          0.35          0.23          0.35          0.29          0.24          0.33
                                           Panel C: Large Corn Farmers (>15ha land)
                                         1991     1993     1995     1996      1997                             1998          1999          2000
# Observations                            96       17       59      240        63                               259           219          193
Real Income (1994 Peso)                 845.46        529.43        649.68        753.77        743.45       1031.82        725.53        949.71
Age                                     48.13         48.32         52.86         50.54         55.41         48.95         50.71         53.89
Years of Schooling                       2.50          4.76          4.00          3.66          3.83          4.08          4.53          3.66
Hours Worked                            45.75         41.78         42.19         51.20         52.74         50.94         44.92         41.39
Total Land (in ha)                      34.15         28.40         44.71         38.88         33.97         37.46         32.22         32.31
Corn Subsistence                         0.78          0.49          0.75          0.49          0.36          0.62          0.51          0.58
Corn Main Crop for Selling               0.16          0.69          0.47          0.58          0.62          0.61          0.54          0.37
Do Not Produce to Sell                   0.25          0.14          0.13          0.19          0.15          0.16          0.14          0.18

Notes: Farmer is defined as someone who takes part in agricultural activities and owns, occupies, or rents land (as opposed to agricultural laborer).
Corn farmer is a farmer who identifies his primary occupation as the cultivation of maiz and beans. "Corn Subsistence" is the percent of respondents
who answer that their main crop for subsistence is corn. "Corn Main Crop for Selling" Selling" is the percent of respondents who answer the
question "what is your main crop for selling?" as corn. "Do Not Produce to Sell" is the percent of respondents who answer the question "what is your
main crop for selling?" as "I don't produce to sell." Occasionally Sell is the percentage of respondents who answer the question "how much of your
subsistence crop do you sell?" with corn. Never Sell Corn is the percentage of respondents who answer they do not produce to sell when asked "what
is your main crop for selling?" but who answer "which of your subsistence crops do you sell?" with corn. Medians are not reported because they are
virtually identical to means. Source: ENE 1991-2000.
                              Table 10: Differences Between Corn Farmers in 1991 and 2000
                                                       Panel A: All Cornfarmers
                                                                                      a                                         b
                            Differences between 1991/2 and 2000                           Differences between 1994/5 and 2000
                             Difference T-statistic    P-value                             Difference T-statistic    P-value
Farmer Characteristics and Income (ENE)
Age                                          1.37              2.95         0.00                1.87            4.16    0.00
Years of Schooling                            0.50             6.20         0.00                0.31            4.08    0.00
Hours Worked                                  3.07             5.41         0.00                0.52            1.05    0.30
Total Land (in ha)                           -2.34            -7.07         0.00               -0.19            -0.65   0.52
Income (1994 Peso)                         -310.46           -23.51         0.00              -71.54            -6.81   0.00

                                                  Panel B: Small Cornfarmers
                                         Differences between 1991 and 2000                  Differences between 1995 and 2000
                                         Difference T-statistic    P-value                  Difference T-statistic   P-value
Real Income (1994 Peso)                   -284.72      -23.84       0.00                     -92.47        -9.43       0.00
Age                                          1.88              3.31         0.00                2.01            3.94    0.00
Years of Schooling                            0.48             5.22         0.00                0.26            2.93    0.00
Hours Worked                                  3.45             5.15         0.00                0.31            0.56    0.58
Total Land (in ha)                           -0.31      -6.09       0.00       -0.03        -0.47       0.64
                                                 Panel C: Medium Cornfarmers
                                         Differences between 1991 and 2000   Differences between 1995 and 2000
                                         Difference T-statistic   P-value    Difference T-statistic   P-value
Real Income (1994 Peso)                   -271.79       -8.79       0.00       -2.71        -0.10       0.92
Age                                          0.97              1.03         0.31               -0.19            -0.19   0.85
Years of Schooling                            0.66             3.58         0.00                0.60            3.18    0.00
Hours Worked                                  5.94             4.75         0.00                1.70            1.34    0.18
Total Land (in ha)                           -0.07      -0.46       0.64                       -0.03            -0.17   0.86
                                                  Panel D: Large Cornfarmers
                                         Differences between 1991 and 2000                  Differences between 1995 and 2000
                                         Difference T-statistic   P-value                   Difference T-statistic   P-value
Real Income (1994 Peso)                   104.25         1.03       0.30                     300.03        2.09        0.04
Age                                           5.76             3.22         0.00                1.03            0.50    0.62
Years of Schooling                           1.16              3.27         0.00               -0.34            -0.77   0.44
Hours Worked                                 -4.36            -1.86         0.06               -0.81            -0.33   0.74
Total Land (in ha)                           -1.84            -0.49         0.62              -12.40            -1.70   0.09
Notes: P-values indicate probability that difference is not equal to 0
Cornfarmer is defined as a farmer whose identifies his primary occupation as the cultivation of maize and beans.A12
Source: ENE 1991, 1995, 2000
               Table 11: Income and Consumption of Families of Corn Farmers in 1992 and 2000 by Standard of Living
                                          Panel A: Low Income Cornfarming Families
                                            1992        1994        1996        1998       2000     Change 92/00 Change 94/00
Real Monthly Corn Consumption (means)                                                                Difference and Significance
Value (1994 Pesos)                                   77.15       71.63        79.97       62.73       53.70     -23.45    ***   -17.93    ***

As a share of food expenditures                       0.28        0.24         0.28        0.26         0.22     -0.06           -0.01
As a share of total expenditures                      0.15        0.12         0.17        0.14         0.13     -0.02           0.01
Quantity (kilograms)                                 17.31       18.86        18.74       17.73       19.68      2.37     **     0.82
Real Monthly Income ( means)
Work Income                                          78.97       99.34      114.35        86.93       89.24      10.27    ***   -10.10    ***

Profit Income                                      240.94       242.68      191.42       151.28      114.30     -126.64   ***   -128.38   ***

Other Income                                          2.15        1.28         1.25        1.92         1.68     -0.47           0.40
Income from Transfers (Other)                        44.45       62.94        83.51       75.46      121.91      77.46    ***   58.98     ***

Income from Transfers (Remittances)                  42.02       58.40        38.69       46.32       39.23      -2.79          -19.17    ***

# Observations                                    438,613     365,409      445,568     470,569      352,983
                                               Panel B: Middle Income Cornfarming Families
                                                  1992       1994       1996       1998             2000       Change 92/00 Change 94/00
Real Monthly Corn Consumption (means)                                                                           Difference and Significance
Value (1994 Pesos)                                   75.93       63.49        80.64       67.49       62.58     -13.35    ***    -0.91
As a share of food expenditures                       0.19        0.16         0.20        0.18         0.17     -0.03           0.00
As a share of total expenditures                      0.10        0.07         0.10        0.09         0.08     -0.02           0.01
Quantity (kilograms)                                 15.71       15.59        17.85       16.57       18.60      2.90     **     3.01     **

Real Monthly Income ( means)
Work Income                                        134.72       189.20      195.81       177.06      187.89      53.17    ***    -1.31
Profit Income                                      468.93       370.02      255.29       291.64      192.61     -276.32   ***   -177.41   ***

Other Income                                          4.30        9.42        13.85       10.52       13.20      8.90            3.78
Income from Transfers (Other)                      111.56        87.33      145.60       110.04      215.28     103.72    ***   127.95    ***

Income from Transfers (Remittances)                 97.17       78.50       101.16       60.93       111.61      14.44    **    33.11     ***
# Observations                                    324,016     407,348      469,429     353,566      329,765
                                                Panel C: High Income Cornfarming Families
                                                  1992        1994      1996       1998             2000       Change 92/00 Change 94/00
Real Monthly Corn Consumption (means)                                                                           Difference and Significance
Value (1994 Pesos)                                   79.31       55.63        59.47       52.82       48.83     -30.48    ***    -6.80    **
As a share of food expenditures                       0.12        0.09         0.11        0.11         0.10     -0.02           0.01
As a share of total expenditures                      0.05        0.04         0.05        0.05         0.04     -0.01           0.00
Quantity (kilograms)                                 15.90       12.30        12.00       12.01       12.40      -3.49    **     0.10     **
Real Monthly Income ( means)
Work Income                                        277.24       316.34      320.04       277.43      286.95      9.71     **    -29.38    **
Profit Income                                      617.19       599.82      537.21       624.13      807.63     190.44    ***   207.81    ***
Other Income                                         60.90        8.34        17.45       20.87       26.12     -34.78    **    17.78     **
Income from Transfers (Other)                      163.15       253.37      298.93       270.22      294.48     131.33    ***   41.11     ***
Income from Transfers (Remittances)                    120.19         147.74     190.17      167.40     159.44      39.25    **   11.70   ***
# Observations                                        372,611       475,855     450,238    373,118     298,706
Notes: Consumption figures include corn purchases, corn produced for household's consumption, and in-kind payments and gifts of corn.
Cornfarmer is defined as someone who identifies his/her primary occupation as the cultivation of corn and beans. All means computed using
population weights. The last four columns report the change in mean between 1992 and 2000 and then between 1994 and 2000. The column to
the right of the change in mean reports the significance of a t-test with *** 99%, **95% and *90%. Source: ENIGH
Source: ENIGH
Table A1: Description of variables and data sources
Variable name       Source                                    Description
Headcount           World Bank Poverty Net                    Constant $1985 US Dollar; fraction of
poverty rate                                                  population with income less than $1 per
                                                              day

Log average         Penn World Tables 6.1                     Constant $1985 US Dollar, real GDP per
income per capita                                             capita

SOI anomaly         National Oceanic and Atmospheric          Southern Oscillation Index anomaly
                    Administration. Available:
                    ftp://ftp.ncep.noaa.gov/pub/
                    cpc/wd52dg/data/indices/soi

OECDPOLICY          SourceOECD Agriculture support            OECD average Nominal Protection
                    estimates, available:                     Coefficient. Data included in regression as
                    http://oecdpublications.gfi-nb.com/cgi-   weighted average across commodities
                    bin/OECDBookShop.storefront/EN/produ      where weights are production shares for
                    ct/512002093C3                            major commodity classes. These
                    USDA Economic Research Service Trade      commodity classes are: wheat, maize, rice,
                    Issues data, available:                   other grains, oilseeds, sugar, milk, beef,
                    http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/          sheepmeat, wool, pigmeat, poultry, eggs,
                                                              coffee, cocoa, roots and tubers, fruits,
                                                              vegetables (including melons). Data
                                                              available from OECD for period 1987-
                                                              2000, and USDA/ERS for period 1982-87.
                    FAOSTAT Agricultural production of        Data included in regression as weighted
                    primary crops, available:                 average across commodities where weights
                    http://faostat.fao.org/faost              are production shares for major commodity
                    at/collections?subset=agricu              classes listed above in 1970. Production
                    lture                                     share data from FAO.

Exports+Import/     World Development Indicators              Exports and imports in constant 1985 US
GDP                                                           Dollars at market exchange rate. GDP is in
                                                              $1985 PPP

ln(1+inflation      World Development Indicators              Log of rate of inflation plus one
rate)
                                                    Table A.2 Rural Poverty Lines for Mexico

Monthly Per Capita Poverty Lines (1994 Pesos)                     1994         1996         1998         2000
Food Poverty/Extreme Poverty                                      43.29        87.61       117.52       139.78
Asset-poverty/Moderate Poverty                                    82.78       159.21       208.76       254.50
$1/day poverty line                                               68.51       124.29        173.8       219.24
$2/day poverty line                                              137.02       248.58        347.6        438.48

Notes: Source: ENIGH, ENE, World Bank (2004). Food Poverty is defined as the income required to purchase a food basket to satisfy minimum
nutritional requirements. Asset poverty uses Engel coefficients to estimate the non-food component of income. Since our income data is in real 94
pesos and the poverty line estimates were originally in 2000 pesos, we used the general CPI to convert the poverty lines to real 94 pesos. Income
from corn farming is only reported in the last three years because the available data for the earlier years does not correspond to the years of data
available for household data.
