                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAMS AND
                              RETIREMENT AROUND THE WORLD:
                                    FISCAL IMPLICATIONS

                                 INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY

                                             Jonathan Gruber
                                              David A. Wise

                                          Working Paper 11290
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11290


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2005




Funding from the National Institute on Aging, through Grants P01-AG05842 and P30-AG12810, is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jonathan Gruber and David A. Wise. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Fiscal Implications, Introduction and
Summary
Jonathan Gruber and David A. Wise
NBER Working Paper No. 11290
April 2005
JEL No. F0, H0

                                            ABSTRACT

This is the introduction to and summary of Phase III of an international research project to study the
relationship between social security provisions and retirement. The project relies on the work of a
large group of economists in 12 countries who conduct the analysis for each of their countries. The
first phase described the retirement incentives inherent in plan provisions and documented the strong
relationship across countries between social security incentives to retire and the proportion of older
persons out of the labor force. The second phase illustrated the large effects that changing plan
provisions would have on the labor force participation of older workers. This third phase shows the
consequent fiscal implications that extending labor force participation would have on net program
costs – reduced government social security benefit payments less increased government tax revenues.

The findings are conveyed by simulating the implications of illustrative reforms. One reform

increases benefit eligibility ages by three years. Another illustrative reform reduces actuarially

benefits received before the normal retirement age. A common reform prescribes the same provisions

in each country. The financial implications of the illustrative reforms are very large in many

instances, often as much as 20 to 40 percent of current program costs. The savings amount to as

much a 1 percent or more of country GDP. The results make clear that reforms like those considered

in this volume can have very large fiscal implications for the cost of social security benefits as well

as for government revenues engendered by changes in the labor force participation of older workers.

Jonathan Gruber                                        David Wise
MIT Department of Economics                            NBER
E52-355                                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
50 Memorial Drive                                      Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                               dwise@nber.org
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
    Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World:
                        Fiscal Implications

                                       Introduction and Summary

                                                           by

                                 Jonathan Gruber and David A. Wise

           Under pay-as-you-go social security systems most developed countries have

made promises they can’t keep. The systems in their current forms are not financially

sustainable. What caused the problem? It has been common to assume that the

problem was caused by aging populations. The number of older persons has increased

very rapidly relative to the number of younger persons and this trend will continue. (See

Figure 1.1) Thus the proportion of retirees has increased relative to the number of

employed persons who must pay for the benefits of those who are retired. In addition,

persons are living longer so that those who reach retirement age are receiving benefits

longer than they used to. The effect of aging populations and increasing longevity has

been compounded by another trend: older persons are leaving the labor force at

younger and younger ages, further increasing the ratio of retirees to employed persons.

(See Figures 2a and 2b.) What has not been widely appreciated is that the provisions

of social security programs themselves often provide strong incentives to leave the

labor force. By penalizing work, social security systems magnify the increased financial

burden caused by aging populations and thus contribute to their own insolvency.

           Several years ago we began an international project to study the relationship

between social security program provisions and retirement. This volume presents the

results of the third phase of the project. The first phase described the retirement

1
    In this figure “Now” varies from country to country but is generally the early 1990s.
                                                    Page 1
incentives inherent in plan provisions and documented the strong relationship across

countries between social security incentives to retire and the proportion of older persons

out of the labor force (Gruber and Wise 1999a). The second phase illustrated the large

effects that changing plan provisions would have on the labor force participation of older

workers. This third phase shows the consequent fiscal implications that extending labor

force participation would have on net program costs—reduced government social

security benefit payments less increased government tax revenues.

       The findings are conveyed by simulating the implications of illustrative reforms.

One reform increases benefit eligibility ages by three years. Another illustrative reform

reduces actuarially benefits received before the normal retirement age. A common

reform prescribes the same provisions in each country. The financial implications of the

illustrative reforms are very large in many instances, often as much as 20 to 40 percent

of current program costs. The savings amount to as much a 1 percent or more of

country GDP.

       The results of the ongoing project are the product of analyses conducted for each

country by analysts in that country. Researchers who have participated in the project

are listed below. The authors of the country papers in this volume are listed first; others

who participated in one of the first two phases are listed second and shown in italics

       Belgium              Raphaël Desmet, Alain Jousten, Sergio Perelman, Pierre
                            Pestieau, Arnaud Dellis, and Jean-Philippe Stijns
       Canada               Michael Baker, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan
       Denmark              Paul Bingley, Nabanita Datta Gupta, and Peder J. Pedersen
       France               Emmanuelle Walraet, Ronan Mahieu, Didier Blanchet, and
                            Louis-Paul Pelé
       Germany              Axel Börsch-Supan, Simone Kohnz, Giovanni Mastrobuoni,
                            and Reinhold Schnabel
       Italy                Agar Brugiavini and Franco Peracchi
       Japan                Akiko Sato Oishi, Takashi Oshio, and Naohiro Yashiro
       Netherlands          Arie Kapteyn and Klaas de Vos
       Spain                Michele Boldrin, Sergi Jiménez-Martín, and Franco Peracchi
                                       Page 2
       Sweden               Mårten Palme and Ingemar Svensson
       United Kingdom       Richard Blundell, Carl Emmerson, Paul Johnson, Costas
                            Meghir, and Sarah Smith
       United States        Courtney Coile, Jonathan Gruber, and Peter Diamond


       An important goal of the project has been to present results that were as

comparable as possible across projects. Thus the papers for each phase were

prepared according to a detailed template that we prepared in consultation with country

participants. In many cases the country papers contain analyses in addition to those

prescribed in the template, usually pertaining to reforms or reform proposals in

individual countries.

       Before discussing in more detail the results of this phase of the project we

summarize the results of the previous two phases. We give particular attention to the

second phase, which provides the empirical base for the analysis in this volume.

PHASE I

       The goal of the first stage of the project was to describe the incentives inherent in

the social security provisions and to relate the incentives to the labor force participation

of older workers across nations. The core of each Phase I paper is a detailed analysis

of the retirement incentives inherent in the provisions of that country’s retirement

income system based on a template that described in detail how the incentives were to

be calculated. By making the same analytic calculations and by presenting the same

simulations in each of the countries, the individual studies could provide a means of

comparing the retirement incentives among the countries. Each of the country papers

presents completely parallel labor force and other data for men and women. To simplify

the exposition here, only data for men are discussed, but the effect of the social security




                                       Page 3
incentives to leave the labor force, as discussed below, appear to be at least as

important for women as for men.

Unused Labor Force Capacity

       The proportion of men out of the labor force between ages 55 and 65 in 11 coun-

tries is shown in Figure 3. The term “unused labor force capacity” is used to emphasize

that incentives to induce older persons to leave the labor force reduces national econo-

mic production, recognizing of course that not all persons in these age ranges want to

work or are able to work. For the 55 to 65 age group the proportion ranges from close

to 0.7 in Belgium to about 0.2 in Japan. Subsequent results will show the relationship

between social security plan provisions to leave the labor force and this measure of

unused labor force capacity. We first describe the measurement of incentives to retire.

Measuring Incentives to Retire

       Three key features of social security systems have an important effect on labor

force participation incentives. The first is the age at which benefits are first available.

This is called the early retirement age, or the age of first eligibility. Across the countries

participating in this study, the first eligibility age ranges from about 53 for some

employee groups in Italy to 62 in the United States. In none of the countries in this

project does a significant portion of persons retire before the first eligibility age. The

“normal” retirement age—e.g. 65 in the United States—is also important, but typically

much less important than the early retirement age. Now in most countries, few people

work until the “normal” retirement age.

       The second important feature of plan provisions, which is strongly related to the

extent to which people continue to work after the early retirement age—and which we

emphasized in this phase of the analysis—is the pattern of benefit accrual after the age

                                        Page 4
of first eligibility. The idea can be explained this way: Consider two components of total

compensation for working an additional year. One component is current wage earnings.

The other component is the “increase” in future promised social security benefits. Con-

sider a person who has attained the social security early retirement age (when benefits

are first available) and suppose that a person is considering whether to work for an

additional year. It is natural to suppose that if benefit receipt is delayed by a year, bene-

fits when they are received might he increased, to offset the receipt of benefits for one

fewer years. But in most countries this is not the case. Once benefits are available, a

person who continues work for an additional year will receive less in social security

benefits over his lifetime than if he quit work and started to receive benefits at the first

opportunity. That is, the present value of expected social security benefits declines. In

many countries, this loss of social security benefits can offset a large fraction of the

wage earnings a person would receive from continued work. Thus there is an implicit

tax on work and total compensation can be much less than net wage earnings.

       A bit more formally, consider the difference between the expected discounted

value of social security benefits (social security wealth) if retirement is age a+1 and the

present value if retirement is at age a—SSW(a+1) – SSW(a). This difference is called

the accrual of benefits between age a and age a+1. It is this value that is often neg-

ative. If the accrual is positive it adds to total compensation from working the additional

year; if the accrual is negative, it reduces total compensation. The ratio of the accrual to

net wage earnings is an implicit tax on earnings if the accrual is negative and an implicit

subsidy to earnings if the accrual is positive. Thus a negative accrual discourages

continuation in the labor force and a positive accrual encourages continued labor force

participation. This accrual rate, and the associated tax rate, is one of the key calcula-

                                        Page 5
tions that was made in the same way for each of the countries. As it turns out, the

pension accrual is typically negative at older ages: continuation in the labor force means

a loss in the present discounted value of pension benefits, which imposes an implicit tax

on work and provides an incentive to leave the labor force. In many countries the

implicit tax on work is 80 percent or more the first year after benefit eligibility.

         This feature of plan provisions is related to a technical term called “actuarial

adjustment.” In the United States, for example, if benefits are taken at 64 instead of 65,

they are reduced just enough to offset the receipt of benefits for one additional year. If

they are taken at 63 instead of 65 they are reduced just enough to offset the receipt of

benefits of 2 additional years, and so forth.2 Under some plan provisions there is no

actuarial adjustment. The importance of this feature is discussed in some detail below.

         A third important feature of social security systems is that in many European

countries disability insurance and special unemployment programs essentially provide

early retirement benefits before the official social security early retirement age. Figure 4

shows the proportion of men collecting disability benefit by age in seven of the coun-

tries.3 At age 45, the proportion of men collecting disability benefits is rather close in all

of the countries; the range is from 2 to 5 percent in all of the countries except the

Netherlands where the rate is 8 percent. At age 64, however, the range is from about 7

percent in Spain and the United States to over 37 percent in Sweden.4 In each of the

countries with very high proportions, the rate essentially falls to zero at the “normal”

retirement age, which is 65 in Sweden, the UK, the Netherlands, and Germany, and 60


2
  Under current law, benefits in the Unites States are actuarially fair between 62 and 65, but are increased less than
actuarially if the receipt of benefits is delayed beyond age 65, thus providing an incentive to leave the labor force at
65. Benefits will eventually become actuarially fair after age 65 as well.
3
  To reduce the complexity of the figure, data are shown only for selected countries.
4
  The data for Italy are similar to the data for Spain. The rates for Belgium and Canada are similar and follow a path
approximately midway between the path for the United States and the path for Germany.
                                                   Page 6
in France. At the normal retirement age, benefits are obtained from country social

security programs rather than disability programs. It is evident that the receipt of

benefits from a disability program does not always indicate that a person is physically

disabled.

       Figure 5 shows the pathways to retirement in Germany from 1960 to 1995. It is

clear that the proportion of persons retiring at the age-65 normal retirement age

declined substantially over this period, while the proportion retiring under disability and

unemployment programs and under the social security age-63 “early” retirement pro-

gram increased correspondingly. In Germany, many employees retire as early as age

57 under a “disability” program. In 1995, 65 percent of men retired under a disability or

special unemployment program. Where these programs are important they are

incorporated in the social security incentive calculations.

Retirement Incentives and Labor Force Participation

       To summarize the social security incentive to retire in each country we proposed

a simple measure. At each age, beginning with the early retirement age, the implicit tax

on work was calculated in each country. These implicit tax rates on work were then

summed, beginning with the early retirement age and running through age 69. This

measure we called the “tax force” to retire. The sum is shown for each of the countries

in Figure 6. This tax force to retire ranges from over 9 in Italy to about 1.5 in the United

States.

The Tax Force to Retire and Unused Labor Force Capacity

       The key finding from Phase I of the project is shown in Figures 7 and 8. Figure 7

shows the relationship between the tax force to retire and unused labor force capacity—

the proportion of men between ages 55 and 65 that is out of the labor force. It is clear

                                        Page 7
that there is a very strong correspondence between the two. Figure 8 shows the same

data for all of the countries except Japan, and rescales the tax force measure to

achieve a linear relationship between the tax force to retire and unused labor force

capacity. The relationship between the two is perhaps even more evident. The propor-

tion of variation in unused labor force capacity that is explained by the tax force to retire

is 86 percent (as indicated by the R-squared value).

       The results of the first phase were reported in Gruber and Wise (1999a). The

introduction (Gruber and Wise 1999b) concluded this way:

               The populations in all industrialized countries are aging rapidly and
       individual life expectancies are increasing. Yet older workers are leaving the
       labor force at younger and younger ages. In several countries in our study,
       participation rates for men 60 to 64 have fallen from over 70% in the early 1960s
       to less than 20% now. This decline in labor force participation magnifies
       population trends, further increasing the number of retirees relative to the number
       of persons who are working. Together these trends have put enormous pressure
       on the financial solvency of social security systems around the world. Ironically,
       we argue, the provisions of the social security systems themselves typically
       contribute to the labor force withdrawal.

              It is clear that there is a strong correspondence between the age at which
       benefits are available and departure from the labor force. Social security
       programs often provide generous retirement benefits at young ages. In addition,
       the provisions of these programs often imply large financial penalties on labor
       earnings beyond the social security early retirement age. Furthermore, in many
       countries disability and unemployment programs effectively provide early
       retirement benefits before the official social security early retirement age. We
       conclude that social security program provisions have indeed contributed to the
       decline in the labor force participation of older persons, substantially reducing the
       potential productive capacity of the labor force. It seems evident that if the trend
       to early retirement is to be reversed, as will almost surely be dictated by
       demographic trends, changing the provisions of social security programs that
       induce early retirement will play a key role.

PHASE II

       The first stage of the project established two key results: (1) that the social

security systems in many countries provide enormous incentives to leave the labor force

at older ages; and (2) that there is a strong correspondence between social security
                                        Page 8
incentives to retire and the withdrawal of older workers from the labor force. The

relationships in the first volume, however, did not provide a means of estimating the

magnitude of the effect on labor force participation of changes in plan provisions.

       The goal of the second phase of the project was estimate how much the

retirement age would change if social security provisions were changed. This analysis

was based on within-country analysis of the determinants of retirement, considering the

relationship between retirement and the incentives faced by individual employees. That

is, rather than considering system-wide incentives for representative persons (such as

those with median earning histories), and comparing these incentives to aggregate

labor force participation across countries, we turned to micro-econometric analyses

within countries. The results of these analyses are based on differences in individual

circumstances within a given country. Persons in a given country who are similar in

many respects face quite different retirement incentives. It is these differences in

retirement incentives—among otherwise similar persons—and the corresponding

differences in individual retirement decisions that are used to determine the effect of the

incentives on retirement.

       In Phase II, the investigators in each country put together large micro-data files

which combined information on individual retirement decisions with retirement incen-

tives (together with other individual data). Individual measures of social security

retirement incentives—which vary substantially across persons within a country—were

calculated based on the methods developed for the first phase of the project. A key

incentive measure was the “option value” of delayed retirement. This forward-looking

measure is based on the potential gain (or loss) in wage earnings plus social security

wealth if receipt of benefits is delayed. The financial value of retiring at the current age

                                       Page 9
is compared with the age at which the financial value is the greatest, which could be the

current age or could be many years in the future. That is, this constructed economic

variable describes the financial gain or loss from continuing to work. Estimation using

this measure goes back to the procedure Stock and Wise (1990a, 1990b) used to

analyze the effect on retirement of employer-provided defined benefit pension plans in

the United States. Estimates were also obtained based on the related peak value

measure proposed by Coile and Gruber (2001), which is based on the potential gain (or

loss) in social security wealth only if receipt of benefits is delayed Although the focus of

the analysis is on forward-looking measures of the incentive to retirement—or for

continued work—a natural starting point is a measure that looks ahead only one year,

the single year accrual measure. This measure captures the effect of another year of

work on future benefits. Thus, as a base for comparison the country analyses present

the single-year accrual incentive measure as well.

       As in the first phase, the analysis in each country followed a detailed template, so

that results could be compared across countries. The micro-analysis in each country is

based on a sample of individuals. In some cases, the data come largely from adminis-

trative records, while in other cases, the data were obtained from special surveys. The

coverage is not precisely the same in each country. Nonetheless, it was possible to

estimate the same models in each country, even though the population covered by the

country data sets differed in some respects.

       The key advantage of the micro-estimation is that in each country the effects of

changes in plan provisions could be predicted. A second key feature of the micro

analyses is that they allow consideration of several features of social security systems—

as well as individual attributes—that may simultaneously affect retirement decisions. In

                                       Page 10
particular, the micro-estimation results made it possible to estimate jointly the effect on

retirement of the age at which benefits are first available and the incentive to retire once

benefits are available. Both of these features were shown in the first stage of the

project to be important determinants of retirement.

       The analysis in Phase II, however, posed several estimation challenges. Per-

haps the most difficult was to identify the effect on retirement of the first eligibility age—

in particular to distinguish the effect of the eligibility age from the effect of the incentive

measure, given eligibility. This was an important consideration because a key empirical

regularity across all countries was that retirement before the first eligibility age is rare

and there is typically a jump in retirement at successive eligibility ages, in particular the

age of first eligibility. This empirical regularity is discussed in some detail in the intro-

duction to the Phase II volume (Gruber and Wise 2004b). To address this and other

identification issues, each country estimated two different specifications of the base

retirement model with respect to age: a model including a linear age trend and a model

including age-specific dummy variables.

Parameter Estimates

       The results in Volume II produced a striking finding: in virtually every country, in

virtually every specification, the retirement incentives inherent in most social security

programs are strongly related to departure from the labor force. In ten of the twelve

countries we studied, the incentive measure effects were uniformly negatively related to

retirement (a higher option value or peak value of continued work led to less retirement)

and significantly different from zero. The results were robust to the use of both linear

age and age dummy variables. In two of the countries, Italy and Spain, the peak value




                                        Page 11
and option value effects were typically not significant and sometimes of the wrong sign.5

In these two countries the single year accrual effect is negative and significantly related

to retirement in four of the six cases.

        Thus, overall, we found the results from these 12 separate analyses to be

strikingly consistent. The incentives inherent in retirement income programs are clear

determinants of individual retirement behavior. The estimates themselves strongly

suggest a causal interpretation of the cross-country results presented in our first

volume. The results point to an important relationship between incentive effects and

labor force participation, independent of cultural difference among countries. The

magnitudes of the implied effects are also very comparable across countries, as shown

by the simulations discussed below.

Simulations

        To demonstrate the effect of plan provisions on retirement, the estimates for

each country were used to simulate the effect of three illustrative changes in plan

provisions. Two illustrative plan changes were simulated in Phase II of the project, and

a third was added in Phase III. All three are described here:

        (1) Three-year increment in eligibility ages: This illustrative simulation
        increases all eligibility ages by three years, including the early retirement age, the
        normal retirement age, and the ages of receipt of disability benefits—in countries
        in which disability, unemployment, or other retirement pathways are important,
        the eligibility age for each of the programs is delayed by three years.
        (2) Actuarially fair: This reform reduces benefits actuarially if taken before the
        normal retirement age and increases benefits actuarially if taken after the normal
        retirement age.

        (3) Common reform: This illustrative simulation is intended to predict the effect
        of the same reform (the “common reform”) in each country. Under the common

5
  In the United Kingdom the option value incentive measures are significant when a “bootstrap” method that
accounts for repeated observations for the same person is used to calculate standard errors. Also in the United
Kingdom, both the peak value and the option value incentive measures are very significant–under conventional
standard error estimates--when cohort indicator, instead of age indicator, variables are used.
                                                 Page 12
       reform, the early retirement age is set at age 60 and the normal retirement age at
       65. Benefits taken before age 65 are reduced “actuarially,” by 6 percent for each
       year before age 65. Benefits taken after age 65 are increased by 6 percent for
       each year the receipt of benefits is delayed. In addition, the replacement rate at
       age 65 is set at 60 percent of (projected) age 60 earnings.

It is clear that an increase in eligibility ages will typically increase labor force

participation in each country. The implications of the actuarial and common reforms are

less obvious, so we illustrate their likely effects across different countries using the

examples of Germany and the United States.

       In Germany there was no actuarial adjustment before the 1992 reform legislation,

and until recently most employees still retired under provisions that did not include

actuarial adjustment. The magnitude of the combined effect of early retirement under

the disability program in Germany and no actuarial adjustment is illustrated conceptually

in Figure 9. The official social security normal retirement age in Germany is 65.

Suppose that at that age, benefits would be 100 units per year. Many employees can

receive benefits at age 57 through the disability program. The disability benefits at 57

are essentially the same as normal retirement benefits at age 65. That is, a person

“eligible” for disability benefits at age 57 who did not take the benefits at that age would

forego 100 units per year. This results in a baseline profile of benefits that starts at age

57 and remains flat at 100 units per year.

       On the other hand, suppose benefits were reduced actuarially if taken before age

65 and increased actuarially if taken after age 65. Then benefits taken at 57 would be

about 60 instead of 100. Benefits if taken at 70 would be about 140 instead of 100.

There would be no incentive to take benefits early. Indeed there would be no social

security incentive to take benefits at any specific age, once benefits were available.




                                         Page 13
           Figure 10 shows a comparable figure for the United States. In both countries the

normal retirement age is 65. Benefits in the United States are first available at 62,

however, compared to the common receipt of benefits from a disability program at age

57 in Germany. In addition, benefits taken before age 65 in the United States are

reduced actuarially. Benefits at 62 are 80 percent of benefits at 65. The increase in

benefits after age 65 is less than actuarially fair, however.6 Thus a reform to adjust

benefits actuarially in the U.S. would have no effect before age 65, and only a small

effect thereafter. It should be clear from Figures 9 and 10 that increasing the first

eligibility age—without any actuarial adjustment—would increase labor force participa-

tion in both countries, although the size of the effect is likely to be greater in Germany

than in the United States because benefits at the first eligibility age are much larger in

Germany than in the United States. Under this illustrative reform, in Germany benefits

would be zero at age 57, 58, and 59. Benefits would first be available at age 60. In the

United States, this illustrative reform would increase the age of first eligibility from 62 to

65.

           Continuing to use a conceptual representation of social security provisions in

Germany as an example, Figure 11 shows the effect of the common reform in Germany,

and, for comparison, shows the actuarial reform as well. The common reform

incorporates actuarial reduction in benefits before and actuarial increase in benefits

after the normal retirement age, as described in Figure 9 above. In addition, the com-

mon reform in Germany implies a substantial reduction in benefits at the age 65 normal

retirement age. And, the common reform in Germany would increase the age of first

eligibility by 3 years (and thus incorporates the three-year increment in eligibility). In


6
    Under current legislation, the increase will be gradually increased to be actuarially fair by 2008.
                                                     Page 14
short, the receipt of benefits is delayed from 57 to 60, benefits at the normal retirement

age are reduced from 100 to 75, and normal retirement age benefits are adjusted

actuarially if taken before or after the normal retirement age.

       The diagram suggests that the combined effect of these changes is likely to be

large in Germany. Benefits before age 57 are no longer available. When they are

available at 60 there is no financial incentive to take benefits then as opposed to some

later age, and when the normal retirement age is reached there is no financial incentive

to take benefits at that age as opposed to some later age. (The results below show that

the actuarial reduction accounts for a large fraction of the labor force participation effect

of the common reform in Germany.)

       Figure 12 is a conceptual representation of the common reform in the United

States. The common reform provides benefits two years earlier than the current early

retirement age of 62. In addition, the common reform represents approximately a 33

percent increase in benefits at the normal retirement age. These two features of the

common reform should be expected to reduce the labor force participation of older

workers in the United States. (In addition, the common reform provides for an actuarial-

ly fair increase in benefits after age 65, which would provide some incentive to remain in

the labor force for persons who were still employed at ages older than 65.)

       The cases of Germany and the United States are representative of the other

nations in our sample. Most European nations have a system similar to Germany’s, so

that we would expect for them very large increases in labor force participation from all

reforms. Canada is more similar to the United States, so that raising eligibility ages will

raise labor force participation, the common reform will lower participation, and the

actuarial reform will have little effect.

                                            Page 15
       In general, specific features of the current plan in each country suggest how the

common reform should change labor force participation in that country. Thus in part,

the common reform is used to confirm that the simulation results, when compared

across countries, conform to expectations based on current plan provisions.

Results

       As emphasized above, we made calculations based on two principle estimation

specifications (option value, OV, and peak value, PV) and three simulation methods.

The three simulation methods are:

   •   S1: Use the retirement model with linear age

   •   S2: Use the retirement model with age dummies, and assume that the age
       dummies effects purely represent taste for leisure and do not change when the
       system is reformed

   •   S3: Use the retirement model with age dummies, and assume that the deviation
       of age dummies from a linear age trend purely represent effects of the retirement
       system

Arguments can be made for all three of these approaches. The advantage of the first

approach is that it allows us to remain neutral on the meaning of age-specific retirement

patterns, but at the risk of mis-specifying the regression model. But once age dummies

are included, we do not know exactly whether they should be interpreted as variations in

taste for leisure by age or as program effects. Thus, in this section, we will rely on the

results from simulation approach S1, as a middle ground; the actual chapters in

Volumes II and III show the results from all simulation methods.

       Three-Year Increment in Eligibility Ages and Labor Force Participation: The

basic findings can be shown in two figures. Figure 13 shows the effect of the three-year

increment in eligibility ages, based on the method that we believe is most likely to reflect

the long-run effect of such a reform. To help to standardize for the wide variation

                                      Page 16
across countries in the age at which retirement begins, each bar shows the reduction in

the fraction of the population out of the labor force four years after the age at which a

quarter of the population has retired (which is an “effective retirement age”). There are

two notable features of this figure. The first is that the average reduction in the OLF

proportion is very large—47 percent. The second is the similarity across countries. The

reduction is between 34 and 55 percent in 9 of the 12 countries. In Germany and Swe-

den, the reductions are 77 and 68 percent respectively. (The average reduction is 28

percent using the simulation method that we believe is likely on average to substantially

underestimate the response to the three-year increment.)

       The Common Reform and Labor Force Participation: Figure 14 shows the

effect on the OLF proportion of the common reform. In this figure, it is clear that the

greatest reductions in the OLF proportion under the common reform are realized in the

countries with the youngest effective retirement ages. For the six countries with sub-

stantial retirement before age 60, the average reduction in the OLF proportion is 44

percent. For the six countries in which most retirement is after age is 60, there is a 4

percent average increase in the OLF proportion.

       The systematic pattern of these results shows a strong correspondence with

intuition. For the six countries with youngest effective retirement ages, the common

reform represents a substantial increase in the youngest eligibility age, and the actuarial

reduction in most of these countries means that benefits at this age are much lower

than under the base country plans. Thus, for these countries, the OLF proportion

should decline under the reform, and that is the case for every country but Canada. But

for the six countries with older retirement ages, the common reform may reduce the

earliest eligibility age–as in the United States–and may provide a greater incentive to

                                      Page 17
leave the labor force. In addition, the 60 percent replacement rate at the normal

retirement age represents an increase for countries, such as the United States, but a

reduction in the replacement rate for other countries. Consequently, in three of these

six countries, there is an increase in the OLF proportion under the common reform

simulation, and on average there is an increase in the OLF proportion. (The seemingly

anomalous result for Canada is explained by the fact that Canada is the only country in

which the 25% age is below the nominal social security entitlement age; the 25% age is

58 while the social security entitlement age is 60. In addition, Canada has relatively low

benefits at the age 60 early retirement age. Thus the common reform significantly

increases benefit levels, providing an additional inducement to retirement.)

      A key reason for simulating the common reform was to determine whether the

results would correspond with intuition based on current plan provisions. That the

correspondence is close we believe helps to add credence to the estimation and

simulation methods and to the overall results.

      We concluded the introduction to this phase of the project (Gruber and Wise

2004b)—with these comments:

             The results of the country analyses reported in this volume confirm the
      strong causal affect of social security program retirement incentives on labor
      force participation. But perhaps more important, the results in this volume show
      the large magnitude of these effects. Across 12 countries with very different
      social security programs and labor market institutions, the results consistently
      show that program incentives accord strongly with retirement decisions. The
      magnitude of the estimated effects varies from country to country, but in all
      countries the effects are large.
              In short: the results in this volume provide an important complement to
      the first volume. The results leave no doubt that social security incentives have a
      strong effect on retirement decisions. And the estimates show that the effect is
      similar in countries with very different cultural histories, labor market institutions,
      and other social characteristics. While countries may differ in many respects, the
      employees in all countries react similarly to social security retirement incentives.
      The simulated effects of illustrative reforms reported in the country papers make

                                      Page 18
       clear that changes in the provisions of social security programs would have very
       large effects on the labor force participation of older employees.

PHASE III

       Using the estimates from Phase II, Phase III of the project describes the fiscal

implications of changes in program provisions. What would be the financial implications

of changing the provisions of social security systems? Again, the results are demon-

strated by simulating the fiscal effects of illustrative reforms. In this phase, all three

illustrative reforms described above are simulated. In addition to the three-year

increment and the common reforms, we also simulate separately an “actuarially fair”

reform. As noted above, in the United States and in Canada, for example, benefits

taken before the early retirement age are reduced actuarially (so that, on average,

benefits received over a lifetime do not depend on the age at which receipt of benefits

begins), so that this simulation closely parallels existing law. In many European

countries, however, there is little or no actuarial reduction if benefits are taken early.

This provides a very large incentive to leave the labor force early, so that moving to an

actuarially fair system can have very large fiscal implications in many countries.

       The goal of the analysis in this phase is not to calculate the long-run balance

sheets of a social security system, as is undertaken for example by the United States

Social Security Administration (SSA). Rather the approach taken here is to illustrate the

fiscal implications by calculating the implications of reform for a specific cohort or for a

group of cohorts. For example, in the United States, the estimates show the fiscal

implications of changes in social security provisions for the cohort born between 1931

and 1941 (reaching age 65 between 1996 and 2006). The calculations in Phase III, like




                                        Page 19
those in Phases I and II, are made according to a detailed template so that the results

can be compared across countries.

       In each country, the simulations proceed in several steps:

   1) Using the retirement models estimated in Phase II of the project, predict the
      distribution of retirement ages under current law (the “base” case).

   2) For this distribution of retirement ages, compute the fiscal position of the cohort—
      total expected benefits paid to the cohort and total expected taxes (both social
      security and other taxes) paid by the cohort.

   3) Use the retirement models to predict the distribution of retirement ages under a
      reform.

   4) For the new distribution of retirement ages, compute the fiscal position of the
      cohort.

   5) Calculate the difference between fiscal positions under the base and the reform
      systems to obtain the fiscal implication of reform.

   6) Divide the fiscal implication into two components: The mechanical effect is the
      effect of the reform assuming no behavioral response (change in retirement
      ages) to the reform. The behavioral effect is the additional incremental effect due
      to retirement response to the reform.
       To illustrate the method used in each of the country papers, we describe key

calculations for two countries—the effects of the reforms in Canada, focusing on the

three-year increment in eligibility ages, and effects of the actuarial reform in Germany.

These examples also help to highlight how the details of the current plan provisions,

including the treatment of different components of the current system, influence the

effect on the illustrative reform. We then show comparative results across countries.

Canada—Three-Year Increment in Eligibility Ages

       We illustrate the results presented in each paper using results for Canada as an

example. (Values are shown in Euros, converted from Canadian dollars at the

December 31, 2001 exchange rate—C$1.4185 = €1.00.) The Canadian retirement

system has three central components:
                                      Page 20
   1) The Old Age Security (OAS) pension is a lump sum that is paid to all citizens 65
      and older. (It was $442.66 in March 2002(€312.06) at the December 31, 2001
      exchange rate.) The OAS is indexed to the CPI and is fully taxable. (It also
      includes a “claw-back” provision for very high-income recipients.)
   2) The Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS) is an income-tested supplement for
      low-income OAS beneficiaries. (In January to March 2002 it was $526.08 for
      married couples and $342.67 for single persons (€370.85 and €241.57)
      respectively.) The GIS is indexed to the CPI and is not subject to income taxes.
      These benefits are not adjusted actuarially.
   3) The largest component of the social security system (called the Income Security
      system in Canada) is the combination of the Canada Pension Plan (CPP) and
      the Quebec Pension Plan (QPP). The actuarial reduction applies only to the
      CPP/QPP component, for which the normal retirement age is 65 and the early
      retirement age is 60. The reduction rate is 0.5 percent per month (6 percent per
      year), so that those retiring at 60 receive 70 percent of the age 65 benefit. The
      CPP/QPP replaces at most 25 percent of pre-retirement income.
For this discussion, we focus on the three-year increment in eligibility but show key data

for the other reforms as well. The main results are shown in two tables in each of the

country papers. The example for Canada shows how these tables are organized and

how to interpret the entries.

        Table 1 shows the total effect of each of the three reforms. As noted above,

reforms were simulated for each country using six methods—three simulation

approaches, each implemented based on the option value and the peak value incentive

measures. Here we show the results for the option value model and for simulation

method S1. Each of the country papers presents a table with six panels—one for each

of the estimation-simulation methods—in which each panel looks like Table 1 shown

here.




                                      Page 21
          Table 1. Canada illustration: total fiscal effect of reform: OV- S1
                                                                          Total Change Relative to
                           Present Discounted Value
     Cost or                                                                       Base
    Revenue
      Item                       3-Year Actuarial Common 3-Year Actuarial Common
                     Base
                                 Reform Reform Reform Reform Reform Reform

Benefits           111,084 91,491 111,084 187,796 -17.60%                             0.00%        69.10%
Taxes:
                    15,182       16,821       15,182       12,537      10.80%         0.00%       -17.40%
Payroll
Taxes:
                    81,313       85,075       81,313       93,608       4.60%         0.00%        15.10%
Income

Taxes:
                     37.54       37,265       37,540       41,314       -0.70%        0.00%        10.10%
Consumption

Taxes: Total       134,034 139,161 134,034 147,459                      3.80%         0.00%        10.00%


         The first four columns show the present discounted value (PDV) of benefits and

taxes under the base plan and under each of the three illustrative reforms. For

example, the PDV of future benefits payments under the base plan is 111,084 Euros.

Under the three-year increment the PDV is reduced to 91,491 Euros. Total taxes under

the base plan are 134,034 Euros, and are comprised of payroll taxes (15,182), income

taxes (81,313) and consumption taxes (37,540).7 Total taxes increase slightly to

139,161 Euros under the three-year increment.

         The last three columns show the total change relative to the base. For example,

the three-year increment reduces benefits by 17.6 percent and increases tax receipts by

3.8 percent. The change in benefits minus the change in taxes (-19.593 - 5,127 = -

24,720 Euros) is 22.3 percent of the base benefit costs (111,084 Euros) of the program.

This percent is shown explicitly in Table 2 below and is the key result of the simulation.



7
  Consumption tax revenues are imputed based on the income associated with each policy. Payroll tax revenues
include the share of general revenues that are associated with Social Security programs, as imputed in each country.
                                                 Page 22
       The actuarial reform has no effect in Canada because, as mentioned above,

benefits are adjusted actuarially under the base (current) plan so the actuarial reform is

not a change. The common reform increases program costs substantially in Canada,

primarily because benefits under the common reform are much larger than current

benefits in Canada.

       Table 2 below shows the total effect of the reform, shown in Table 1,

decomposed into mechanical and behavioral components. Again each of the country

papers presents a second key table with six panels and each of the panels is organized

like Table 2 shown here. The mechanical component is the effect of the reform

assuming no behavioral—labor force participation—response to the reform. The

behavioral component is the additional incremental effect resulting from the labor force

supply response to the reform. For example, the three-year increment mechanical

effect reduces benefits by 19,452 Euros. The behavioral response—a substantial

increase in the typical retirement age—in fact reduces benefits a bit more. (This

apparent anomaly is the result of specific features of the Canadian social security

system and is explained below.) The mechanical effect reduces total taxes by 4,753

Euros (and is also explained below). The behavioral effect—prolonging participation in

the labor force—leads to an increase in taxes of 9,905 Euros. The total effect on taxes

is an increase of 5,127 Euros. The net change in benefits minus tax revenues is -

24,720 Euros, which is equivalent to 22.3% of the base (current) cost of the program.

This change as a percent of base benefits is perhaps the single best summary of the

effect of the illustrative reform. Comparable percents apply to each of the reforms in

each of the countries and are used below to provide cross-country comparisons.



                                      Page 23
 Table 2. Canada illustration: decomposition of total effect of reform, change in
                        present discounted value: OV-S1
 Cost or    3 Year Increment                 Actuarial             Common Reform
Revenue Mech- Behav-                  Mech- Behav-              Mech- Behav-
  Item                    Total                    Total                           Total
         anical   ioral               anical ioral              anical ioral
Benefits -19459 -134 -19593       0     0     0                 79151    -2438    76713
Total     -4778  9905    5127     0     0     0                 36231    -22806 13425
Taxes
Net      -14681 -10039 -24720     0     0     0                 42920    20368    63287
Change
Change
as a %
of Base -13.20% -9.00% -22.30% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%               38.60% 18.30% 57.00%
Benefits


       A series of figures help to explain the results in Tables 1 and 2, focusing on the

three-year increment. Figure 15 shows the present discounted value of social security

wealth by age of retirement, under the base plan and under the three-year increment.

Benefits taken at any age are lower under the three-year increment. There are two

reasons for the pattern across ages. First, the age-65 normal retirement age under the

base plan is increased to 68 under the three-year increment. Thus benefits taken at 55,

for example, are lower under the three-year increment because they are discounted

actuarially from 68 to 55 instead of from 65 to 55. Second, while the CPP and QPP are

actuarially adjusted, so that receiving them later does not affect their PDV, the GIS and

OAS are not. So if the age of receipt of these programs is delayed, that lowers the PDV

of benefits at all ages.

       Figure 16 shows the relationship between total taxes and retirement age. Taxes

increase sharply with age, but at any age of exit from the labor force, taxes are less

under the three-year increment. This is because the OAS component of the social

security benefit—which is taxable—is received for three fewer years under the three-

                                      Page 24
year increment. Thus prolonging labor force participation yields increased tax revenues

from taxes on the increased wage earnings. But this increase is partially offset by the

reduction in future taxable social security benefits under the three-year increment.

       Figure 17 shows the distribution of retirement ages under the base and under the

three-year increment reform. The upward shift in the distribution is clear. The

behavioral component of benefits and taxes reported in Table 2 is due to this upward

shift in retirement ages.

       Figure 18 shows how the total effect reported in Table 2 arises by considering

the change in expected totals by age. The bars labeled “total benefits” show the

change in expected benefits by age. For example, the expected payment to persons at

age 55 is lower because fewer persons retire at this age and because they receive

lower payments, as shown in Figure 15 above. The expected payment of benefits to

persons age 64 or older, however, is increased under the three-year increment. Even

though the benefit per person is lower under the three-year increment, more people

retire at these ages, leading to an increase in the expected payment to these older

persons. Aggregated over all ages—weighted by the proportion of persons retiring at

each age—the reduction is 19,593 Euros, shown under benefits total in Table 2.

       The lighter bars show the change in the expected benefit payments by age, less

the expected tax revenues of persons who retire at each age. Expected benefits minus

tax revenues are lower at each age under the three-year increment. The reduction in

the expected value of benefits minus taxes is less than the reduction in benefits at

younger ages because persons who retire at these ages pay lower taxes on future

social security benefits than they used to, as explained with reference to Figure 15

above. Nonetheless there is a net gain to the government budget. The important

                                      Page 25
feature shown by this figure is that even at older ages—at which the expected benefits

are increased under the three-year increment because more persons are retiring at

these ages—the added taxes paid by these persons when they are working more than

offsets the greater expected benefits paid to persons at these ages. The net reduction

in benefits minus taxes across all retirement ages is 24,720 Euros, as shown in Table 2

above.8

        Finally, Figure 19 shows the fiscal effect of the three-year increment as a percent

of GDP. This figure shows the estimated effect for each of the six methods used to

obtain estimates. The reduction in government benefits payments minus revenues

ranges from about .30 to .45 percent of GDP, depending on the estimation method.

        Figures like those for Canada are shown in each of the country papers, but the

figures that the country authors have selected to show vary from country to country.

Tables showing results like those in Tables 1 and 2, however, are shown for each

country.

Germany—Actuarial Adjustment

        Germany has a very generous social security system, with very strong incentives

to retire early. In addition to the social security program per se, a large fraction of

workers in Germany retire through disability and unemployment programs, as described

above. These programs essentially provide early retirement benefits before the age 60

social security early retirement age. Indeed, these programs provide the principle path

to retirement in Germany. And as described above, once benefits are available, there is


8
 The sum over the values in the figure is not exactly 24,720. Figure 18 shows the average benefits and taxes at each
age (Figure 16) times the average retirement rates at each age (Figure 17). The 24,720 in Table 2 comes from taking
each individual in the sample and multiplying benefits and taxes by probabilities of retirement, and then taking the
average. The bars in Figure 18 sum to 24,193.


                                                Page 26
no actuarial reduction in benefits taken before the age-65 “normal” retirement age

(although recent reforms have introduced some actuarial reduction). For example early

retirement benefits taken at age 60, or benefits from the disability program taken at age

57, are the same as the age-65 normal retirement benefits. This provides an enormous

incentive to take benefits when they are first available. If they are not taken, they are

simply lost; there is no offsetting increase in benefits if they are received for fewer

years.

         Suppose that benefits in Germany were “actuarially fair,” so that benefits

received prior to age 65 were reduced by 6 percent per year, and benefits received after

65 were increased 6 percent per year.      What would be the fiscal implication of such a

change? Table 3 shows the effect of this change on the mean retirement age for the

sample of workers used in the analysis. The mean retirement age for men under the

current provisions is 61.91. The base simulation yields a mean retirement age very

close to the sample mean. The actuarially fair reduction in benefits is estimated to

increase the retirement age by about 3 years, for both men and women. Figure 20

shows the change in the distribution of retirement ages for men; there is a clear shift to

older ages throughout the distribution.

Table 3. German Illustration: Effect of Actuarial Reduction in Benefits on
Retirement Age: OV Model
 Model                             Men               Women
 Sample frequencies                61.91             61.73
 Base simulation                   62.05             62.01
 Actuarially fair simulation       65.18             64.57


         The fiscal implications of this change are shown in Table 4. As described above,

the total effect of the reform is decomposed into two parts—the mechanical effect that

would exist if retirement ages did not change, and the behavioral effect that is due to

                                       Page 27
change in retirement ages. Benefits received at any age less than 65 are reduced by

the actuarial reduction. If there were no change in retirement ages, the average benefit

per worker would be reduced by 37,056 Euros. But the behavioral response to the

reform increases the average retirement age, as shown in Table 3 and Figure 20. This

increases the average benefit by 19,632 Euros. The total (net) effect on benefits is a

reduction of 17,423 Euros.

      In addition to the change in benefits, the reform has further fiscal implications.

Contributions to the social security system are increased if employees continue to work.

This behavioral effect is +16,766 Euros.

      In addition, if employees work longer, they pay more in other taxes. The total

increase in taxes is 49,049 Euros per worker (including taxes for health and other

insurance programs, income taxes, and VAT tax). The net change in benefits minus the

change in contributions and taxes is -83,238 Euros. This net reduction in the total

government benefit payments minus revenues is equivalent to 42.85 percent of base

benefits under the current system. The fiscal effect of the reform as a percent of GDP is

shown in Figure 21, which shows the estimated effect for each of six estimation and

simulation methods. On balance, the reduction in benefits minus all taxes is about 1.2

percent of GDP.

Table 4. German Illustration: Fiscal Implications of Actuarial Fair Reform:
Change in PDV, Euros per Worker (OV model, dummies shifted)

                Mechanical Effect          Behavioral Effect          Total Effect

Benefits              -37056                      19632                  -17423
Contribution             0                       16766                   16766
All taxes              -1558                      50608                   49049
Net change            -35497                     -47741                  -83238
% Change             -18.27%                    -24.58%                 -42.85%


                                      Page 28
Cross-Country Comparisons

       Calculations like those illustrated for Canada and Germany were made by each

of the country teams for each of the three illustrative reforms. As the illustrations high-

light, the effect of each of the reforms depends on the provisions of the current system

in each country. An increase in eligibility ages is expected to reduce expenditures and

increase tax revenues in all countries. But even in this case, the added tax revenue

from increased labor force participation can be at least partly offset by lower taxes

resulting from lower future social security benefits as in Canada. The actuarial reform,

which has large effects in Germany, should have little effect in countries like the United

States and Canada where the system is already actuarially fair.

       Results across all countries are shown in the next five figures. Like the results

for the first two phases of the project, these results are taken from the individual country

papers. For these comparisons, we use the estimates based on the option value

specification and simulation method “S3”—sometimes referred to as OV-S3 or as option

value-age dummies shifted. The figures show the total fiscal effect of the reforms. To

reduce complexity, the figures do not divide the total effect into the mechanical and the

behavioral components that can be seen in the country papers. The behavior effects of

the three-year increment in eligibility ages and of the common reform on labor force

participation are shown in Figures 13 and 14 respectively.

       Figure 22 shows the total fiscal effect of the three-year increment in eligibility

ages. For example, in Germany, the reduction in government benefit payments minus

the increase in tax revenues—resulting from a three-year increment in all eligibility

ages—would be equivalent to about 36 percent of the current cost of the program.

Across all countries, the average decrease in government benefit payments minus tax

                                       Page 29
revenues is equivalent to 27 percent of current program cost. The anomalous positive

total fiscal effect in Denmark is due to the replacement of 3 years of Old Age Pension

benefits with benefits from a more generous early retirement program.

       Figure 23 shows the decrease in government benefit payments minus tax

revenues—resulting from the three-year increment—as a percent of Gross Domestic

Product. The average decrease over all countries is equivalent to 0.97 percent of GDP

and is greater than 0.50 percent or greater in all but two of the countries—again

reported as a reduction in government benefit payments minus tax revenues.

       Figure 24 shows the fiscal effect of the actuarial adjustment, as a percent of base

cost. As expected, there is large variation across countries. As noted above, In the

United States and Canada where adjustment is close to actuarial already, the effect is

small. In Germany, where until recently there was no actuarial adjustment, the effect is

very large, as explained in detail above.

     In France, the actuarial increase in benefits after the age-60 early retirement age

would prolong participation in the labor force and would increase benefits for many

retirees. The early retirement age in France is 60 and the normal retirement age

depends on the number of "validated" participation quarters. (The normal retirement

age is the minimum of 65 and the age at which a person attains 150 validated

quarters). But under the current system there is no actuarial adjustment of benefits if

they are taken after the age of first eligibility and the reduction in benefits if they are

taken before the normal retirement is greater than actuarial. For persons with more

than 150 validated quarters, the actuarial upward adjustment of benefits after age 60

would increase their pension benefits. The reduction in benefits if they are taken with




                                        Page 30
less than 150 quarters is less under the actuarial reform. So both the behavioral and

the mechanical effects of the actuarial reform increase the cost of benefits.

       On average across all countries the decrease in government expenditure minus

revenue is equivalent to about 26 percent of the base cost—reported as a reduction in

government benefit payments minus tax revenues. Because of particular features of

the current system in the United Kingdom, the actuarial reform has not been simulated

for that country.

       Figure 25 shows the fiscal effect of the common reform, as a percent of base

cost. In accord with intuition, the total net government revenue as a percent of program

base cost varies greatly. In the United States for example, benefits under the common

reform are more generous than current benefits and they are available at age 60

instead of the current age-62 early retirement age. Also in the United Kingdom, the

common reform benefits are much more generous than current benefits and the age-60

early retirement age is younger than the current early retirement age for some

participants.

       Figure 26 shows the fiscal effects of each of the reforms on the same figure,

ordered by the effect of the common reform. This figure helps to emphasize the

sometimes intricate relationship between current plan provisions and the effects of the

illustrative reforms. In the United States and Canada, for example, the three-year

increment reduces (net) program costs. The actuarial reform has essentially no effect in

Canada where the system is already actuarial, and little effect in the United States

where the system is close to actuarial. But in both of these countries the common

reform provides higher benefits than provided by the current systems, and in the United




                                      Page 31
States benefits are available 2 years earlier than the current early retirement age. Thus

the common reform substantially increases program costs in these countries.

       As another example: In France, the three-year increment would reduce net

program costs. The actuarial adjustment alone would increase benefit payments as

described above. But the common reform provides much lower benefits than the

current system in France. In addition the common reform sets the normal retirement

age at 65 and benefits are reduced actuarially between 65 and the age 60 early

retirement age. Thus, on balance, the common reform implies a substantial reduction in

net program cost in France.

       Although not detailed in this introduction, the results for each of the countries are

determined by the precise relationships between the current plan provisions and the

illustrative reform.

CONCLUSIONS: LOOKING BACK AND GOING FORWARD

       Our introduction to Phase I of the project emphasized the striking relationship

across countries between social security program incentives to retire and the proportion

of older persons out of the labor force (Figures 7 and 8 above). The weight of the

evidence, we judged, was that the relationship was largely causal.

       The results of the country analyses reported in Phase II of the project— based on

within-country analysis of micro data—confirmed the strong causal effect of social

security program retirement incentives on labor force participation and showed the large

magnitude of these effects. The results left no doubt that social security incentives have

a strong effect on retirement decisions. Across 12 countries the results consistently

showed that program incentives accord strongly with retirement decisions. The

magnitude of the estimated effects varies from country to country, but in all countries

                                      Page 32
the effects were found to be large. And the estimates show that the effect is similar in

countries with very different cultural histories, labor market institutions, and other social

characteristics. While countries may different in many respects, the employees in all

countries react similarly to social security retirement incentives. The simulated effects

of illustrative reforms reported in the country papers made clear that changes in the

provisions of social security programs would have very large effects on the labor force

participation of older employees.

       In this phase of the project we built on the estimates obtained in the second

phase to analyze the fiscal implications of program provisions. In particular, we

estimated the financial implications of three illustrative program reforms. The results

make clear that reforms like those considered in this volume can have very large fiscal

implications for the cost of social security benefits as well as for government revenues

engendered by changes in the labor force participation of older workers.

       On average across the 12 countries, we judge that a three-year increase in

program eligibility ages would reduce government benefits payments minus tax

revenues by 27 percent of current program cost. The average reduction is

approximately 0.72 percent of country GDP. While the estimates vary by method of

estimation—as reported in each of the country papers—we believe that these averages

reflect the most likely long-run effect of the illustrative reforms. Actuarial reform alone

would have a very large effect in some countries—reducing net government cost by

over 40 percent in 5 countries—depending on the extent of actuarial adjustment to

benefits under the current program provisions.

       In the second phase of the project, we used estimates of the of the labor force

participation effects of the common reform to judge the plausibility of the estimates. In

                                       Page 33
this third phase we estimated the fiscal implication of the common reform. Again we

find that the results accord strongly with intuition based on the provisions of the current

plans. In accord with intuition, the common reform yields both increases and reductions

in government revenue equivalent to a large fraction of current program costs. We

believe that this adds credence to the methods used for estimation of the fiscal effects

of the illustrative reforms.

       In short, the fiscal effects of reform can be very large. Some combination of

increases in the early retirement age, actuarial adjustment of benefits, and change in

the benefit level can change net government revenue substantially. In many countries,

the illustrative reforms simulated by the participants in this project yield reductions in

government benefit payments minus tax revenues equivalent to 20 to 50 percent of

current program cost.

       Finally, having emphasized the potential for changes in plan provisions to

increase the labor force participation of older workers and to relieve the financial

pressure on social security systems, we consider how such changes in social security

systems may already be having an effect in some countries. Figures 27a and 27b are

the same as Figures 2a and 2b but they have been updated to include labor force

participation rates of men from about 1995 to about 2003. In many of the countries

there seems to be a clear reversal in the decline in labor force participation. In some

countries the reversal can be traced to changes in social security provisions, while in

others it seems to be associated with economy-wide trends in labor market conditions.

       Consider Denmark first. Except for updating the series, the only other change is

the addition of data for Denmark, which was added to the project after the first phase.

In 1999, the Post Employment Wage (PEW) program was changed to provide

                                       Page 34
incentives to stay in the labor force until 62. (When the PEW program was introduced in

1979 it induced an almost immediate drop of 17 percentage points in the labor force

participation rate of men 60 to 64.)

       In Sweden, the explanation for the increase in the labor force participation of men

60 to 64 lies primarily in changes in the eligibility requirement for the disability program.

The provision that unemployed workers older than aged 60 were eligible for a disability

pension was abolished in 1991 and the provision that these unemployed workers were

eligible because of a combination of medical and labor market reasons was abolished in

1997. The most important change was likely the 1995 provision that enabled the social

security administration to reconsider the right to a disability pension. Consistent with

these changes, from 1993 to 2002 the percent of men aged 60 to 64 with a disability

pension was reduced from 30 to 23 percent. In addition, the Swedish economy has

recovered from the 1990s recession during the 1990s that limited labor force demand.

       In Germany, the reversal of the downward trend in the labor force participation of

men 60 to 64 that began in 1997 coincides with the introduction of partial actuarial

reduction in benefits taken before the early retirement age. In the United States the

downward trend was reversed about 1995. While the reason for the reversal is unclear,

it seems likely that the decline in employer-provided defined benefit pension plans—with

strong incentives to retire early—and the rapid spread of personal retirement plans—

with no retirement incentive effects—has been part of the explanation.

       In the United Kingdom, there has been a general increase in labor force

participation rates at all ages, but there was no apparent change in social security plan

provisions that might have lead to an increase for men 60 to 64. In Canada, there were

no changes in social security provisions that could account for the increase in the labor

                                       Page 35
force participation of men 60 to 64. There was, however, a general improvement in

labor market conditions after the mid 90s, with a fall in the overall unemployment rate

from 10.4 percent in 1995 to 7.6 percent in 2003. In Spain, the reforms during the 1997

to 2002 period did not change substantially the retirement incentives faced by older

workers. There was, however, a large increase in the labor force— from about 12.5

million in 1995 to over 17 million in 2004—apparently due to an increase in the demand

for labor. And during this period, labor force participation increased from 50.8 to 55.7

percent.

       We do not yet have a succinct explanation for the increase in the labor force

participation in the Netherlands. Early retirement provisions in the Netherlands are the

result of collective bargaining by sector, or even by firm, and hence it is hard to easily

identify and summarize changes in plan provisions.

       Thus far in the project, we have considered the early retirement incentives

inherent in many social security programs, the reduction in the labor force participation

of older workers induced by these penalties on work, and the consequent financial

implications of the induced early retirement. Going forward, we will direct our attention

to several new issues, including: the relationship between social security system

provisions and the well-being of the elderly and the young, the relationship between

social security system provisions and the employment of the young, and how the

relationship between health status and retirement varies with social security (including

disability) program provisions.




                                       Page 36
References
Coile, Courtney C. and Jonathan Gruber, "Social Security and Retirement." NBER
       Working Paper #7830, 2000.

Coile, Courtney C. and Jonathan Gruber, "Social Security Incentives for Retirement," In
       D.A. Wise, (ed.), Themes in the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago
       Press, pp. 311-341, 2001.

Gruber, Jonathan and David A. Wise (editors), Social Security and Retirement around
      the World. University of Chicago Press, 1999a

Gruber, Jonathan and David A. Wise, "Introduction and Summary," In J. Gruber and
      D.A. Wise, (eds.), Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World,
      University of Chicago Press. Also published as Gruber, Jonathan and David A.
      Wise, "Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World." Research in
      Labor Economics, Volume 18, 1999b.

Gruber, Jonathan and David A. Wise (editors), Social Security and Retirement around
      the World: Micro-Estimation. University of Chicago Press, 2004a.

Gruber, Jonathan and David A. Wise, "Introduction and Summary," In J. Gruber and
      D.A. Wise, (eds.), Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World:
      Micro-Estimation, University of Chicago Press, 2004b.

Stock, James H. and David A. Wise, "Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and
       Retirement." Econometrica, 58(5):1151-80, 1990a.

Stock, James H. and David A. Wise, "The Pension Inducement to Retire: An Option
       Value Analysis, Issues in the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press,
       pp 205-224, 1990b.




                                     Page 37
                          Figure 1. Population 65+ to population 20 to 64
             0.7

             0.6

             0.5
Proportion




             0.4                                                                                Now
                                                                                                2020
             0.3                                                                                2050

             0.2

             0.1

              0
                                                     y
                              n




                                                                                         a
                                                                       ly
                                                               e
                              s




                                                                              S
                                      n


                                              n




                                                                                        m
                                                   an
                            nd
                 e




                                                                                      ad
                                            ai




                                                            nc
                                    pa




                                                                             U
                                                                    Ita




                                                                                      iu
               ed




                                          Sp


                                                  m


                                                             a
                         rla




                                                                                    lg
                                                                                   an
                                  Ja




                                                          Fr
             Sw




                                                                                  Be
                                               er
                       he




                                                                                  C
                                              G
                     et
                    N




                              Figure 2a. LFP trends for men 60 to 64
             0.9

             0.8

             0.7
                                                                                             Japan
             0.6
                                                                                             Sweden
Proportion




                                                                                             US
             0.5
                                                                                             UK
             0.4                                                                             Germany
                                                                                             Belgium
             0.3

             0.2

             0.1
                   1960      1965     1970        1975      1980      1985    1990    1995
                                                         Year




                                                          Page 38
                                Figure 2b. LFP trends for men 60 to 64
             0.9

             0.8

             0.7

             0.6                                                                                      Japan
Proportion




                                                                                                      Spain
             0.5                                                                                      Netherlands
                                                                                                      France
             0.4                                                                                      Italy

             0.3

             0.2

             0.1
                   1960     1965        1970       1975      1980        1985        1990    1995
                                                          Year


                            Figure 3. Unused productive capacity:
                                       men age 55 to 65
       0.7

       0.6

       0.5

       0.4

       0.3

       0.2

       0.1

             0
                           ly




                                                                         y




                                                                                                 n
                                               h




                                                             in
                   m




                                                     K




                                                                                 a


                                                                                         S




                                                                                                          n
                                   ce




                                                                     an




                                                                                                e
                                          et




                                                                                ad




                                                                                                      pa
                                                    U




                                                                                        U
                          Ita




                                                              a
                 iu




                                  an




                                                                                             ed
                                                           Sp
                                         N




                                                                     m
         lg




                                                                           an




                                                                                                     Ja
                                Fr




                                                                                            Sw
       Be




                                                                   er

                                                                          C
                                                                  G




                                                            Page 39
              Figure 4. Proportion of men collecting
                    disability benefits, by age
  0.40

  0.35                                          Spain
                                                United States
  0.30
                                                France
  0.25                                          Germany
                                                Netherlands
  0.20
                                                United Kingdom
  0.15                                          Sweden
  0.10

  0.05

  0.00
         45       50      55         60   65       70
                               Age


      Figure 5. Germany: Pathways to retirement for
                   men, 1960 to 1995

 1

0.8
                                                Age 65 NR
0.6                                             Age 63 ER
                                                Unemploy > 60
0.4                                             Disability > 60
                                                Disability
0.2

 0
 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995




                               Page 40
                  Figure 6. Sum of Tax Rates on Work
                    From Early Retirement Age to 69
 10
  9
  8
  7
  6
  5
  4
  3
  2
  1
  0




                                         en
                                           y
         ly




                                          K




                                                                        S
                                           a
                        ce




                                           n




                                          n
                         m


                         s




                                        an
                     nd




                                       ad
                                        ai




                                       pa
                                        U




                                                                        U
      Ita


                      iu




                    an




                                      ed
                                     Sp
                                      m
            lg

                  rla




                                     an




                                     Ja
                 Fr




                                   Sw
          Be




                                   er
                he




                                   C
                                  G
              et
              N




          Figure 7. Unused Capacity v Tax Force to Retire
0.7
                                                                 Belgium
                                                        France                  Italy
0.6
                                   UK
                                                                  Netherlands

0.5                       Spain    Germany

                          Canada
0.4              US
                          Sweden

0.3
                                                          Tax Force ER to 69
                      Japan                               Unused Capacity 55 to 65
0.2
      0               2             4               6               8                   10
                                        Tax Force




                                        Page 41
                     Figure 8. Unused Capacity v Tax Force to Retire
           0.7
                                                                                   Belgium
          0.65
                         2
                       R = .86
                                                                               France
           0.6                                                                               Italy
                                                               UK                   Netherlands
          0.55

           0.5
                                           Spain
                                  Canada                  German
          0.45
                                                                          Tax Force ER to 69
           0.4                                                            Unused Capacity 55 to 65
                             US
                                         Sweden                           Excluding Japan
          0.35
                 0            0.5                  1                1.5              2                2.5
                                             Logarithm of Tax Force


                 Figure 9. Germany: base versus actuarial adjustment
          160

          140

          120

          100
Benefit




           80

           60

           40                                                             Base
           20                                                             Actuarial Adjustment

            0
                55                  60                    65                  70                     75
                                                         Age




                                                       Page 42
                       Figure 10. US: base versus actuarial
                                    adjustment
          180.0
          160.0
          140.0
          120.0
Benefit




          100.0
           80.0
           60.0
           40.0                                   Current
           20.0                                   Actuarial Adjustment

            0.0
                  55          60          65         70             75
                                         Age


                 Figure 11. Germany: base, 3-year increment,
                     actuarial adjustment, common reform
          160

          140

          120

          100
Benefit




           80

           60
                                                   Base
           40                                      Actuarial Adjustment
                                                   Common
           20                                      3-Year Increment
            0
                55           60           65          70                 75
                                         Age




                                      Page 43
                      Figure 12. US: base versus common reform
          200.0
          180.0
          160.0
          140.0
          120.0
Benefit




          100.0
            80.0
            60.0
            40.0                                                                 Base
            20.0                                                                 Common

                0.0
                      55               60                 65              70              75
                                                         Age

                       Figure 13. OLF Change 25% Age + 4 Yrs
                          Base versus 3-Year Delay: OV-S3
            0

          -10

          -20                               Can 58

          -30

          -40                                                                  Spain 62US 62
                                                                           UK 61
          -50 Italy 53                                   Den 60
                             Belg 56                                Japan 60
          -60          Neth 55    France 57

          -70                                                  Swed 60
          -80                                    Ger 59

          -90




                                                     Page 44
                    Figure 14. OLF Change 25% Age + 4 Yrs
                     Base versus Common Reform: OV-S3
         60

         40                                                                      US 62
                                                  Den 60
                                      Can 58
         20
                                                               Japan 60
          0
                                                                           Spain 62
         -20                                              Swed 60
         -40 Italy 53                                                  UK 61

                               France 57
         -60                               Ger 59
                          Belg 56
         -80

        -100         Neth 55
        -120




               Figure 15. Canada: SSW by age of labor force exit
        140000

        120000

        100000

         80000
Euros




         60000

         40000

         20000

               0
                   55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76
                                                    Age

                                           Base     3-Year Increment




                                            Page 45
                   Figure 16. Canada: Total taxes by age of labor
                                    force exit
          300000


          250000


          200000
Euros




          150000


          100000


           50000


               0
                   55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76
                                                     Age

                                         Base Case      Age-Shift Reform


                Figure 17. Canada: Distribution of labor force exit
                               ages, OV S1 model
          12

          10

           8
Percent




           6

           4

           2

           0
               55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76
                                                 Age
                                          Base         3-Year Increment




                                           Page 46
                         Figure 18. Canada: Total effect of three-year
                         increment by age of retirement, OV S1 model
               2000

               1000

                  0
 2001 Euros




              -1000

              -2000

              -3000

              -4000                                                                Benefits
                                                                                   Benefits - taxes
              -5000
                        55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76
                                                            Age



                       Figure 19. Canada: Fiscal implication of three-
                           year increment as percent of GDP, by
                                     estimation method
              0.00%
              -0.05%
              -0.10%
              -0.15%
              -0.20%
Percent




              -0.25%
              -0.30%
              -0.35%
              -0.40%
              -0.45%
              -0.50%
                          PVS1        PVS2           PVS3         OVS1          OVS2           OVS3
                                 Mechanical effect                       Behavioral effect




                                                     Page 47
                     Figure 20. Germany: Distribution of retirement ages
                        for base and actuarial reform, OV-S1 method
             0.14
                          Base
             0.12
                          Actuarial
              0.1
Proportion




             0.08

             0.06

             0.04

             0.02

               0
                     55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74
                                                     Age



                     Figure 21. Germany: Fiscal implications of actuarial
                       reform as % of 2001 GDP, by estimation method
             0.00%

       -0.20%

       -0.40%

       -0.60%

       -0.80%

       -1.00%

       -1.20%

       -1.40%
                        OVS1          OVS2      OVS3        PVS1         PVS2   PVS3
                                        Mechanical Effect   Behavioral Effect




                                                 Page 48
               Figure 22. Total fiscal effect of
              3-yr increment, as % of base cost
10.0

 0.0

-10.0

-20.0

-30.0

-40.0

-50.0
        Ge   F    It     Sp   N    Be    D   S   J    C   U                    UK
          rm ranc aly      ain eth   lgi enm wed apa ana S
            an   e                      um  ark en  n   da
               y


                Figure 23. Total fiscal effect of
                 3-yr increment, as % of GDP
0.10

-0.10

-0.30

-0.50

-0.70

-0.90

-1.10

-1.30
                                          Netherlands value at -2.44 cut off

-1.50
        Ge    F    It    Sp   N    Be    D   S    J   C   U                    UK
           rm ranc aly     ain eth   lgi enm wed apa ana S
             an   e                     um  ark en  n   d a
               y




                                Page 49
               Figure 24. Total fiscal effect of
             actuarial reform, as % of base cost
20.0

10.0

 0.0

-10.0

-20.0

-30.0

-40.0

-50.0
        Ge    B     De   Ja  Ne        Ita        Sw     S   C     US   Fr      UK
          rm elgi      n   p    th        l   y      ed pain ana           an
            an    um mar an                            en        da          ce
               y         k




               Figure 25. Total fiscal effect of
             common reform, as % of base cost
120.0


 80.0


 40.0


  0.0


-40.0


-80.0
        Ge   F    It    Sp    N    Be    D   S   J    C  U                 UK
          rm ranc aly      ain eth   lgi enm wed apa ana S
            an   e                      um  ark en  n   da
               y

                             Page 50
             Figure 26. Total fiscal effect of 3-year
        increment, actuarial, and common reforms, as
                         % of base cost
120.0

         3-year increment
 80.0    Actuarial
         Common

 40.0


  0.0


-40.0


-80.0
         Ge        F       It    Sp          Ne     Be      De  Sw   Ja   Ca     US   UK
              r m r a n c a ly      a          th     lg i    n         p   na
                 an      e              in                um mar eden an       da
                    y                                           k




                                             Page 51
                     Figure 27a. LFP trends for men 60 to 64, updated
              1

             0.9

             0.8
                                                                                            Japan
             0.7
                                                                                            Sweden
Proportion




             0.6                                                                            US
                                                                                            UK
             0.5                                                                            Germany
             0.4
                                                                                            Belgium
                                                                                            Denmark
             0.3

             0.2

             0.1
                   1960   1965   1970   1975    1980     1985    1990     1995     2000
                                                  Year


                     Figure 27b. LFP trends for men 60 to 64, updated
             0.9

             0.8

             0.7
                                                                                          Japan
             0.6
                                                                                          Spain
Proportion




                                                                                          Netherlands
             0.5
                                                                                          France
             0.4                                                                          Italy
                                                                                          Canada
             0.3

             0.2

             0.1
                   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980     1985    1990    1995     2000
                                                Year




                                                      Page 52
