                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        A QUANTITATIVE MODEL OF SUDDEN STOPS
                         AND EXTERNAL LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT

                                          Ricardo J. Caballero
                                           Stavros Panageas

                                         Working Paper 11293
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11293


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2005




We are grateful to Lars Hansen and conference participants at CIRJE, Tokyo, for their comments, and to
Herman Bennett, Fernando Duarte and, particularly, Jose Tessada for excellent research assistance. Caballero
thanks the NSF for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Stavros Panageas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
A Quantitative Model of Sudden Stops and External Liquidity Management
Ricardo J. Caballero and Stavros Panageas
NBER Working Paper No. 11293
April 2005
JEL No. E2, E3, F3, F4, G0, C1

                                            ABSTRACT

Emerging market economies, which have much of their growth ahead of them, run persistent current
account deficits in order to smooth consumption intertemporally. The counterpart of these deficits
is their dependence on capital inflows, which can suddenly stop. In this paper we develop and
estimate a quantifiable model of sudden stops and use it to study practical mechanisms to insure
emerging markets against them. We first assess the standard practice of protecting the current
account through the accumulation of international reserves and conclude that, even when optimally
managed, this mechanism is expensive and incomplete. External insurance, on the other hand, is hard
to obtain because sudden stops often come together with distress in emerging market investors
themselves (the most natural insurers). Thus, one needs to find global (non-emerging-market-

specific) assets that are correlated to sudden stops. We show an example of such an asset based on

the S&P 500's implied volatility index. If added to these countries portfolios, it would significantly

enhance their sudden stop risk-management strategies. In our simulations, the median gain in terms

of reserves available at the time of sudden stop is around 30 percent. Moreover, in instances where

the level of non-contingent reserves is low, the median gain is close to 300 percent. We also find that

as countries manage to reduce the size of the sudden stops that afflict them, they should reduce their

stock of reserves and significantly increase their share of contingent reserves. The main insights of

the paper extend to external liquidity and liability management more generally.

Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics
MIT
Room E52-252a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

Stavros Panageas
The Wharton School
1     Introduction
Emerging market economies, which have much of their growth ahead of them, run persistent current account
deficits in order to smooth consumption intertemporally. The funding of these deficits is a perennial source
of fragility since it requires ongoing capital inflows which can suddenly stop. While in many circumstances
the breakdown in capital inflows simply amplify domestic deficiencies, there is extensive evidence that in
many others the main culprit is not the country itself but the international financial markets’ response to
shocks only vaguely related to the country’s actions.
    The real costs of this volatility for countries that experience open crises are dramatic and well known.
Less noticed, but at least as important in terms of their pervasiveness and cumulative impact, are the large
costs paid by prudent economies. These economies do not fall into open crises but are forced to incur in a
variety of costly precautionary measures and build large war-chests of international reserves, a trend that
has only increased in the aftermath of the capital flow crises of the late 1990s. Chile and South Korea,
for example, hold close to 20 percent of GDP in reserves, which contrasts with the 4 to 5 percent held by
developed open economies such as Australia or Canada. How eﬀective are reserves in smoothing the impact
of sudden stops unrelated to a country’s actions? How much of them should be accumulated? How fast?
Are there potentially less costly financial mechanisms to deal with capital flow volatility? Who would be the
natural counterpart for these mechanisms? How are these mechanisms limited by financial and collateral
constraints?
    These are among the most pressing questions for policy-makers and researchers in emerging market
economies and the international financial institutions. Unfortunately, while there has been significant con-
ceptual progress over the last two decades in understanding some of the limitations of financial contracting
with emerging markets, there has been much less progress in providing an integral framework to analyze
these questions quantitatively. In this paper we take one step in this direction.
    In a nutshell, our framework considers three type of agents: An emerging market country, specialist
investors, and the world capital markets at large. The essence of an emerging market economy for the
problem we wish to model has two ingredients: First, its future income is significantly higher than its
current income so it would like to borrow and run persistent current account deficits. Second, it has great
diﬃculty in pledging future income to finance these deficits. Specialists can alleviate this problem but they
themselves are subject to shocks that limit their ability to commit to deliver resources. These shocks, which
in our model are driven by a Poisson process, trigger a period of significantly reduced capital inflows. The
beginning of this period is the sudden stop stop itself, when specialists are unable to rollover all their explicit
or implicit short term commitments, but it can continue even after specialists recover as countries have to
rebuild their international collateral. For simplicity, we refer to the entire episode as a sudden stop. The
country would like to insulate its current account financing from these sudden stops, but it cannot do so with


                                                        2
its specialists since they are constrained during these events. Resorting to the world capital markets after
the sudden stop takes place does not work either, since the country has very limited credibility with non-
specialists. However, world capital markets can still be used ex-ante, as long as contracts and investments
are made contingent on variables that do not require emerging markets knowledge.

    One of the main obstacles in building this type of structure for quantitative analysis is that it is in
principle quite complex, involving several layers of potential financiers, contractual problems, and multiple
state variables. Our framework preserves some of this richness but it is at the same time manageable.
We make several stylized assumptions that allow us to represent the problem in terms similar to those
of managing the risk associated to an exogenous non-diversifiable “income” diﬀusion-jump process, and is
amenable to estimation.
    A key simplification is that countries’ and their specialists engage in growth-swaps. These swaps eliminate
debt-overhang type considerations and focus the analysis on the obtention of new, uncommitted, resources.
This is probably not an overly costly simplification in terms of realism, as it isolates the most fragile source
of external financing. Unlike existing liabilities, uncommitted resources cannot be forced to stay in through
renegotiation. It is perhaps for this reason that in practice sudden capital flow reversals are more closely
associated to the current account deficit (a flow variable) than to the stock of debt (see, e.g., Calvo, Izquierdo
and Mejia (2004)).
    In the first part of the paper we discuss the pure reserves-management problem. Countries hoard (non-
contingent) international reserves to smooth the impact of sudden stops on the current account. Since
this is more or less what countries do in practice, we use this structure to estimate and calibrate the key
parameters of the model. First, we use a Bayesian-hidden-state model to estimate the sudden stop processes
for a small panel of emerging market economies with open capital accounts for at least two decades. Our
findings indicate that sudden stops are infrequent, but recurrent and costly events. In a typical sudden stop,
external funding declines by 10 percent or more, and its main impact lasts for over six years. Note that our
estimation procedure is designed to capture the impact of the sudden stop beyond any initial turmoil or short
run spike in interest rates. This is important because in practice current account reversals are significantly
more persistent (and hence costly) than the initial impact of the sudden stop, which is what is often measured
(see, e.g., Calvo et al (2004)).1 Second, we conclude from this part that holding non-contingent international
reserves, as central banks do in practice, is a costly and incomplete sudden-stop insurance mechanism even
when managed optimally. Reserves require large consumption sacrifices prior to sudden stops per unit
   1 See   Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2005) for a model where sudden stops come together with a persistent decline in the
country’s ability to produce financial assets, and hence to attract savings. Moreover, after the initial crash, interest rates
decline below the pre-crisis level, but inflows do not recover. This characterization is consistent with our empirical findings and
SS-identification procedures in this paper.




                                                                3
of protection, especially while their stock is being built. This is costly for emerging market economies,
which experience limited access to external resources even during normal times. Here again, the standard
practice of measuring the cost of hoarding reserves from the spread between US-Treasuries and country debt
underestimates the actual opportunity cost.
   This takes us to the second part of the paper, where we expand the set of investments (or contracts)
countries can make. In particular, we consider the optimal inclusion of digital options on the VIX in the
country’s portfolio. The VIX is an index of implied volatilities extracted from options on S&P500 firms,
that simultaneously satisfies the conditions to appeal to world capital markets and to provide a good hedge
against sudden stop for emerging markets: It is a developed world variable that is highly correlated with
sudden stops. We discuss implementation and run the economy through simulations with the same sample
paths of sudden stops used in the case with only non-contingent reserves. Relative to the latter case, the
median gain in terms of reserves available at the time of sudden stop is about 30 percent. Moreover, in
instances where the level of non-contingent reserves is low (lower quintile) and hence the cost of a sudden
stop is high, the median gain is close to 300 percent.
   In terms of dynamics, these observations mean that a country should first build the contingent part of the
portfolio aggressively, adding non-contingent reserves only gradually. The reason for this strategy is that the
country is particularly concerned about the worst possible event. That is, to be found without resources at
the time of a sudden stop. When the stock of reserves is small, the best chance of avoiding this worst-event
is by getting a large contingent payment at the time of the sudden stop. When the stock of reserves is large,
the worst-event is more likely to take place if the country overcommits to contingent contracts and these do
not deliver, than by holding a large amount of non-contingent reserves.
   Extrapolating these dynamic implications to the cross-section, we find that as countries improve along
dimensions that reduce the size of their sudden stops, they should not only reduce their reserves accumulation
but also reallocate their portfolios toward more contingent instruments.
   Finally, we show that the insights developed for reserves management extend more generally to external
liquidity and liability management. Non-contingent debt with world capital markets has the same deficiencies
that non-contingent reserves have, and hence can be improved by adding contingencies similar to those
discussed for reserves. These contingencies can be obtained by either embedding them in the debt itself or
by raising the contingent component of reserves.

   Our paper relates to several strands of literature. The main shock that concerns us here is a sudden
stop of capital inflows. The literature on sudden stops gained new life since the Asian and Russian crises.
The work of Calvo (1998) describes the basic mechanics and implications of sudden stops and Calvo and
Reinheart (1999) document the pervasiveness of the phenomenon. The modelling of these sudden stops as
the tightening of a Kiyotaki-Moore (1997) style collateral constraint is also present in the work of Caballero


                                                         4
and Krishnamurthy (2001), Arellano and Mendoza (2002) and Broner et al. (2003), among others.
   As an intermediate step in developing our substantive argument and quantifying the eﬀects we describe,
we model reserves accumulation as a buﬀer stock model against capital flow reversals. The view that reserves
can be used to cushion the impact of external shocks exists at least since Heller (1966), was enhanced by
the work on precautionary savings in macroeconomics during the 1980s and has recently returned to the
fore with the large accumulation of reserves exhibited by emerging markets since the crises at the end of the
1990s (see, e.g., Lee (2004)).
   Importantly, the main reason for seeking insurance and hedging in our context is not income fluctuation
per-se but the potential tightening of a financial constraint. This motive parallels that highlighted by Froot
et al (1993) at the level of corporations, and by Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001) for emerging markets.
While the substantive themes developed in those articles diﬀer from ours, the basic model in our paper is in
many respects a dynamic version of theirs.
   Closely related to our recommendations are those in the sovereign debt literature. The optimality of
contingent debt and the limitations to it imposed by financial frictions are also a feature of that literature.
In particular, the work of Kletzer, Newbery and Wright (1992) and Kletzer and Wright (2000), characterize
feasible financial structures consistent with diﬀerent degrees of commitment by a sovereign borrower and
its lenders. Our collateral constraints capture features similar to those of their richer limited enforcement
framework. Our paper reinforces much of the message in that literature and provides a tractable model that
can be estimated and quantified.
   The interaction between precautionary savings and financial constraints is also present in the closed
economy framework of Aiyagari (1994). He calibrated such a model to estimates of US microeconomic
income processes and other parameters and concluded that eventually agents would save enough to relax
all financial constraints. Our model has similar ingredients, in that countries tend to accumulate resources
over time and in that there is a level after which sudden stops would have no consequences on consumption.
However, in sharp contrast with his quantitative results, ours suggests that historically countries have not
gotten close to that level of savings. The main reason is the high opportunity cost of accumulating reserves
for these countries, which face two financial constraints. On one hand, countries are unable to transfer
enough resources from the post- to the pre-development phase. On the other, within the pre-development
phase the country experiences sudden stops. The problem equivalent to that in Aiyagari is the buﬀer stock
built to smooth the sudden stop. The long run constraint, on the other hand, raises the opportunity cost of
such buﬀering.
   Over recent years there has been a significant rise in the volatility trades, including the VIX. The finance
literature has studied the impact of such trades on the performance of hedge funds and other markets
participants (see, e.g., Bondarenko (2004)). From a risk management perspective, the issues faced by these



                                                      5
economic agents are similar to those faced by emerging market policymakers.
    We setup the model in Section 2 while constraining the precautionary options of the country to the
accumulation of non-contingent reserves. In Section 3 we estimate the sudden stop process, quantify the
basic model, and assess the eﬀectiveness of reserves as a precautionary mechanism. In section 4 we let the
country purchase digital options from world capital markets. Section 5 implements the extended model
using the VIX as the contingent indicator on which options are written. Section 6 extends the results by
adding debt and discuss contingent liability management more broadly. Section 7 concludes and is followed
by several appendices.



2     Sudden Stops and Non-contingent Protection

While there are many important issues that arise from decentralization in economies with poor institutional
development, we leave these aside and focus on the problems between the country as a whole and international
investors. We study a representative agent economy with a benevolent government that seeks to maximize
the expected present value of utility from consumption:
                                            ∙Z ∞                   ¸
                                          E      U (Cs )e−r(s−t) ds
                                              t

with r being both the discount and riskless interest rate. While it is not essential, assuming a CRRA utility
of consumption also simplifies the exposition:

                                                            C 1−γ
                                                  U (C) =
                                                            1−γ

2.1    Emerging Market Economies and World Capital Markets

There are two features of an emerging market economy that are important for our analysis. First, its current
income is low relative to its future income (it has yet to catch up), and thus it would like to borrow and run
current account deficits. Second, it has diﬃculty pledging future income to finance these deficits.
    Let Yt represent the country’s income in the pre-development phase, and follow the geometric Brownian
motion:
                                          dYt = µY Yt dt + σ Y Yt dBt

with 0 ≤ µY < r.
    Income post-development, on the other hand, is equal to:

                                                  κYt       κ > 1.




                                                        6
A transition from the pre- to the post-development phase is irreversible and takes place at a random time
τ G . The focus of the paper is on the former phase. In order to eliminate inessential time dependency, we
assume that τ G is governed by a Poisson process with constant hazard g and independent of all other sources
of uncertainty in the model. Note that g(κ − 1) > 0 is the diﬀerence in the expected rate of growth of a
developing and a developed economy.
   The swift transition and clear demarkation ensures that a country in the pre-development phase would
like to borrow against its post-development income. We split potential financiers into world capital markets
at large (WCM, for short), and specialists. We focus on the former in this section and discuss specialists in
the next one.
   World capital markets have limited connections and understanding of emerging market economies, hence
they do not accept contracts contingent on variables endogenous to these economies. For now, let them just
accept plain-vanilla debt. Moreover, they have only limited willingness to invest resources in any particular
emerging market economy. We shall assume that a country’s debt capacity with respect to WCM is capped
at some finite value Wt .
   The country can also accumulate international assets. Both assets and liabilities pay a return of r per
unit of time. The constraint with respect to WCM applies to the country’s net assets, Xt :

                                                   Xt ≥ −Wt .

   Let us define reserves, Rt , to be the diﬀerence between debt capacity with respect to WCM and actual
net assets:
                                                  Rt = Wt + Xt

Note that if the country is at its debt capacity, then Xt = −Wt and reserves are 0. Similarly, if Wt = 0 then
reserves and net uncontingent assets coincide. By construction Rt ≥ 0. For now, we shall focus our attention
on the case
                                                    Wt = 0

and relax this simplification in Section 6. Until then, all borrowing will be done through specialists, which
will be introduced shortly in the next section.
   Note that given our assumptions of a continuous sample path for the income process, a stable WCM
and, most importantly, a high expected growth, the country has no incentive to accumulate reserves. We
establish this as our benchmark result.

Lemma 1 Assume that Wt = 0 and :
                                                    σ 2 (γ + 1)
                                            µY −                >0                                        (1)
                                                          2
Then, starting from Rt = 0, the optimal solution is to keep Rt = 0 throughout and set Ct = Yt .

                                                       7
      That is, as long as income growth (µY ) is suﬃciently strong to outweigh the precautionary savings motive
³          ´
    σ 2 (γ+1)
         2   , then there are no reserves accumulation in the post-development phase. This result can only be
strengthened during the pre-development phase since there the expected growth rate is µY + g(κ − 1) > µY .
Simply put, hoarding reserves during the pre-development phase is particularly costly for an emerging market,
primarily because the country as a whole is already constrained in its ability to transfer resources from the
post-development phase. This means that any accumulation of reserves in aggregate carries with it a costly
reduction in current consumption.
      Henceforth we shall assume that condition 1 holds. This means that any accumulation of reserves will
have a source diﬀerent from the ingredients described up to now. We now turn to the role of specialists and
their risks.


2.2        Specialists and Sudden Stops

Specialists are investors that have developed some expertise and connections in the country and can engage
in more information-intensive contracts. Concretely, we capture this feature by allowing countries to sign
contracts with specialists that are contingent on country-specific variables. In particular, we let specialists
and countries write contracts contingent on the country’s transition to development. With this we capture
the idea that specialists big payoﬀs are closely tied to the country’s success. In practice, these contracts may
represent equity investment, FDI, the riskiest tranches of GDP-indexed bonds, or toxic-waste more generally.
Later on we also consider a richer set of contingent contracts that hedge the diﬀusive component of income,
but this we do for technical reasons and does not change the substantive message we isolate here.
      Countries’ can pledge up to a share z of post-development output, κYs , for all s ≥ τ G . In aggregate
–that is after netting out the multiple type of financial contracts that individuals may sign and are not
of our concern in this paper – risk neutral specialists optimally engage in “swap-like” contracts with the
country. At each time t, the specialists commit to provide resources at a rate Ft over the next infinitesimal
time interval dt, in exchange for receiving a promise to a stream of payments zκYt forever if development
¡ G¢
 τ    arrives in the interval dt and 0 otherwise. By risk neutrality this stream is valued at zκYt /(r − µY ).
      The maximum flow that competitive specialists are willing to commit for the next dt is then:2

                                                              Ft = f Yt
     2 Formally,   this expression can be derived from the pricing equation:

                                                 rPt = −Ft + g(zκYt /(r − µY ) − Pt )

    and noting that a swap at the time of its inception has value Pt = 0. Note that it would be trivial to add a markup to
compensate specialists for the resources spent in becoming one, but this would not alter the formulae or main results in any
significant way.




                                                                   8
   with
                                                            Yt
                                               f ≡ gzκ           .
                                                          r − µY
                                            κ−1 r−µY
Assumption 1 (Limited Smoothing) z <         κ r+g−µY


   This ensures that the funds provided by specialists before development are less than the unpledged income
after development. Thus, during non-sudden stop times, abbreviated as “N SS” and sometimes referred to
as “normal” times, an emerging market economy engages in as much swaps as it can:

                                                  ftN SS = f

in order to smooth pre- and post-development consumption.

   Let us now introduce the sudden stops, which are our main concern in this paper. Specialists help
completing financial contracts and markets, but they can also experience shocks. We assume that there
are episodes when specialists’ ability to pledge resources is significantly reduced. We neither specify the
particular agency problem or capital constraints that aﬄict specialists during sudden stops, nor let them
take precautionary measures against these. We simply state the aggregate constraint implied by these shocks
and focus on the country’s side of the problem:

Assumption 2 (Sudden Stops) During sudden stops, specialists (collectively) can commit at most ft < ft
resources to the country. Specialists transit from the normal to the sudden stop stage with hazard λ and do
the reverse with hazard λ̃, both of which are independent of the transition to development.

   That is, the maximum flow of resources received from the specialists before development drops to ft Yt
during sudden stops, with
                                                       f <f

This tightening of the aggregate financial constraint can be interpreted as a drop in the share of swaps rolled
over by the specialists, which are clearly binding:

                                                      ftSS = f

For simplicity, we shall assume that if the country transits from the sudden stop to development, it transfers
the eﬀectively pledged resources f κz/g per unit time to specialists. Note that we could have assumed a
transfer of f κz/g, or anything in between, in which case not only the shadow but also the observed interest
rate would rise during sudden stops. This modification is straightforward but not a first order issue in our
analysis. More importantly, in the empirical section we associate the sudden stop to a period of prolonged
reduction in capital inflows; in practice this may come from a combination of an initial shock to specialists


                                                         9
and a longer lasting decline in the country’s collateral z. This is straightforward to accommodate in the
model, with results analogous to attributing the entire episode to specialists’ problems, which is what we do
throughout.3

    Letting At denote the sum of income and contingent flows from specialists, we can write in a mathemat-
ically compact form:
                        ³                                                             ´
                    At = θN SS 1{N SS} + θSS 1{SS} + θG|SS 1{G|SS} + θG|N SS 1{G|N SS} Yt                                  (2)

with

                                                 θN SS    = 1+f                                                            (3)

                                                   θSS    = 1+f                                                            (4)

                                               θG|N SS    = κ − f (r − µY )/g                                              (5)

                                                 θG|SS    = κ − f (r − µY )/g                                              (6)

where 1{N SS} and 1{SS} indicate whether the country is in normal times ("NSS"), or in a sudden stop
("SS"). Importantly, for it is behind the external crises we wish to capture,

                                                         θSS < θN SS .

    Finally, 1{G|SS}, 1{G|N SS} indicate that the country is currently developed and the transition to
development took place from SS or NSS, respectively. Note that,

                                                  θNSS < θG|N SS < θG|SS .

The first of these inequalities is important since it captures the constraint to transferring resources to the
emerging market (pre-development) phase. The second one is inessential, except for implicitly stating that
the former constraint binds regardless of whether the particular transition into development takes place from
NSS or SS.

    Taking stock, we have that net assets accumulation is now described by:

                                                 dXt = (rXt − Ct + At ) dt.

    Let us conclude this section with two remarks. First, by introducing specialists we have eﬀectively
introduced short term borrowing whose availability can be reversed instantaneously in a manner that is
largely unrelated to country specific state variables, such as the level of debt. This captures an important
   3 Note,   nonetheless, that we do need that specialists are a significant part of the problem, otherwise we have to consider
additional insurance contracts between the country and its specialists.


                                                               10
aspect of reality, especially for sudden stops that stem from contagion eﬀects (see, e.g., Calvo et al (2004)).
Second, we have managed to reduce the problem to one where the setup resembles closely a precautionary
savings model applied to the specific jump nature of sudden stops. Thus we can use standard and well
developed intuitions to analyze most of our results.


2.3    The Problem

We are now ready to study the reserves accumulation problem for an economy facing temporary shocks to
its specialists (sudden stops). Let us now collect the ingredients into the country’s optimization problem:
                                      "Z G SS                                                  #
                                         τ ∧τ
                                                                           G  SS
                V (X , Y ) = max E
                      t    t                     e−r(s−t) u(C )ds + e−r((τ ∧τ )−t) Ṽ (X , Y )
                                                                                  s                                         τ     τ
                                     Cs         t
                                           "Z                                                                                                 #
                                                    τ N SS ∧τ G
               SS                                                     −r(s−t)                  −r ((τ G ∧τ N SS )−t)        SS
           V        (Xt , Yt ) = max E                            e             u(Cs )ds + e                           Ṽ        (Xτ , Yτ )
                                     Cs         t
                                           ∙Z       ∞     ¸
           G|SS                                         −r(s−t)
         V      (Xt , Yt ) = max E       e        u(Cs )ds
                              Cs
                                   ∙Zt ∞                  ¸
         G|N SS                           −r(s−t)
       V        (Xt , Yt ) = max E       e        u(Cs )ds
                                     Cs         t
                                    s.t.

               Ṽ (Xτ , Yτ ) = V G|NSS (Xτ , Yτ )1{τ = τ G } + 1{τ = τ SS }V SS (Xτ , Yτ )

          Ṽ SS (Xτ , Yτ ) ≡ V G|SS (Xτ , Yτ )1{τ = τ G } + V (Xτ , Yτ )1{τ = τ N SS }

                          dXt   = [rXt − Ct + At ] dt                                                                                             (7)
                                  ³                                                             ´
                           At   =   θN SS 1{N SS} + θSS 1{SS} + θG|SS 1{G|SS} + θG|NSS 1{G|N SS} Yt

                          dYt   = µY Yt dt + σ Y Yt dBt

                          Xt    ≥ 0 for all t ≥ 0.

            lim e−rt Xt         = 0
           t→∞


where V , V SS and V G denote the value functions in the states NSS, SS and G, respectively.
   In words, in post-development (in the state G) the country faces a standard precautionary savings
problem. This state is absorbing, so that there can be no further transitions to the states "SS" or "NSS".
The first (and final) time that development arrives is denoted by τ G , which occurs with hazard g. Prior
to development, the country can be either in a sudden stop "SS" or in normal times "NSS". Transitions
from normal times to sudden stops occur with a constant hazard rate of λ, at the stochastic times τ SS . The
                                                       e at stochastic times τ NSS . Aside from the diﬀerent
reverse transitions (from SS to NSS) occur at the rate λ,
potential transitions, the practical implication of being in any of the three regimes is that the maximum
amount of resources available diﬀers.


                                                                         11
   Aside from the decision of how many growth-swaps to engage with specialists, which we have already
discussed and solved out of the problem, the country is faced with the decision of how much to consume (Ct ).
Reserves play the role of providing the country with resources during sudden stops. However, accumulating
them is costly because the country is already constrained in normal times, since it cannot borrow to the full
extent against its post-development income.
   While a full characterization of the solution to this problem has to wait until the quantitative section,
here we gauge the nature of the solution analytically.
   Let us start backwards, from the post-development phase, where the problem is a conventional income-
fluctuation problem. When not leading to confusion, we use the generic notation V G for both V G|SS and
V G|NSS , since they both satisfy the Bellman equation:
                      (                )
                        Ct1−γ                 ³         ´                    1
             0 = max          − Ct VX + VXG rXt + θG Yt − rV G + +VYG µY Yt + σ 2Y Yt2 VYGY
                                     G
                                                                                                           (8)
                   ct   1−γ                                                  2

where θG should be taken to be θG|SS for V G|SS while it should be taken to be θG|N SS for V G|N SS . Defining

                                                         Xt                          Ct
                                             xt ≡       N SS
                                                                         ct ≡       NSS
                                                                                               ,
                                                    θ          Yt               θ         Yt
noticing that
                                                           ³        ´1−γ
                                           V G (Xt , Yt ) = θNSS Yt      v G (xt ) ,

and plugging this expression back into (8) and simplifying4 , we obtain:
                             (               ) Ã               !
                               c1−γ
                                t                          θG
                 0 = max             − ct vx + rxt + NSS vxG − rv G
                                           G
                                                                                                           (9)
                          ct   1−γ                       θ
                             £                  ¤  1     ¡                               ¢
                        +µY (1 − γ)v G − xt vxG + σ 2Y −γ(1 − γ)v G + 2γxt vxG + x2t vxx
                                                                                      G
                                                   2

   The first order condition for consumption (normalized by potential income) is:
                                                              ¡ ¢− 1
                                                          ct = vxG γ                                     (10)

   An immediate implication of this first order condition is that the consumption to (potential) income ratio
is a function of the reserves to (potential) income ratio only.

   Following similar steps in NSS, we obtain:
                       (                  )
                         c1−γ
                          t
          0 = max              − ct vxN SS + gv G|NSS (xt )                                              (11)
                   ct    1−γ
                       + (rxt + 1) vxNSS − (r + λ + g)v N SS + λv SS
                            £                       ¤ 1       ¡                                     ¢
                       +µY (1 − γ)v NSS − xt vxN SS + σ 2Y −γ(1 − γ)v N SS + 2γxt vxN SS + x2t vxx
                                                                                                NSS
                                                         2
  4 For   details see Duﬃe et al. (1997)


                                                                    12
    Once again, the first order condition for consumption is
                                                       ¡      ¢− 1
                                                   ct = vxN SS γ                                           (12)

    Finally, we obtain the Bellman equations for the SS region:
                            (               )
                              c1−γ
                               t
                0 = max            − ct vxSS + gv G|SS (xt )                                               (13)
                         ct   1−γ
                          Ã           !
                                  θSS               e + g)v SS + λv
                                                                 e N SS
                       + rxt + NSS vxSS − (r + λ
                                 θ
                            £                   ¤ 1      ¡                                 ¢
                       +µY (1 − γ)v SS − xt vxSS + σ2Y −γ(1 − γ)v SS + 2γxt vxSS + x2t vxx
                                                                                        SS
                                                    2

which has a first order condition similar to that in the NSS region:
                                                        ¡    ¢− 1
                                                    ct = vxSS γ .                                          (14)


    It is instructive to study and compare the first order conditions across the regions, in the (positive)
neighborhood of xt = 0. It follows from the condition θG|SS > θG|N SS > θN SS > θSS that:

                                    vxG|SS (0) < vxG|N SS (0) < vxN SS (0) < vxSS (0)

The last inequality implies that consumption drops at the sudden stop, while the next to last implies that
the country is not smoothing pre- and post-development consumption. It turns out that, as we show in the
next section, these features of the solution carry over to most of the empirically relevant range of reserves.



3     Quantitative Analysis
In this section we estimate the main parameters of the model, calibrate others, and assess the optimal
reserves strategy quantitatively.


3.1    The Sudden Stop Process

The core of our analysis is the sudden stop process. In this section we estimate the main parameters of such
            e and θSS /θNSS using data from 1983 to 2003 for six representative emerging market economies
process: λ, λ,
(see the Appendix for selection criterion): Chile, Colombia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, and Thailand.
    The first step is to find empirical counterparts for the processes describing available resources during NSS
and SS. For this, we note that in the model these resources can be decomposed into income, Yt , and financial
flows, (θt − 1)Yt . In practice, there are several additional complexities in doing such a decomposition. These
stem from the existence of multiple goods whose relative prices change during the transitions between NSS

                                                           13
and SS and viceversa, the presence of temporary terms of trade shocks, and endogenous domestic output
declines during sudden stops. The Data Appendix describes our methodology to deal with these issues. In
a nutshell, we approximate Yt with the permanent component of domestic national income, and (θt − 1)Yt
with the sum of capital flows in terms of imported goods and the transitory component of exports and terms
of trade eﬀects. Our main left hand side variable is the ratio of these two, which can be loosely interpreted
as external financing over “normal” pre-development income:
                                                                    (θit − 1)Yit
                                             ψ it ≡ θit − 1 =                    .
                                                                         Yit
   In our model, ψ can take only two values: (θNSS − 1) and (θSS − 1).                      Since this this is too stark a
characterization for actual data, we assume that that ψ is observed with (state contingent) noise,

                                                e = ψ (sit ) + eit (sit )
                                                ψ it i


with
                                 eit (sit ) ∼ N (0, σ 2e (sit )),       sit ∈ {SS, N SS}.

        e follows a process described by a standard regime-switching model a la Hamilton (1989, 1990),
   Then ψ it

with parameters: {ψ N
                    i
                      SS
                         , ψ SS    NSS     SS
                             i , σ e,i , σ e,i , pi (N SS → SS), pi (SS → N SS)}, such that:


                      pi (N SS   → SS) = Pr(si,t+∆ = SS|si,t = N SS) = 1 − e−λi ∆                                    (15)
                                                                                                hi ∆
                                                                                               −λ
                        pi (SS   → N SS) = Pr(si,t+∆ = N SS|si,t = SS) = 1 − e                                       (16)

where we have approximated the continuous time model by its discrete analog assuming that there can be
at most one transition in a time interval of ∆.
   For the calibration exercises we convert annual transition probabilities into annual frequencies by setting:

                                        λ = − log [1 − P (N SS → SS)]
                                        e = − log [1 − P (SS → N SS)]
                                        λ

   Given the limited number of SS observations we have for each country and the highly nonlinear nature of
the hidden states model we are estimating, we use a Bayesian approach based on a Gibbs Sampler (see Kim
and Nelson 1999). We describe the precise procedure in the Appendix, but the main steps are as follows:

   • We fix arbitrary starting parameters.

   • Conditional on these parameters, we filter the data using Hamilton’s algorithm to find the posterior
       probability that at a given point in time each country is in a SS or in NSS.

   • We draw a sample path from this joint distribution. Such a path takes the value 1 if a given country
       is in a SS and 0 otherwise.

                                                              14
           Average         Std Dev               5%                25%             50%               75%             95%
λ           0.19           0.050141           0.11337             0.15434         0.1868            0.22153        0.27772
e
λ          0.14769         0.046718           0.079083            0.11403        0.14322            0.17685        0.23111

                        Table 1: Pooled Estimates using 1983-2003: Poisson Parameters.


    • We condition on these paths (one for each country) and derive the joint posterior distribution of the
       parameters. We require only that parameters related to pi (N SS → SS), pi (SS → N SS) are the same
       across all countries, while the rest of the parameters can vary across countries. These parameters are
       key for the quantitative exercises that follow, while they seem to be the hardest ones to measure based
       on time series observations alone. Hence we exploit the cross sectional dimension of the panel in order
       to increase the precision of these estimates. Throughout we use uninformative priors.

    • Finally, we draw a new set of parameters from this posterior distribution and iterate the procedure
       several thousand times. By standard results in Bayesian computation, the stationary distribution of
       the sampled parameters coincides in law with the posterior distribution of the parameters.

    Tables 1 and 2 present the estimates we obtain form this procedure for the parameters ψ N
                                                                                            i
                                                                                              SS
                                                                                                 , η i ≡ ψ SS
                                                                                                           i −
             ei .5 Note that from the first two parameters we can recover           θSS
ψN
 i
   SS
      , λi , λ                                                                        i
                                                                                   θNSS
                                                                                           since:
                                                                                    i



                                                   θSS
                                                     i          ηi
                                                   NSS
                                                       = 1+
                                                  θi        1 + ψNi
                                                                    SS


    Based on the medians, we conclude that sudden stops are large, leading to declines in available resources
typically beyond 10 percent, last for about 6.5 years years and occur about every 12 years (about 5.5 years
after exiting the previous sudden stop). As we said in the introduction, our measure of sudden stop is meant
to capture not only the initial spike in interest rates and turmoil but also the eﬀects of sudden stops that
remain even after the main event. Our estimates suggest that these eﬀects can be quite large: Countries
take a long time in resuming significant borrowing after experiencing a severe capital flow reversals.

    Finally, Figure 2 summarizes the output of the corresponding Gibbs sampler run for our economies. It
illustrates the path of the share of economies with posterior probabilities of being in sudden stop above 0.5
during a given period. It is apparent from this figure that our procedure does capture the events one would
want it to capture when studying sudden stops.
    5 Wealso estimated for a sub-sample from the 1990s using quarterly data for a broader set of countries. The results were
                        h which were cut in half. However, this estimator is too aﬀected by end of sample condition in a short
very similar except for λ,
sample (if we trim the last two years, the estimates become very similar to those of the 1983-2003 sample that we report).




                                                             15
Chile                Average       Std Dev         5%          25%          50%         75%          95%
    N SS
ψ                     0.066          0.024        0.031        0.049       0.063        0.081       0.108
η                     -0.091         0.030        -0.132      -0.109       -0.094      -0.076       -0.041
Colombia
ψ N SS                0.059          0.008        0.044        0.055       0.060        0.065       0.070
η                     -0.051         0.009        -0.064      -0.057       -0.052      -0.047       -0.036
Mexico
ψ N SS                0.078          0.010        0.061        0.072       0.079        0.085       0.094
η                     -0.084         0.015        -0.106      -0.093       -0.085      -0.075       -0.059
Indonesia
ψ N SS                0.043          0.006        0.033        0.039       0.043        0.047       0.053
η                     -0.066         0.009        -0.081      -0.072       -0.067      -0.061       -0.049
Malaysia
ψ N SS                0.114          0.020        0.081        0.101       0.114        0.127       0.146
η                     -0.164         0.023        -0.199      -0.178       -0.164      -0.149       -0.126
Thailand
ψ N SS                0.098          0.019        0.064        0.085       0.099        0.111       0.127
η                     -0.146         0.023        -0.179      -0.161       -0.147      -0.133       -0.107

           Table 2: Country Specific Parameters 1983-2003: Normal Level of Resources and Sudden Stops.




                                                        16
                             Chile                                              Colombia
                                               1                                                     1
                                                               0.08
      0.1
                                                               0.06
     0.05

                                                     Pr(SS)




                                                                                                           Pr(SS)
                                                               0.04
       0                                       0.5                                                   0.5
ψ




                                                       ψ
    −0.05                                                      0.02

     −0.1                                                        0
                                               0                                                     0
             1985     1990       1995   2000                          1985   1990     1995    2000
                             Mexico                                             Indonesia
                                               1                                                     1
      0.1
                                                               0.05
                                                     Pr(SS)




                                                                                                           Pr(SS)
     0.05
                                               0.5                                                   0.5
ψ




                                                       ψ




                                                                 0
       0

    −0.05                                                     −0.05
                                               0                                                     0
             1985     1990     1995     2000                          1985   1990      1995   2000
                          Malaysia                                               Thailand
      0.2                                      1                0.2                                  1


      0.1                                                       0.1
                                                     Pr(SS)




                                                                                                           Pr(SS)
                                               0.5                                                   0.5
ψ




                                                       ψ




       0                                                         0


     −0.1                                                      −0.1
                                               0                                                     0
             1985     1990       1995   2000                          1985   1990     1995    2000



            Figure 1: ψ i and posterior probability of being in a SS for 6 diﬀerent countries.




                                                      17
                                                                    Sudden Stops
                     1


                    0.9


                    0.8                                                            LTCM/Russia →
                                          ↓ Crises in Asia
                    0.7                                                         Asian Crisis →


                    0.6
% countries in SS




                    0.5
                          ↓ Debt Crisis

                    0.4


                    0.3


                    0.2                                              Tequila Crisis ↓


                    0.1


                     0
                     1983        1985       1987      1989   1991       1993       1995    1997    1999   2001   2003
                                                                        Year




                                                   Figure 2: Fraction of Economies in SS




                                                                      18
3.2    Other parameters
                  e and θN SS /θSS we need to determine r, µ , σ Y , g, α, γ, θ G|SS /θSS and θG|N SS /θN SS
In addition to λ, λ                                         Y

before simulating the model. Within reasonable ranges, the choice of r, which represents both the interest
and the discount rate, is not of first order importance; we simply set it to 0.04. The post-development growth
rate µY is set to 0.018, which is approximately the rate of growth of per-capita consumption in the US over
the very long sample considered in Campbell and Cochrane (1999). We set σ Y = 0.05, which is higher than
the developed economies volatility in national income because emerging markets also have significant terms
of trade fluctuations. The parameter g is set to 0.025, which matches the speed of convergence estimated by
Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2003). We set θG|N SS /θN SS to 2, so that the expected rate of growth of income
in an emerging market economy during normal times is:
                                               Ã         !
                                                 θG|N SS
                                    µY + g log             = 3.7%
                                                  θN SS

which is on the conservative end of an emerging market economy’s expected growth during normal times.
The parameter θG|SS /θSS follows from the previous ones since:
                                             Ã           !
                              θG|SS   r − µY θN SS             θG|NSS θNSS
                                 SS
                                    =             SS
                                                     − 1 + N SS
                               θ         g      θ               θ      θSS

   We used γ to match a reasonable stationary level of central bank reserves. Consider the dynamics of
                              µ          ¶ Ã                                     !
                                   Xt                      σ2      Ct   θN SS Yt
           d log(xt ) = d log              = r − (µY −        )−      +            dt − σdBt =
                                θN SS Yt                    2      Xt      Xt
                         Ã                             Ã          !           !
                                      σ2         Ct      θN SS Yt     θNSS Yt
                      =    r − (µY −     ) − N SS                   +           dt − σdBt =
                                       2      θ     Yt     Xt           Xt
                            µ                            ¶
                          1               σ2
                      =       r − (µY −      )xt − ct + 1 dt − σdBt
                         xt               2

Let us define the "steady state" level of x as:

                                                          σ2
                                  x∗ = min{(r − (µY −        ))x − ct + 1 = 0}
                                         x                2

   Beyond this level, the process for xt has a negative drift and reserves start to decline on average. By
setting γ = 8, we obtain an x∗ = 0.2, which is a reasonable estimate for the maximum desired level of
reserves for countries not attempting to use reserves accumulation with goals other than smoothing sudden
stops (such as maintaining an undervalued currency, and so on).
   Finally, we use η = −0.1, ψ N SS = 0.08 as a base case scenario in this section. These correspond roughly
to the median values of these parameters across the countries that we consider.                         e are
                                                                                      The values for λ, λ
taken from the estimations of the previous section. Table 3 summarizes the values of the parameters used.


                                                     19
γ                                   8                                   λ                                  0.211
δ                                 0.04                                  e
                                                                        λ                                  0.158
r                                 0.04                                  η                                  -0.1
µ                                 0.018                                 g                                  0.025
σ                                 0.05                                  ψ                                  0.08

                                   Table 3: Parameters used in Simulations.

3.3    Implications

Figure 3 depicts the policy functions. The upper curve represents consumption during NSS and the lower one
represents consumption during SS, both as a function of the level of reserves. The vertical distance between
these two curves illustrates the instantaneous drop in consumption once the country transits into SS. In the
neighborhood of 0 this drop is largest and around 7.5%, and it declines as the level of reserves rises. Because
the drop is very large when the country has no reserves, precautionary savings is also maximum a this point,
which is reflected in the diﬀerence between one and cNSS .
    Note that the policy functions cN SS (x) and cSS (x) do not converge. This is because, as we discussed in
the calibration section, once the country reaches x∗ = 0.2, it stops accumulating reserves. If reserves exceed
this level, the country rather consume them than use them to further smooth sudden stops. The opportunity
costs of reserves is simply to great to purse full insurance. Despite the large costs associated to sudden stops,
the strength of the other financial constraint (the inability to pledge a significant share of future, and higher,
income) raises the opportunity cost of storing reserves enough to make it (constrained) optimal to remain
somewhat unprotected against these sudden stops.
    Panels (a) and (b) in Figure 4, plot the paths of consumption and reserves, respectively, for a case where
the country starts with 0 reserves, then a sudden stop takes place exactly at its expected time, 1/λ, and the
                                              e For clarity, we also set dBt = 0 (in the path but not the
sudden stop lasts exactly its expected time,1/λ.
value and policy functions). Early on, the consumption path is increasing and below one, as the country
accumulates reserves, which it then uses during the sudden stop. The country’s incentive to accumulate
reserves is very steep initially and less intense once some reserves have been accumulated. Importantly,
even though the sudden stop in this example takes place exactly at its expected time, there is a significant
consumption drop at the time of the sudden stop, reflecting the imperfect nature of the reserves accumulation
self-insurance mechanism.
    The next two figures contain the distributions of the main quantities generated by the model, associated
to a large number of paths in our economy. Recall that randomness stems from Yt as well as from the
transitions in and out of sudden stops. We start with a country that has 0 reserves initially and simulate



                                                       20
                                    Consumption as a function of Reserves
              1.02
                                                                                  cNSS
                                                                                  cSS

                1




              0.98
consumption




              0.96




              0.94




              0.92




               0.9
                     0    0.05             0.1               0.15           0.2          0.25
                                                      xt




                         Figure 3: Consumption functions in NSS and SS




                                                 21
                At and consumption                                       Reserves
  1                                                 0.08
                                                               xt

0.99
                                                    0.07

0.98
                                                    0.06
0.97

                                                    0.05
0.96


0.95                                                0.04


0.94
                                                    0.03

0.93
                                                    0.02
0.92

                                                    0.01
0.91       At
           ct
 0.9                                                  0
       0         20              40       60               0        20              40   60
                      quarters                                           quarters




                      Figure 4: Typical path of consumption and reserves.




                                               22
                                                     Density of Reserves (no hedging)
                       700




                       600




                       500




                       400
           frequency




                       300




                       200




                       100




                         0
                             0   0.02     0.04     0.06       0.08          0.1      0.12       0.14       0.16        0.18
                                                                       xt




                                   Figure 5: Distribution of Reserves immediately prior to SS.


5000 paths for T = 80 years, without a transition into development.
   Figure 5 displays the histogram of reserves available at the point in which the country enters a sudden
stop. The possibility of a sudden stop leads to an accumulation of reserves well above 5% of available
resources during NSS. However it is critical to observe that there a significant mass concentrated at very
low levels of reserves. This mass corresponds to those cases where the country has not had the time to
accumulate reserves since the previous sudden stop. These early crises are an important source of risk, that
reserves are particularly ineﬃcient in dealing with.6
   Figure 6 displays average consumption during N SS and SS. The average diﬀerence between consumption
is large, around 7 percent. Moreover, often the country simply runs out of reserves during sudden stops and
consumption falls by the full extent of the capital flow reversal.
   In summary, these results raise the question of whether there are other ways to manage reserves that
  6 In   practice, countries often deal with this risk by not using reserves very aggressively during sudden stops, which is a clearly
suboptimal strategy.



                                                                  23
                    Average Consumption during NSS                                Average Consumption during SS
            140                                                           140




            120                                                           120




            100                                                           100




             80                                                            80
frequency




                                                              frequency




             60                                                            60




             40                                                            40




             20                                                            20




             0                                                             0
             0.85          0.9          0.95         1                     0.85         0.9         0.95          1
                                 cNSS
                                  t
                                                                                              cSS
                                                                                               t




                            Figure 6: Average consumption during SS and NSS.




                                                         24
could increase their eﬃciency and avoid the risk that is associated with the unpredictability of sudden stops.
We turn to this question in the next section.



4     Contingent Instruments
In practice, how much better could countries do by holding contingent instruments in their reserves? Obvi-
ously, the answer to this question depends on the specific factors behind a country’s sudden stops and the
financial markets available to hedge those specific factors. Our goal here is less ambitious. We simply want
to illustrate, in a conservative scenario in terms of information and financial development requirements, the
significant potential gains from improving current sudden-stop-risk-management practices by adding con-
tingent instruments that are largely independent of the country’s actions and, more generally, of factors
exclusively related to emerging markets (and hence not appealing to world capital markets).


4.1      Portfolio decision

Before introducing additional assets, let us develop in more detail the events behind a transition into a
sudden stop. It is useful to think of this transition in two steps. First, there is a Poisson process with
intensity χ that puts the economy in a “danger zone” at stochastic times τ D . Second, at τ D , the country
enters a sudden stop with probability P (SS = 1) and avoids it with probability P (SS = 0) = 1−P (SS = 1).
It is evident that,
                                                 λ = χP (SS = 1)                                         (17)

and that nothing in our analysis up to now is modified by this decomposition of events.
    Let us now assume that there is a financial asset with payoﬀ Ft , that also has the potential to exhibit a
jump in “danger zones” τ D , which we denote by J. When J = 1 the asset’s payoﬀ exhibit a jump at τ D ,
while J = 0 denotes the absence of a jump at such time. Correspondingly, the probability of each event
(conditional on τ D ) are denoted by P (J = 1) and P (J = 0), respectively. It follows that this jump process
also follows a Poisson process with intensity:

                                                 λJ ≡ χP (J = 1)                                         (18)

    Note that sofar we have not excluded the possibility that the jump in the asset with payoﬀ Ft is inde-
pendent from the transition into the SS (P (J = 1, SS = 1) = 0)), although clearly our interest is in the case
where:
                                            P (J = 1, SS = 1) > 0

We can now write the risky asset’s payoﬀ process as:
                                                       ¡           ¢
                                      dFt = rFt dt + Ft JdNt − χJdt                                      (19)

                                                       25
where dNt is a jump process that takes the value of one at time τ D and zero otherwise, and J = P (J = 1)
                                                                    dFt
is the mean of J. Correspondingly, the asset has a return           Ft .

   In what follows we condition on those times τ D where we observe either a jump (J = 1) and/or a
transition into SS. This is without loss of generality, since (as we show shortly) the Bellman equation only
depends on those events and not on situations where neither takes place. Hence from now on let us define:

                                         χ∗ = χ(1 − P (SS = 0, J = 0))

which is the hazard rate for observing either a jump in J or a transition into SS. An obvious corollary
is that there are only three possible outcomes that can take place at those times (SS = 1, J = 1), or
(SS = 0, J = 1) , or (SS = 1, J = 0) . To simplify notation let us define:

                           pJ=1,SS=1     = P (SS = 1 and J = 1|SS = 1 or J = 1)

                           pSS=1,J=0     = P (SS = 1 and J = 0|SS = 1 or J = 1)

                           pJ=1,SS=0     = P (SS = 0 and J = 1|SS = 1 or J = 1)

   To complete the description of the data generating process we assume that once in a sudden stop, the
                                                   e is independent of the jumps in J.
transition out of it, which happens with intensity λ,

   The addition of a risky asset with the above properties modifies the analysis in only two respects. First
the evolution of reserves (7) becomes

                                 dXt = (r(Xt − ξ t Ft ) − Ct + At ) dt + ξ t dFt

where ξ t is the amount invested in the risky asset Ft . It is important to note that the constraint Xt ≥ 0,
implies the “short selling” constraint
                                              ξ t ≥ −Xt / max(J).

Else, there could be case, where the jump is suﬃciently large to violate the non-negativity constraint on Xt .
If max(J) = 1 (as we have assumed) we have the portfolio constraint: ξ t /Xt ≥ −1. This means that the
risky asset cannot be used to circumvent the borrowing constraint (i.e., it must post full margin).
   Second, the optimization problem now involves a portfolio decision. This decision is straightforward in
the post-development and sudden stops regions since investing in the asset Ft only means adding risk to the
country’s reserves holdings, without reward in terms of hedging value. Accordingly, the country picks ξ t = 0
in these regions and the associated Bellman equations of section 2.3 remain unchanged.
   Thus the portfolio decision is interesting only in the pre-development non-sudden-stop region (NSS),
where the country is preparing itself for a potential sudden stop. Letting:
                                                               ξt
                                                 ξet =       N SS
                                                         θ          Yt

                                                         26
the Bellman equation in the NSS region is now7 :
                     (                )
                       c1−γ
                        t         NSS
         0 = max            − ct vx     + (rxt + 1) vxN SS + gv G (xt )
                ct     1−γ
                       ⎧ ⎡                                                      ⎤                    ⎫
                       ⎨      X                                                                      ⎬
               + max χ∗ ⎣           pJ=i,SS=j v SS1{SS=j} (xt + ξet Ft 1{J = 1})⎦ − ξet Ft χ∗ JvxNSS
                   ξht ⎩                                                                             ⎭
                                    i,j∈{0,1}
                              ∗
                    −(r + χ + g)v N SS
                        £                        ¤ 1    ¡                                       ¢
                    +µY (1 − γ)v N SS − vxN SS xt + σ 2Y −γ(1 − γ)v N SS + 2γvxN SS x + vxx
                                                                                         N SS 2
                                                                                             x
                                                   2
where:                                                              ½
                                                    SS1{SS=j}         v SS if SS = 1
                                                v               =
                                                                     v N SS if SS = 0
   and
                                                    J = E (J|SS = 1 or J = 1)

   The additional first order condition is:
                           X
                                pJ=i,SS=j vxSS1{SS=j} (xt + Ft ξet )1{J = 1} = JvxN SS                   (20)
                              i,j∈{0,1}

   Notice that this is a standard Euler equation. Defining the rate of return on asset Ft as:
                                                                    1{J = 1}
                                                           R=
                                                        J
   and using the first order condition for consumption given in (12) we can rewrite (20) as:
                                      ∙ 0                          ¸
                                       u (Cτ D+ )
                                   E 0            R|SS = 1 or J = 1 = 1
                                       u (Cτ D− )
where the expectation is taken at time τ D but without knowledge of which of the three possible combinations
of J and SS is about to materialize.
   In the extreme case where pJ=1,SS=1 = 1, the country has an "ideal" instrument at its disposal and the
Euler equation collapses to:
                                                       u0 (Cτ D+ ) = u0 (Cτ D− )

which implies Cτ D+ = Cτ D− and hence there is no consumption drop upon entering a SS. Moreover, one
can show that in this case the country has no incentive to accumulate reserves and instead just purchases
enough contingent instruments to ensure that Cτ D+ = Cτ D− .
   More generally, both pJ=0,SS=1 and pJ=1,SS=0 are positive, which implies that there can be significant
injections of resources that do not come with sudden stops, as well as sudden stops with significant con-
sumption drops since the contingent strategy does not yield the resources in a timely manner. In this case,
the Euler equation simply balances the risks of these events. Doing so generally requires accumulating
non-contingent and contingent reserves, an issue we return to in the empirical implementation below.
  7 In   the second line pJ=0,SS=0 = 0 since we condition on events where either J = 1 or SS = 1.


                                                                    27
4.2         Implementation

The strategy described above assumes that the country and the world capital markets can write a contract
that is contingent on a jump in the price of a traded asset. It is not immediately obvious how to write such
a contract. In this section we describe a practical way to create a contract that pays 1 if a traded asset
exhibits a jump and 0 otherwise. Assume that there exists a state variable with dynamics:

                                                 dwt = µw dt + σ w dBt + Jw dNt

and that there exist call and put options that are written on this state variable. Fix first ∆, ε, ε1 > 0 and
                                                                             √
assume that the country goes long a call option with exercise price wt + σw ∆ + ε and short a call option
                          √                                                    √
with strike price wt + σ w ∆ + ε + ε1 . Such a scheme pays ε1 if wt+∆ > wt + σw ∆ + ε + ε1 and 0 if wt+∆ <
         √
wt + σ w ∆ + ε. Now suppose that it can be repeated N times, so that ε1 → 0 and N ε1 → 1. Then, one
                                                                      √
obtains in the limit a “digital” option that pays 1 if wt+∆ > wt + σw ∆ + ε, and 0 otherwise. Furthermore
assume that we take ∆ to 0, by considering contracts of very small maturity. Then we have a contract that
pays 1 if wt+ − wt− > ε, i.e. if wt exhibits a discontinuity larger than ε. If the distribution of Jw has a
positive lower bound then taking ε to be that lower bound yields a contract that has a payoﬀ of 1 if there is
a jump and 0 otherwise.8 The payoﬀ of such a strategy would then be equivalent to the payoﬀ of an asset
following the process in equation (19) and the analysis of the previous section follows.
     It is important to note that the above argument is an approximation argument. We obtain a contract
that delivers a payoﬀ conditional on a jump as the limit of trading strategies with existing securities. From
a practical perspective, creating a payoﬀ that resembles a digital option from puts and calls is relatively
straightforward. Investment banks are often willing to provide quotes for such contracts directly. The more
subtle part of the argument is the limit as ∆ → 0. In the econometric estimations that follow we therefore
estimate the “correlation” between a contract that would have a payoﬀ of 1 if wt+∆ − wt is larger than a
fixed amount ε, and ∆ is taken to be a month.



5          Quantitative Analysis
Our goal here is not to conduct a thorough search for the optimal risky instrument for specific countries’
portfolios. Rather, we seek to illustrate the kind of properties that such instruments ought to have and their
implications. With this purpose, we chose the CBOE Volatility Index (VIX). This is a traded index formed
from quoted put and call options on the S&P 500, available since the late 1980s. This index extracts the
“implied” volatility from the underlying options. Traders then can take positions in this index to implement
    8 If   the distribution of the jump has no lower bound then we can still obtain a payoﬀ similar to the above with high enough
probability as long as we set the "cutoﬀ" ε low enough and Pr(ζ w > ε) is close to 1.


                                                                 28
hedges or speculate. In line with the model, this index is primarily driven by US and not emerging market
events. Moreover, as we show below, sudden stops are highly correlated with jumps in the VIX. These two
properties are key for useful and potentially liquid SS-hedging instruments.


5.1    The VIX Process


Let us postulate a continuous time process of the VIX, described by an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck with jumps:
                                                                     ¡               ¢
                    d log(V IX) = A (B − log(V IX)) dt + σ V IX dBt + φdNt − λJ µφ dt

   Notice that this process is of the form considered in section 4.2. The first term captures the predictable
component of the process, which plays no interesting role in what follows. For simplicity we shall take
A, B, σ V IX to be constant and φ to be a normal distribution with mean µφ and standard deviation σφ . The
jump process dNt takes the value 1 when a jump takes place and 0 otherwise. The parameter λJ denotes the
hazard rate for the jump process. Finally, note that the second and third terms in the process are martingale
diﬀerences.
   In estimation, we shall approximate the above process by its discrete time counterpart. The first step is
to remove the predictable component, for which we estimate an AR(1) process for log(V IX) and focus on
the residuals. These residuals are characterized by a mixture of normals:
                                                   √
                               et = µV IX ∆ + σV IX ∆εt+∆ + φt+∆ 1{J = 1}                               (21)

with µV IX ≈ −λJ µφ ∆ and 1{J = 1} denotes an indicator that takes the value 1 if a jump takes place
                        ¡           ¢
between t and t + ∆, and εt+∆ , φt+∆ are i.i.d. Normal:
                                                 ⎛             ⎞
                                   µ      ¶
                                     εt+∆           0     1 0
                                             ∼N⎝        ,      ⎠
                                    φt+∆            µ     0 σ2
                                                             φ         φ

The source of the approximation to the continuous time limit, is that the discrete approximation excludes
the possibility of more than one jump in the interval ∆, which seems reasonable if we want to focus on
relatively large and infrequent jumps and relatively small time intervals ∆.
   Note that (21) can be rewritten as:

                et = (1 − pV IX )N (µV IX ∆, σ 2V IX ∆) + pV IX N (µV IX ∆ + µφ , σ 2V IX ∆ + σ2φ )     (22)

with pV IX = 1 − e−λJ ∆ .
   In principle, estimation can proceed from this point on along conventional jump-diﬀusion estimation
(see, e.g., Caballero and Panageas (2004)). Instead of following this path, we adopt a strategy that is more


                                                        29
directly linked to the implementation strategy described in section 4.2.9 We assume that the country can
obtain contracts that pay oﬀ 1 unit if the residual from the log(V IX) AR1-regression is above 0.259. This
is the cutoﬀ that ensures that the type I error of wrongly accepting an observation as a jump is less than
1% (see the appendix):
                                                  P r(et > 0.259|J = 0) < 0.01

Note that this rule clearly selects the jumps, but there is some residual Type I error associated with the
diﬀusion component of et .
    Figure 7 shows the residuals of an an AR(1) model for log(V IX). The shaded areas represents those
instances when this statistic is above 0.259. The VIX exhibits significant jumps in the early 90’s (at the
onset of the gulf war) in 1997 (around the Asian crisis), in 1998 (around the Russian/LTCM crisis), after
9/11/2001, and around the beginning of the U.S. corporate scandals and the Argentinean default.
    This procedure gives us estimates of the times when the (AR1 residuals of the) VIX experience jumps.
With these estimates we turn next to determining the joint occurrence of jumps and transitions into SS for
the various countries.


5.2        Conditional Probabilities

The final step to be able to assess the benefits of hedging, is to find an estimate of the degree of “correlation”
between jumps in the VIX and transitions into SS.
    We use a Bayesian procedure to estimate the parameter

                                                                   pJ=1,SS=1
                                              P (SS|J) =
                                                             pJ=1,SS=0 + pJ=1,SS=1

, as described in detail in the appendix. In essence, we start by marking the dates associated with jumps
in the VIX as determined above. Eﬀectively we are conditioning on this information. We then use the
paths associated with the repetitions of the Gibbs sampler to identify the dates in which individual countries
entered into a SS (applying the parameters estimated for the long annual sample on quarterly data for the
1990s). Second, we update the (uniform - uninformative) prior by counting the number of times that the
VIX jumps and the country transits from an NSS state into an SS state. We pool all countries together as
in section 3.1 in order to exploit the cross sectional dimension of the panel. Third, we condition on the NSS
states and count the total number of jumps in the VIX during such states. This allows us to update the
probability that within each quarter the VIX jumps (we denote this probability as P (J)). We also count
the number of times that a given country transits into SS. Fourth, we obtain a (beta) posterior distribution
for P (SS|J) and P (J) from which we take a separate draw for each repetition of the sampler. To check
   9 If   anything, this procedure is biasing the results towards finding a lower "correlation", because it introduces the potential
of type I error compared to Bayesian filtering.


                                                                  30
                                          VIX Residuals and Jumps

               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2
        VIX




               0.1


                0


              −0.1


              −0.2


              −0.3



                      Jan92      Jan94      Jan96        Jan98      Jan00    Jan02




Figure 7: VIX residuals. The grey areas correspond to instances where the VIX residual is above the
jump-cutoﬀ.




                                                31
                  Average           Std Dev          5%          25%         50%          75%          95%
Beta               0.159             0.032          0.109       0.137       0.158         0.180        0.215
Empirical          0.155             0.006          0.145       0.151       0.155         0.159        0.163

Table 4: P r (J) Pooled Estimator, quarterly data 1990-2003. Bayesian Updating and Empirical Distribution.

                  Average           Std Dev          5%          25%         50%          75%          95%
Beta               0.236             0.096          0.095       0.165       0.226         0.296        0.413
Empirical          0.211             0.040          0.150       0.190       0.200         0.238        0.286

Table 5: P r (SS|J) Pooled Estimator, quarterly data 1990-2003. Bayesian Updating and Empirical Distri-
bution.

the influence of this prior on our estimates we also report directly the distribution of the ratio of joint
occurrences (N SS → SS = 1 and J = 1) to total occurrences (N SS → SS = 1 or J = 1). Similarly, we also
report the distribution of the ratio of total occurrences of jumps only (J = 1) to total occurrences of either
event(N SS → SS = 1 or J = 1) . We label this the "empirical" distribution.
   In tables 4 and 5 we report the results of this estimation. Table 4 contains the estimates for P (J)
and table 5 contains estimates for P (SS|J). The top line in both tables includes statistics for the posterior
distribution obtained through the formal Bayesian procedure described above. The bottom line contains
the “empirica” distribution, which is only given for an intuitive “robustness” check on the influence of the
uniform prior on the posterior location parameters like the mean and the median.
   From this table one can obtain the implied intensity of a jump in the VIX as:

                                          λJ = −4 log(1 − P (J)) = 0.69

   where P (J) denotes the mean of the posterior distribution of P (J).


   Now we can identify all the key parameters of the joint VIX and SS process, which can be recovered from
the following four relations:

                                     λJ   ≡ χ∗ (pJ=1,SS=1 + pJ=1,SS=0 )                                  (23)

                                       λ ≡ χ∗ (pJ=1,SS=1 + pJ=0,SS=1 )
                                                 pJ=1,SS=1
                                Pr(SS|J) =
                                           pJ=1,SS=0 + pJ=1,SS=1
                                       1 = pJ=1,SS=1 + pJ=1,SS=0 + pSS=1,J=0                             (24)

   Since we have obtained estimates for λJ , λ (from section 3.1) and Pr(SS|J) from the above table, we


                                                       32
γ               8               λ                 0.211              P r (SS = 1 and J = 1)           0.221
δ              0.04             e
                                λ                 0.148              P r (SS = 1 and J = 0)           0.063
r              0.04             η            (0.07, 0.1, 0.14)       P r (SS = 0 and J = 1)           0.716
µ              0.018            g                 0.025                                 χ∗            0.743
σ              0.05                                                                     λJ            0.696

                                    Table 6: Parameters used in Simulations.

                      Average       Std Dev            5%        25%           50%       75%          95%
Beta                   0.636        0.16122           0.354      0.526         0.645     0.759        0.883
Empirical              0.672         0.088            0.556      0.625         0.667     0.714        0.857

Table 7: P r (J|SS) Pooled Estimator, quarterly data 1990-2003. Bayesian Updating and Empirical Distri-
bution.

can solve for the four unknowns pJ=1,SS=1 , pSS=1,J=0 , pJ=1,SS=0 and χ∗ . Table 6 summarizes the resulting
parameters that we use in the simulation in the next section.
    Finally, we also obtain estimates Pr(J|SS), which report in Table 7. They indicate that the probability
of observing a “jump” conditional on a transition to SS is about 70 percent. Which means that with very
high probability the contract that we consider delivers payoﬀs exactly in the states where inflows are needed
the most.


5.2.1     Implications

In this section we calibrate the model with the same parameters as the ones used in section 3.2. To provide
a base case scenario we use the median pJ,SS . Using the same λ as in section 3.2 and the λJ obtained in
5.1 we can determine χ∗ , pSS=1,J=0 and pJ=1,SS=0 from the procedure described above and solve the model
numerically.
    For the same realizations in section 3.2, plus the corresponding realizations of simulated VIX processes,
panel (a) in Figure 8 reports the diﬀerence in reserves at the time of the sudden stop between the contin-
gent and non-contingent strategies, normalized by the average of the latter. The empirical mean of this
distribution is close to 30 percent. This is a direct consequence of the eﬃciency of hedging compared to
non-contingent reserve accumulation. By adopting the optimal hedging strategy the country manages to
transfer more resources towards the states it is concerned with, namely the onset of a SS.
    However, the above distribution and its mean underestimates the benefits of hedging. It is apparent that
it is much worse to have less reserves when there is little of them to start with (which is when the hedging
strategy typically dominates by a wide margin), than to have fewer reserves when the country has had plenty


                                                          33
                   Density of absolute Reserve Gain                               Density of proportional Reserve Gain
            1400                                                           1800


                                                                           1600
            1200

                                                                           1400

            1000
                                                                           1200


            800
                                                                           1000
frequency




                                                               frequency




                                                                           800
            600


                                                                           600
            400

                                                                           400

            200
                                                                           200


              0                                                              0
              −4    −2        0         2        4    6                      −2       0       2         4       6        8
                          (xhτSS−xτSS)/E(xτSS)                                              (xhτSS−xτSS)/xτSS




                      Figure 8: Reserves Gain (in absolute and proportional terms)




                                                          34
                                           Difference in consumption drop
            1800


            1600


            1400


            1200


            1000
frequency




            800


            600


            400


            200


              0
             −0.04     −0.03     −0.02     −0.01         0         0.01     0.02   0.03       0.04
                                                     |∆ch|−|∆c|




              Figure 9: Diﬀerence in the magnitude of consumption drop upon entering the SS




                                                    35
                                                                      η = 0.1      η = 0.14         η = 0.07
Mean Level of Reserves                                                 0.065           0.137            0.019
Median Level of Reserves                                               0.064           0.132            0.019
Mean Reserves (first quartile)                                         0.011           0.022           0.0034
Mean Reserves (fourth quartile)                                        0.122           0.263           0.0356
Median (normalized) reserves gain                                      0.293           0.047            1.658
Median (normalized) reserves gain (first quartile)                     2.797           1.265            9.422
Median (normalized) reserves gain (fourth quartile)                    -0.058         -0.130            0.801
Absolute value of Median diﬀerence in consumption drop                 0.010           0.010            0.022
Absolute Value of Median diﬀerence (75th Percentile)                   0.015           0.013            0.027
Absolute Value of Median diﬀerence (25th Percentile)                   0.007           0.006            0.015
Median Portfolio                                                       0.700           0.562            0.776

                                  Table 8: Performance of hedging strategies

of time to prepare for the sudden stop (which is when the unhedged strategy may do better). To capture
this important asymmetry, panel (b) in figure 8 plots the histogram for:
                                                     xhτSS − xτ SS
                                             ∆xR =
                                                         xτ SS
This expression gives the relative reserves gain. As might be expected the distribution of ∆xR is right skewed.
The hedge performs especially well when the country has not had the time to accumulate non-contingent
reserves. An alternative way of making the same point is seen in the first column of Table 8 (η = 0.1), for
the row labelled “median (normalized) gain (first quartile)," which shows that the median gain from the
contingent strategy when reserves are low is close to 300 percent (since the mean of reserves is 0.011, this
implies an absolute gain in reserves around 3 percent of θN SS Y ).
   In terms of the drop of consumption at the instant of the sudden stop, the above diﬀerence translate into
a median diﬀerence that exceeds 1 percent of maximum NSS-consumption and, as shown in Figure 9, has
significant mass at drop-diﬀerentials four times as large as that.

   Figure 10 displays the notional amount of contingent contracts normalized by reserves as a function of
xt . Two observations emerge from this figure: First, as a percentage of xt , the amount invested in contingent
contracts declines. Second, the country enters a large number of these contracts. For instance when x = 0.05,
the country enters contracts that equal total reserves. And when x is as large as 0.15, the contracts still
exceed 30 percent of reserves.
   In terms of dynamics, these two observations mean that the country should first build the contingent
part of the portfolio aggressively, adding non-contingent reserves only gradually. The reason for this strategy

                                                      36
                                            Portfolio
         1


        0.9


        0.8


        0.7


        0.6
πt/xt




        0.5


        0.4


        0.3


        0.2


        0.1
          0.05       0.1             0.15               0.2          0.25             0.3
                                                 xt




  Figure 10: Notional amount invested in contingent instruments normalized by reserves.




                                            37
is that the country is particularly concerned about the worst possible event. That is, is to be found without
resources at the time of a sudden stop. When the stock of reserves is small, the best chance of avoiding
this worst-event is by getting a large contingent payment at the time of the sudden stop. When the stock
of reserves is large, the worst-event is more likely to take place if the country overcommits to contingent
contracts and these do not deliver, than by holding a large amount of non-contingent reserves.
    These features also have implications across diﬀerent configurations of parameters. Going back to Table
8, the columns report results for three scenarios that only vary in the size of the sudden stop. In addition
to the benchmark scenario, we report results for the 25 and 75 percentiles of our estimated ηs. The results
suggest that as countries improve along dimensions that reduce the size of sudden stop,10 they should not only
reduce their reserves accumulation but also reallocate their portfolios toward more contingent instruments.



6      Debt and Contingent Liability Management
Let us now relax the constraint W = 0 and allow the country to borrow from WCM, so that:

                                                        Xt ≥ −Wt a.s.

for some process Wt > 0. This mean that net assets with WCM as the counterparty (Xt ) can potentially
turn negative. In principle Wt could be any process. However, it is most reasonable to assume that Wt is
proportional to income:
                                                          Xt ≥ −wYt                                                       (25)

    The point of this short section is that the essence of our analysis of reserves remains valid here, now for
net assets (or liabilities) management.
    In fact, without further modifications the analysis is identical to that in the previous sections since the
country would behave as if w = 0. The reason for this is that for any Xt < 0, there is a path of the diﬀusion
in income that would lead to negative consumption. The standard approach to remove this unpleasant
implication is to “complete” the market by introducing a new asset St with payoﬀs:

                                                      dSt
                                                          = rdt + σ S dBt
                                                      St

where dBt is the same Brownian motion that drives the income process.11
    By adding this asset to its portfolio, the country removes the possibility of a perverse path and is now
willing to borrow from WCM.12
  1 0 For   example, the estimate of η we report for Chile corresponds to an average of 0.11 and 0.08 for the 1980s and 1990s,
respectively.
  1 1 See Duﬃe and Huang (1986).
  1 2 We view the introduction of this asset as a technical device to make the substantive point we wish to address here rather




                                                               38
                                                    Rt = Xt + wYt ≥ 0

    The presence of S in the country’s portfolio allows it to eﬀectively remove the diﬀusion component of the
income process but this changes in no substantive way our analysis. In particular, if there are no sudden
stops, and if w is not too large, the country never wants to increase X. But, more importantly, if there are
sudden stops, it is optimal for the country to rely on contingent instruments correlated to the sudden stops
rather than just on ex-ante slack in the constraint 25.
    In summary, the implications and recommendations stemming from our analysis carry beyond the problem
of reserves management to that of external assets and liability management. A country that experiences
sudden stops benefits from indexing its assets and liabilities to variables that are correlated with these sudden
stops. Public debt, for example, should have coupons and principal that fall as the VIX (or similar variables)
crosses certain critical thresholds.



7     Final Remarks
Emerging market economies hold levels of international reserves that greatly exceed the levels held by
developed economies (relative to their size). This would seem paradoxical given that, unlike the latter, the
former face significant financial constraints with much of their growth ahead of them. The paradox disappears
once these greater financial constraints also become an important source of volatility, which countries seek
to smooth. This is the context we have modelled, analyzed, and began to assess quantitatively.
    Once such perspective is adopted, one must ask whether current practices, consisting primarily in accu-
mulating non-contingent reserves, are the best countries can or should aim to do. How eﬀective are reserves
in smoothing the impact of sudden stops unrelated to a country’s actions? How much of them should be
accumulated? How fast? Are there potentially less costly financial mechanisms to deal with capital flow
volatility? Who would be the natural counterpart for these mechanisms? How are these mechanisms limited
by financial and collateral constraints?
    Our framework provides aspects of an answer to each of these questions: Even if optimally managed,
reserves oﬀer limited insurance, should be accumulated at a slower pace and used more aggressively during
sudden stops, than is being done by prudent emerging market economies. However, the most important
than as a claim that such assets exist in reality. An alternative mechanism to make the same substantive point, is simply to
assume that there is a lower bound for Y . One of the main reasons the literature prefers the somewhat artificial “complete
markets” solution is that in such case one can use the very general methods of El Karoui and Jeanblanc Pique (1998), and He and
Pages (1993) to solve the country’s post-development problem. As El Karoui and Jeanblanc Pique (1998) demonstrate, solving
problems of this kind amounts to solving the complete markets problem and subtracting the value of a perpetual American
option on the diﬀerence between the constraint-free net asset process and the constraint.



                                                              39
message of the paper is that there are potential insurance contracts, credit lines and hedging markets,
that could significantly reduce the cost and improve the eﬃciency of mechanisms to smooth sudden stops.
The natural counterpart of these instruments and contracts are not the regular emerging market specialist
investors but the world capital markets at large. This is an important consideration to have in mind when
designing such instruments. The much touted GDP-indexed and peso-bonds, for example, while a natural
and useful instrument to trade with specialists (in fact, they do in our model) are unlikely to appeal to the
broad markets. Non-contingent reserves have a place as well, since in practice hedges are unlikely to be
perfect, and overcommitting to an imperfect hedge comes with its own risks. It is clear, nonetheless, that
there are enough verifiable and contractible global variables that are significantly correlated with sudden
stops and should form the basis for a better contingent strategy. Importantly, the very same financial
constraints that are behind these countries’ troubles, limit the type and amount of insurance and hedging
strategies these countries can engage in. In particular, since sudden stops are mostly times when specialists
are constrained as well, the strategies must be such that require little credibility and commitment on the
country side. This means, essentially, policies and investments that are paid (or collateralized) up-front
rather than simple swaps of future contingencies.




                                                     40
 Series                                                            Source
 Nominal GDP (GDP )                                                World Development Indicators
                                                                   (quarterly and annual)
 CPI (P )                                                          IFS
                                                                   (quarterly and annual)
 Nominal Exports (PX X)                                            World Development Indicators and IFS
 (local currency)                                                  (quarterly and annual)
 Nominal Imports (PM M )                                           World Development Indicators and IFS
 (local currency)                                                  (quarterly and annual)
 Real Exports (X)                                                  World Development Indicators
 (local currency)                                                  (annual)
 Real Imports (M )                                                 World Development Indicators
 (local currency)                                                  (annual)
 Nominal Capital Flows (CF )                                       IFS
 (dollars)                                                         (quarterly and annual)
 Nominal Exchange Rate (E)                                         World Development Indicators and IFS
                                                                   (quarterly and annual)
 Net Factor Payments (N F P )                                      IFS
 (dollars)                                                         (annual)

                                Table 9: Data used in the construction of ψ.


8     Appendix


A      Data
The Data
    The VIX is publicly available from the CBOE on a daily frequency. For an introduction to the construction
of this index, see CBOE (2003). We used a monthly frequency in order to smooth spurious daily volatility.
    For the construction of ψ it , we used data from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators Database,
and from the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics (IFS). Table 9 presents a list
of the variables and corresponding sources.
    While in the model ψ is straightforward, in the data its computation is more cumbersome since there are
multiple goods, exchange rate fluctuations, intermediate goods, and so on. All our steps below are aimed at
isolating in ψ the component of external resources and income which is transitory in nature. For this, we

                                                     41
let:

                                                                 h³                       ´iCycle
                                                   Et CFt             PX,t Xt
                                 (θt − 1) Y         PM,t    +          PM,t     − 0.5Xt
                            ψt =            =                     h³                       ´iT rend ,             (26)
                                     Y               T rend            PX,t Xt
                                                 [Nt ]        +         PM,t     − 0.5Xt

where N and X correspond to real nontradables and exports; PX and PM to export and import prices in
local currency; and E and CF to the nominal exchange rate and capital flows.
       Real nontradables are constructed from:

                                            1
                                    Nt =        (GDPt − (PX,t − 0.5PM,t )Xt )
                                           PN,t

where GDP is the country’s GDP, PN,t is the price of nontradables approximated by the local CPI,
and the term 0.5PM,t removes a proxy for intermediate inputs in export-production.                      The expression
³                ´
  PX,t Xt
   PM,t   − 0.5Xt captures the terms of trade eﬀect.

       We decompose between trends and cycles using a standard Hodrick-Prescott filter; extending the series
as much as we could in order to reduce the eﬀect of the end-of-series bias in this procedure. We applied the
filter the log of the corresponding variable.
       In summary, the denominator in equation (26) measures the average (trend level) of total income and
resources, while the numerator attempts to capture the cyclical component of external resources.
       The Sample
       We work with a sample of six developing countries/emerging markets: Chile, Colombia, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Mexico, Thailand, and Turkey. We chose them from the list of countries in Calvo, Izquierdo
and Mejia (2004) plus Malaysia. However, since their sample is for the 1990s only andwe needed a longer
time series dimension (we used data from 1983 to 2003), we dropped all the countries that either were closed
during the 1980s, or had primarily domestic macroeconomic problems, or did not have complete data. Our
marginal drop was Korea, for which we did not have good deflators. However, when we re-estimated our
model with Korea included (using only capital flows data divided by nominal GDP for Korea ), our results
remained essentially unchanged.
                                                     e . In the case of Chile, the cycle around the debt
       We made one adjustment to our construction of ψ it

crisis is significantly larger than that of the 1990s. Thus in a first stage we standardized the 1980s and
1990s in order to estimate the hidden-states and the transition probabilities. After that, we inverted the
standardization to recover the means of each state in each sub-sample.
                                                    e using a related series approach with quarterly data on
       Finally, we constructed quarterly series for ψ it

capital flows. We restrict the average of the quarterly values to be equal to the annual figure we computed
directly using equation (26). Unfortunately, we lack quarterly data for the capital flows for all countries in
the 1990-2003 period. To solve this problem we use a linear (or a quadratic) interpolation method to obtain


                                                            42
quarterly series for the years when we lack quarterly data. Although the point estimates do not change
much if we only use interpolation methods, the timing of the event matters for the synchronization between
sudden stops and the VIX, so we use as much information from the quarterly capital flows as possible in
order to preserve the timing of the joint events. We use interpolation methods for the following countries
(dates are shown in parenthesis): Chile (1990), Colombia (1990-1995), and Malaysia (1990-1998).
    Reserves
    As a reference, the next table shows reserves, reserves net of short term, and total external liabilities for
the six economies we study.



B      Details on the econometric procedure of Sections 3.1, 5.1, 5.2.
Section 3.1: To estimate the process described in this section we apply a Bayesian methodology, by using a
Gibbs Sampler. The Gibbs Sampler is by now a standard methodology in estimating models involving hidden
states (See Kim and Nelson (1999) for an introductory treatment). The basic idea is to exploit knowledge
about the conditional distribution of one parameter at a time (fixing all the others) to construct the joint
posterior distribution of all parameters.
    We modify the basic model that Kim and Nelson (1999) present by pooling all the countries into a
single sample. We allow all parameters of the model to diﬀer across countries. However, in order to obtain
precise estimates we assume that the transition probabilities into and out of a sudden stop are the same
across countries. Moreover, we assume that the joint probability of a jump in the VIX and a simultaneous
transition into a sudden stop is common across countries.
    The first step of the procedure is to fix a set of initial parameters Φ = {ψ N
                                                                                 i
                                                                                   SS
                                                                                      , ψ SS   N SS
                                                                                          i − ψi    , σN SS    SS
                                                                                                       e,i , σ e,i ,

p(N SS → SS), p(SS → N SS) } and then determine the posterior probabilities that a particular realization
   e was drawn from the first (N SS)or the second (SS) distribution. To do that we run a standard
of ψ it

Hamilton (1989,1990) type filter as described in Kim and Nelson (1999). This allows us to determine
a sequence of posterior probabilities that a given realization of the data was drawn from the second (SS)
normal distribution. We repeat this process for each country separately and obtain one sequence per country.
                                  e ; Φ). In the next step we draw an (artificial) sample of 1’s and 0’s from
We shall denote this as Pr(SS = 1|ψ i

these posterior probabilities. We use the convention that 1 corresponds to a Sudden Stop and 0 to NSS.
    In the next step we take these 1’s and 0’s as given. Eﬀectively this allows us to proceed as if we knew
whether each economy is in SS or not at a given point in time. Then we use this information to determine
the posterior distributions of the elements of Φ. Once again we do this in steps as described in Kim and
Nelson (1999). We start with determining the posterior distribution of {ψ N
                                                                          i
                                                                            SS
                                                                               , ψ SS
                                                                                   i  − ψ NSS
                                                                                          i   , σN SS    SS
                                                                                                 e,i , σ e,i }

first: To facilitate the updating we use conjugate priors: a) a beta prior for p(N SS → SS), p(SS → N SS)



                                                        43
                                    Res               Res          Res - ST Debt          Total Ext
                                                 - ST Debt           + Priv Res             Debt
Chile             Avg              20.6%           15.3%               15.0%                46.5%
                  Median           21.5%           16.3%               12.6%                45.7%
                  Max              22.7%           21.0%               29.1%                63.4%
                  Min              15.4%           4.3%                -5.0%                30.3%
Colombia          Avg              11.3%           6.1%                 1.5%                36.6%
                  Median           10.0%           6.5%                 2.1%                39.1%
                  Max              16.6%           10.8%                6.4%                44.9%
                  Min              8.4%            2.4%                -3.2%                27.1%
Mexico            Avg              5.5%            0.1%                -6.5%                28.8%
                  Median           5.6%            0.2%                -6.7%                25.6%
                  Max              7.2%            3.6%                 2.3%                43.4%
                  Min              2.7%            -4.9%               -18.6%               20.4%
Indonesia         Avg              11.3%           7.1%                 6.9%                22.5%
                  Median           7.4%            4.8%                 4.7%                17.4%
                  Max              19.8%           15.8%               17.4%                44.4%
                  Min              4.7%            1.9%                -0.7%                13.3%
Malaysia          Avg              29.4%           -4.8%               -9.1%               187.7%
                  Median           28.6%           -7.7%               -12.1%              186.2%
                  Max              42.3%           24.3%               24.6%               237.2%
                  Min              19.6%          -25.6%               -35.9%              147.4%
Thailand          Avg              21.3%           3.6%                -7.8%                56.4%
                  Median           20.8%           3.3%                -3.7%                58.2%
                  Max              28.0%           18.6%               21.9%                93.8%
                  Min              14.1%           -6.8%               -36.1%               32.9%

Table 10: Debt and Reserves: 1990-2002 (% of GDP) Res: Total Reserves minus Gold; ST Debt: Short-term
External Debt; Priv Res: Net Private Reserves.




                                                 44
with α = β = 1 which coincides with a uniform prior on [0, 1] b) an (improper) normal prior for ψ N
                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                    SS

                                         ¡ SS ¢2
and an (improper) inverse gamma prior for σ N
                                            e,i  that lead to posteriors that depend only on the data
(see Kim and Nelson (1999)) c) a truncated (improper) normal and an inverse (improper) gamma prior
                  ¡      ¢2
for ψ SS
      i  − ψN
            i
              SS
                 , σ SS
                     e,i    as explained in Kim and Nelson (1999). Finally, we assume that all priors are
independent of each other. By well known results in Bayesian Statistics the posterior distributions are in the
same class as these conjugate priors. Moreover there are simple closed form expressions for the parameters
of the posterior distributions. This allows us to determine the posterior distribution of the parameters for
each country separately. In the spirit of the Gibbs Sampler, when we update the posterior probabilities one
at a time (i.e. keeping all parameters except one fixed). Finally, once we have determined the posterior
distribution of each parameter, we make a random draw from that distribution and keep that number fixed
until the next iteration of the sampler.
   The updating of p(N SS → SS),and p(SS → N SS) is done by pooling the observations for all the
countries. So, for each country we count the number of transitions to and out of sudden stops, and the total
number of periods in normal times and in sudden stops. We then add all the episodes for all countries and
find the posterior distributions as follows
                                                   Ã                                        !
                                                            X               X
                             p(N SS → SS) ∼ beta 1 +            aSS
                                                                 i ,1   +           aN
                                                                                     i
                                                                                       SS

                                                            i               i

where aSS
       i  is the number of observations marked as normal years that are followed by a year marked as
sudden stop. We shall refer to this as a transition to a sudden stop. Conversely, aNSS
                                                                                   i   counts the times
that a normal year is followed by another normal year (NSS). This count is done country by country, but
then we add all them up into a single number which is used in the updating process. Let us emphasize that
this approach exploits the panel dimension of the data in order to obtain precise estimates of the transition
probabilities.
   Similarly, the posterior for the other parameter in the transition matrix is given by the following formula
                                                   Ã                            !
                                                          X              X
                              p(SS → N SS) ∼ beta 1 +         bN
                                                               i
                                                                 SS
                                                                    ,1 +   bSS
                                                                            i
                                                            i                   i

where   bNSS
         i     is the number of observations marked as sudden stops that are followed by a year marked as
"normal". Conversely, bSS
                       i  represents the other case, which is when a transition out of a sudden stop does
not occur.
   We conclude by making a random draw from these distributions too.
   We record the random draws of a) the paths of 1’s and 0’s for each country, b) the country specific
parameters {ψ NSS
              i   , ψ SS   N SS
                      i − ψi    , σN SS    SS
                                   e,i , σ e,i } and c) the "pooled estimates" of p(N SS → SS),and p(SS →

N SS) . Then we repeat the above procedure several times and at each time we record the new draw of
the paths of 1’s and 0’s for each country and the parameters. By properties of the Gibbs sampler, the

                                                       45
posterior distribution of these random draws coincides in law with the posterior (joint) distribution of all
the parameters (and the hidden states).
   Section 5.1: In order to choose the cutoﬀ point x we proceeded as follows. First, we estimate an AR(1)
process for log(V IX) and focus on the residuals zt , which -according to the model- follow approximately a
mixture of normals. Second we estimate a mixture of normals distribution for zt . Having an estimate of the
pV IX , µV IX , σ 2V IX , µφ , σ 2φ , we then proceed to determine the cutoﬀ in the same way that one would proceed
in hypothesis testing. Namely, given our estimate of µV IX , σ 2V IX we set the threshold x high enough so
that:
                                             P (zt > x|J = 0) < 1%

   In statistical terms this would correspond to the "size" of a test that would (wrongly) accept the hypoth-
esis of a jump with probability less than 1%. Also, with the value of x in hand, we can identify the months
when the V IX actually crossed the threshold and we label them as jumps.
   Let us reiterate that we adopt this procedure in order to be able to assess the performance of realistic
hedging contracts. We also tried an alternative approach in order to determine λJ and pJ,SS jointly: We
ran a Gibbs Sampler to determine pV IX , µV IX , σ 2V IX , µφ , σ2φ and the posterior probability of a jump in
zt . Subsequently we used the estimate of pV IX to determine λJ . In a next step we sampled (jointly) from
                                            e in section 3.1 and the posterior probabilities of a jump in the
the posterior distribution of the states of ψ i

VIX to determine pJ,SS . Under either procedure we obtained similar results. We adopt the first procedure
because it is the more conservative of the two and is closer to how such contracts would be implemented in
practice.
   Section 5.2: By using the cutoﬀ value for the V IX we also determine the months in which we observed a
jump in the V IX. By that we mean months when the residuals of the estimated AR(1) process of the VIX
exceeded the cutoﬀ value x.
   To determine a distribution of p(SS|J) we proceed as follows. First, for each country we draw paths from
the posterior distribution of the states (N SS, SS)i , as provided by the Gibbs Sampler. Given the model,
the only relevant observations for the conditional probability are the ones when the country i is in N SS
or has just transitioned to a SS. Hence, in accordance with the data generating process of the model, we
discard all the quarters in which the country is in SS, except the one that marks the beginning of each SS.
Then we look at all those times where the states switch from N SS to SS and simultaneously there is a
jump in the V IX either in that quarter or the quarter before. We allow this short window to allow for the
possibility of delayed data reporting etc. Let this number be given by niSS,J . Similarly, we also determine
all the times when there was a jump in the V IX. Let this number be niJ . Finally, define niN SS+t as the
numbers of observations when country i is either in N SS or just moved to a SS (a transition, T ). We repeat
this procedure for each country separately.


                                                        46
    After completing the above procedure for all countries we sum niSS,J , niJ , and niNSS   or T   across countries.
In accordance with the Bayesian methodology that we have been using throughout, we use a beta distribution
with flat priors for both p (J|N SS or T ) and p ( T |(N SS or T ) and J). In exactly the same way that
we updated the posteriors for p(N SS → SS),and p(SS → N SS) in section 3.1 we obtain the posterior
distributions for the parameters p (J|N SS or T ) and p (J and T |(N SS or T ) and J), which are given by:


                                                        ¡                               ¢
                                 p (J|N SS or T ) ∼ beta 1 + Σi niJ , 1 + Σi niNSS or T
                                                        ¡                          ¢
                       p (T |(N SS or T ) and J) ∼ beta 1 + Σi niSS,J , 1 + Σi niJ

In a nutshell, for each iteration of the Gibbs sampler, we determine the number of times when a jump in the
VIX coincided with a transition into a SS for each country. Then we pool across countries. This eﬀectively
imposes the constraint that all countries have the same joint probability distributions between transitions
into a SS and jumps in the VIX. The benefit is that we can obtain more accurate estimates.
    As a robustness check we also computed p (J|N SS or T ) and p (T |(N SS or T ) and J) without imposing
any prior, i.e. by just recording the random draws of:
                                                                       Σi niJ
                                         p(k) (J|N SS or T ) =
                                                                   Σi niNSS or   T
                                                                   Σi niSS,J
                                p(k) (T |(N SS or T ) and J) =
                                                                    Σi niJ
at each iteration k of the Gibbs Sampler and computing the empirical mean of the corresponding stationary
distribution. The two approaches delivered very similar results, suggesting that our results are not influenced
by the assumption of a uniform prior.



C      Details on the numerical procedure
To solve the model numerically, we proceeded as in Kushner and Dupuis (2001). The procedure is explained
in great detail in Section 5.2 of that book and hence we only provide a sketch. The basic idea is to approximate
the derivatives in all Bellman equations by discretizations. This way one can reexpress the value function at
each point as an appropriately probability weighted average of the value function evaluated at neighboring
points in the state space. That way the discretized version of the Bellman equation coincides with the
solution to a particularly simple dynamic programming equation in discrete time, where the processes can
only transit to neighboring states. For the exact formulas of the transition probabilities as well as the
treatment of jumps we refer the reader to Kushner and Dupuis (2001) Ch. 13.2. Once this simple Markov
chain has been determined, determination of the Value function can proceed by the standard value function
iteration procedure.

                                                       47
D        Proofs
Proof. (of Lemma 1) Post development the country’s total available resources At follow a geometric Brown-
ian motion which up to a constant coincides with Yt . Let us use the normalization:

                                                       Ct       Ct
                                                e
                                                ct =       et =
                                                          ,x
                                                       At       At

where At denotes post development resources. As we establish in section 2.3 the country’s problem (in
the developed phase) can be reduced to the solution of an essentially one dimensional problem with HJB
equation
                     (    ) µ                              ¶
                    ct1−γ
                    e                                  1         ¡¡             ¢            ¢
         0 = max            − r − µY (1 − γ) + γ(1 − γ) σ2Y v G + r − µY + γσ 2Y x         ct vxG (27)
                                                                                  et + 1 − e
              h
              ct   1−γ                                 2
               1   ¡ 2 G¢
             + σ 2Y xet vxx
               2

                                                                                          e = 0 it is optimal
This HJB is satisfied irrespective of the presence of any constraint. Assume now that, at x
to set
                                                       c∗t = 1
                                                       e

i.e. the optimal level of consumption is set to be equal to income, since

                                                                 Ct
                                                     c∗t =
                                                   1=e
                                                                 At

and accordingly:
                                                       de
                                                        xt
                                                           =0
                                                        dt
and similarly:
                                                   du0 (e
                                                        c∗t )
                                                              =0
                                                     dt
By equation (3.8) in Yong and Zhou (1999) it follows that the above equation can only be satisfied if:
                           µ                              ¶
                                                      1        ¡             ¢
                            r − µY (1 − γ) + γ(1 − γ) σ 2Y = r − µY + γσ 2Y
                                                      2

or:
                                                       γ+1 2
                                                µY −      σY = 0
                                                        2
      If the parameters satisfy this restriction, then the Euler equation will be satisfied with equality, and
                                           c∗t = 1 will be optimal.
starting from Xt = 0, the policy that sets e
      For stronger growth or smaller volatility, Xt = 0 will be binding as a constraint, starting from Xt = 0.




                                                         48
References
Aiyagari, S. R. (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics, 109(3), 659—684.

Arellano, C., and E. G. Mendoza (2002): “Credit Frictions and ’Sudden Stops’ in Small Open
     Economies: An Equilibrium Business Cycle Framework for Emerging Markets Crises,” NBER Working
     Papers: 8880.

Broner, F., G. Lorenzoni, and S. Schmuckler (2003): “Why Do Emerging Economies Borrow Short
     Term?,” mimeo. MIT Department of Economics.

Caballero, R. J., and A. Krishnamurthy (2001): “International and Domestic Collateral Constraints
     in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(3), 513—548.

        (2005): “Bubbles and Capital Flow Volatility: Causes and Risk Management,” mimeo. MIT De-
     partment of Economics.

Caballero, R. J., and S. Panageas (2004): “Contingent Reserves Management: An Applied Framework,”
     NBER Working Papers: 10786.

Calvo, G. A. (1998): “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops,”
     Journal of Applied Economics, 1(1), 35—54.

Calvo, G. A., A. Izquierdo, and L.-F. Mejia (2004): “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops: The Relevance
     of Balance-Sheet Eﬀects,” NBER Working Papers: 10520.

Calvo, G. A., and C. M. Reinhart (1999): “Capital Flow Reversals, the Exchange Rate Debate, and
     Dollarization,” Finance and Development, 36(3), 13—15.

Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation
     of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107(2), 205—251.

Duffie, D., W. H. Fleming, H. M. Soner, and T. Zariphopulou (1997): “Hedging in Incomplete
     Markets with HARA Utility,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 21(4-5), 753—782.

Duffie, J. D., and C. fu Huang (1985): “Implementing Arrow-Debreu Equilibria by Continuous Trading
     of Few Long-lived Securities,” Econometrica, 53(6), 1337—1356.

El Karoui, N., and M. Jeanblanc-Picque (1998): “Optimization of Consumption with Labor Income,”
     Finance and Stochastics, 2(4), 409—440.

Froot, K. A., D. S. Scharfstein, and J. C. Stein (1993): “Risk Management: Coordinating Corporate
     Investment and Financing Policies,” Journal of Finance, 48(5), 1629—1658.




                                                  49
Hamilton, J. D. (1989): “A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time Series and
     the Business Cycle,” Econometrica, 57(2), 357—384.

        (1990): “Analysis of Time Series Subject to Changes in Regime,” Journal of Econometrics, 45(1-2),
     39—70.

He, H., and H. F. Pages (1993): “Labor Income, Borrowing Constraints, and Equilibrium Asset Prices,”
     Economic Theory, 3(4), 663—696.

Heller, H. R. (1970): “Wealth and International Reserves,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 52(2),
     212—214.

Kim, C.-J., and C. R. Nelson (1999): State-space models with regime switching: Classical and Gibbs-
     sampling approaches with applications. MIT Press, Cambridge and London.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 211—248.

Kletzer, K., D. M. Newbery, and B. D. Wright (1992): “Smoothing Primary Exporters’ Price Risks:
     Bonds, Futures, Options and Insurance,” Oxford Economic Papers, 44(4), 641—671.

Kletzer, K. M., and B. D. Wright (2000): “Sovereign Debt as Intertemporal Barter,” American Eco-
     nomic Review, 90(3), 621—639.

Kushner, H., and P. Dupuis (2001): Numerical Methods for Stochastic Control Problems in Continuous
     Time. Springer, New York.

Lee, J. (2004): “Insurance Value of International Reserves,” mimeo. IMF.

Yong, J., and X. Y. Zhou (1999): Stochastic Controls: Hamiltonian Systems and HJB Equations. Springer,
     New York.

Zellner, A. (1997 [1988]): Bayesian Analysis in Econometricspp. 444—467, Statistical foundations for
     econometrics. Elgar; distributed by American International Distribution Corporation, Williston, Vt.,
     Elgar Reference Collection. Foundations of Probability, Econometrics and Economic Games, vol. 5.
     Cheltenham, U.K. and Lyme, N.H.




                                                   50
