NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONTRACTIBILITY AND THE DESIGN OF RESEARCH AGREEMENTS
Josh Lerner
Ulrike Malmendier
Working Paper 11292
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11292
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2005

We would like to thank Philippe Aghion, Pablo Casas-Arce, Susan Athey, George Baker, Pierre-André
Chiappori, Thomas Hellmann, Rebecca Henderson, Robert Merges, David Robinson, Patrick Schmitz, Halla
Yang, and Jeff Zwiebel, as well as workshop participants at the AFA Meeting 2005, Columbia University,
Harvard University, MIT, the NBER Organizational Economics Meeting, Simon Fraser University, and
Stanford University for helpful comments. We especially thank Oliver Hart and Jean Tirole for their detailed
suggestions. We also benefited from conversations with a number of practitioners, especially Prem Das and
Michael Lytton. Nageeb Ali, Burak Guner, Camelia Kuhnen, Charmaine Lee, Han Lee, Felix Momsen, and
Chenling Zhang provided excellent research assistance. Harvard Business School’s Division of Research
provided financial support. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Josh Lerner and Ulrike Malmendier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Contractibility and the Design of Research Agreements
Josh Lerner and Ulrike Malmendier
NBER Working Paper No. 11292
April 2005
JEL No. D23, L14, L24, O31, O32, O34

ABSTRACT
We analyze how variations in contractibility affect the design of contracts in the context of
biotechnology research agreements. A major concern of firms financing biotechnology research is
that the R&D firms might use the funding to subsidize other projects or substitute one project for
another. We develop a model based on the property-rights theory of the firm that allows for
researchers in the R&D firms to pursue multiple projects. When research activities are nonverifiable, we show that it is optimal for the financing company to obtain the option right to
terminate the research agreement while maintaining broad property rights to the terminated project.
The option right induces the biotechnology firm researchers not to deviate from the proposed
research activities. The contract prevents opportunistic exercise of the termination right by
conditioning payments on the termination of the agreement. We test the model empirically using a
new data set on 584 biotechnology research agreements. We find that the assignment of termination
and broad intellectual property rights to the financing firm occurs in contractually difficult
environments in which there is no specifiable lead product candidate. We also analyze how the
contractual design varies with the R&D firm's financial constraints and research capacities and with
the type of financing firm. The additional empirical results allow us to distinguish the property-rights
explanation from alternative stories, based on uncertainty and asymmetric information about the
project quality or research abilities.
Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall, Room 395
Cambridge, MA 02163
and NBER
josh@hbs.edu

Ulrike Malmendier
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
ulrikem@stanford.edu

I. Introduction
Understanding the determinants and limits of contract design is central to numerous fields of
economic analysis, including organizational economics, labor economics, and corporate finance.
An important distinction, introduced by the literature on incomplete contracts, is the observability
and verifiability of actions and outputs on which the parties would like to contract (cf. Hart
(1995)). If key variables are not verifiable in front of judges, the contracting parties have to find
alternative mechanisms to induce the expected behavior, such as (re-) allocating asset ownership.
This paper analyzes how the design of contracts varies as underlying variables become
harder or easier to pin down. We compare, both theoretically and empirically, how the decision
rights of one party depend on the contractibility of the effort to be performed by the other party.
The empirical context is the U.S. biotechnology industry. Innovative activities in the
biotechnology sector frequently take the form of research agreements between biotechnology
companies (“R&D firms”) and pharmaceutical or larger biotechnology companies (“financing
companies”). The research tasks to be performed by the biotechnology company can sometimes
be specified in the contract, especially if the parties have a predetermined lead product candidate
and the biotechnology researchers simply have to perform a series of specifiable experiments.
Oftentimes, however, no such lead product candidate exists and it is hard to write a contract on
what the researchers should be working on. In this paper, we analyze how the contract design
covaries with such contracting difficulties.
The analysis of “real-world contract design” in light of the theoretical work on contracts
has advanced rapidly in the field of complete contracts. A considerable number of papers identify
and test the implications of asymmetric information and moral hazard.1 Empirical research
relating to incomplete contracts has been much sparser. This may reflect empirical difficulties in
pinning down theoretical concepts such as observability, verifiability and even incompleteness.
Two leading exceptions are the work by Kaplan and Stromberg (2003 and 2004), which provides
evidence on the empirical incompleteness of contracts, and the work by Baker and Hubbard
(2003 and 2004), which confirms the role of asset ownership to deal with limits to contracting.
The former research gets around the empirical problem of translating abstract theory into tangible
empirics by providing an exhaustive description of all contractual elements. The latter research
benefits from a switch in the monitoring technology of truck drivers, which allows for contracts
previously not feasible. The approach taken in this paper resembles most closely the latter. We
identify an empirical proxy for contractibility and relate it to variations in contract design. A
large, hand-collected data set on research agreements allows us to address empirically a number
1

See the survey by Chiappori and Salanie (2003).

1

of concerns plaguing that literature, such as unobserved firm characteristics (via firm fixedeffects and firm-level controls), and to test directly competing explanations.
Contracting difficulties are a key concern in biotechnology research agreements since the
financing company and research firm pursue different goals. While it is the objective of the
financing company to develop a certain viable and profitable drug, the researchers of the R&D
firm are also interested in advancing research projects underway in other research agreements or
stand-alone projects. Moreover, the researchers are typically more academically oriented and may
focus on different types of research even within the collaboration project. The risk for the
financing company is that the biotechnology researchers take the money provided for the
collaboration but devote their energies to other projects. This is in fact a major concern of
pharmaceutical companies entering research agreements and has been termed “project
substitution” or “project cross-subsidization.”
We explore how the collaborating firms address this incentive conflict contractually.
Empirically, we find that when a research partnership is initiated without any specifiable lead
product candidate and it is thus not possible to contract on the exact nature of the research
activities, the contracting parties endogenously generate decision rights to govern the
relationship. These decision rights typically give the financing company the unilateral and
unconditional right to terminate the research agreement while obtaining broadened access to the
intellectual property rights. In fact, pharmaceutical firms often assert that the only remedy to the
lack of contractibility is to have the right to terminate the research collaboration. No matter how
carefully designed the contract, they argue, constructing a transaction that forestalls all
contingencies is impossible. As a result, firms pay an enormous amount of attention to
negotiating termination rights. These terms have been described as “probably the most heavily
negotiated (at least in terms of time) provision” in biotechnology research agreements (Somers
(2003)). Moreover, these contracts often specify that, in case of termination, the financing firm
will maintain extensive access to the intellectual property of the prior research. The rights
accruing to the financing firm in case of termination are broader than in case of continuation and
go beyond the specific application targeted by the original research collaboration.
We provide a theoretical explanation of the observed contract design, based on the
property-rights theory of the firm, in particular Hart and Moore (1988) and Nöldeke and Schmidt
(1995). Our model allows for multi-tasking of researchers in the R&D firm in the sense of
Holmström and Milgrom (1991). We derive the option to terminate while obtaining broad rights
to the terminated project as an endogenously generated decision right that allows the financing
company to act upon an observable but not verifiable variable, namely the success of the (joint)
research and expected marketability of the product. The optimal contract specifies different
payments in case of termination and in case of continuation to ensure that the financing company
2

terminates if and only if the R&D firm diverts effort from the collaboration into other projects. It
also specifies that, in case of termination, the financing firm will obtain the broadest access to the
intellectual property of the research collaboration.
This allocation of property rights is profit maximizing for the financing company if the
R&D company is financially constrained. Assigning broad property rights to the financing
company – beyond the originally targeted research object – is likely to induce some loss of
surplus. After all, it is exactly this type of broader research the financing company would like to
prevent the R&D company from undertaking. The rationale, then, for such an inefficient
assignment of intellectual property rights lies in the need to generate the right incentives for the
research company. Since the R&D firm has no or little liquidity, it cannot compensate the
financing company for continuation payments ex ante or commit to “negative payments” in case
of termination. Reducing the R&D company’s property rights in case of termination minimizes
the financing company’s required payment in case of continuation for a given (optimal) payoff
difference between continuation and termination for the R&D company.
The financial constraints of the R&D company make option contracts costly for the
financing company. The pharmaceutical company will typically extract less profit than in a
complete-contracts world, in which it can contract directly on the type of research activity.
Therefore, whenever it is possible to contract on details of the research to be undertaken by the
R&D company, the financing company will rather employ such a complete contract in lieu of
termination rights. When contracting on research is not possible, the financing company may
instead employ the option contract.
By the same logic, our model also implies that an option contract is particularly likely if
the outside options of the financing company are high. For example, the financing company can
credibly threaten to terminate the agreement if it profits sufficiently from the broader rights it
obtains in case of termination, even without the continued collaboration of the R&D company. To
prevent the financing company from exercising the termination option and using the intellectual
property in collaboration with other firms and researchers, the R&D firm will be willing to focus
on the collaboration project even if continuation payments are not too high. The model thus
predicts that, the greater are the financing firm’s outside options, (a) the stronger should be the
correlation between option-contract design and non-contractibility and (b) under noncontractibility, the more common should be the option contract.
Similarly, if the biotechnology firm is less financially constrained, the option contract
may be less costly, since the R&D company could commit to payments in case of termination. On
the other hand, a liquid R&D company could also assume the role of the residual claimant,
rendering the option contract unnecessary. Thus, while our model does not have specific
predictions about contract design in research agreements with liquid biotechnology firms, the
3

option-contracts design should be most strongly correlated with the lack of contractibility in
research agreements with financially constrained R&D firms.
The predictions of this incomplete-contracts interpretation of the observed contract
design are borne out in the empirical analysis. Research agreements employ the termination
clause (with expanded access to the intellectual property) when the exact nature of the research
cannot be contracted upon since the lead product candidate cannot be specified. Moreover, the
correlation effect is strongest if the financing company is not a pharmaceutical company but a
biotechnology company. These additional findings are consistent with our model’s prediction that
the correlation of option design and non-contractibility is stronger if the financing company’s
alternative use of the intellectual property outside the original research collaboration is more
valuable: the large (financing) biotechnology company is more likely to be able to use the
intellectual property rights in a profitable way than a pharmaceutical company would be. Thus,
the threat of termination is larger and the option contract becomes cheaper. Similarly, we also
find that the correlation effect is strongest among the most financially constrained firms. As
predicted by the model, the illiquidity of the R&D company makes option contracts costly and
reduces the use of those contracts to the cases of non-contractibility. To sum up, crosssubsidization appears to be addressed by option contracts whenever direct contracting is
particularly hard and the option contract is not too costly.
We employ additional empirical tests to distinguish the incomplete-contracts hypothesis
from other explanations of the correlation between the lack of a contractually specified lead
product candidate and the termination and intellectual property reversion clauses. A number of
the alternative explanations, such as heterogeneity in the extent of uncertainty, the degree of
informational asymmetry, or the “abilities” of the R&D company, would predict a correlation
with (specific) termination clauses, but not necessarily with the reversion of intellectual property
rights. Such a correlation, however, cannot be found in the data. In addition, proxies for the
“research quality” of the R&D firm help to rule out the hypothesis that termination clauses are a
sorting device.
Overall, this paper serves three purposes. First, we shed light on a key incentive conflict
in research collaborations, project cross-subsidization. We characterize the nature of this
incentive conflict as moral hazard in a multi-tasking framework. Second, we provide new details
of the empirical contract design of research agreements. In particular, we point to the frequent use
of unilateral and unconditional termination rights combined with broadened access to the
intellectual property of the research project. Third, we explain how the combination of
termination and broadened access to property rights may remedy incentive problems and
contracting difficulties more generally. Our explanation is based on the assumption of contractual
incompleteness, which appears to be plausible in research agreements and many other settings.
4

While our empirical application is research agreements in the biotechnology sector, we
believe that termination rights (and payments) combined with ownership allocation may be used
in other settings to overcome the limits to contractual complexity. Venture capitalists typically
provide capital in stages and have the right not to refinance a firm, which Gompers (1995) and
others have attributed to the difficulty of writing a contract that foresees all contingencies. Not
providing any refinancing is often equivalent to driving the company into bankruptcy, in which
case the venture capitalist (who as a preferred stock holder is a senior claimant) ends up owning
all the assets. A second example is the rising age-earnings profile in companies. Given that
employment contracts cannot specify all work-related contingencies ex ante, the increase helps
insure that employees perform as their firm would like them to. In fact, firms face a similar
problem of financial constraints on the part of the employees as pharmaceutical companies do
with biotechnology firms. To both set incentives right and to allow the employer to extract the
surplus from the employment relationship, employees would need to post a bond ex ante. Lazear
(1979) interprets mandatory retirement as a substitute for such a bond given that employees are
often unable to post it ex ante.
Empirical tests of the property rights theory of the firm have largely focused on “make or
buy” decisions (e.g. Monteverde and Teece (1982); Baker and Hubbard (2003); Acemoglu,
Aghion, Griffith, and Zilbotti (2003)). The theoretical literature, however, pioneered by
Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore (1988, 1990), goes beyond the question of
integration and outsourcing. In theory, the contracting parties may remedy contractual
incompleteness by assigning any suitable decision right that governs the actions of the other party
even though the actions themselves are not contractible. Theory thus implies a much broader
arena for empirical tests than “make or buy” decisions. Since integration decisions are affected by
numerous considerations, such as diversification, market power, or deregulation, broader tests are
an important addition to our understanding of real-world contract design and the empirical
relevance of the property-rights approach.
Our paper differs from much of the previous work on strategic alliance and venture
capital contracts in de-emphasizing the optimal allocation of firm ownership. Most of the
literature, such as Cornelli and Yosha (2003), Dessein (2003), Schmidt (2003), and Nöldeke and
Schmidt (1998), focuses on the transfer of control rights over a company or joint venture between
the contracting parties. In research agreements, however, the financing company may not have
much interest in owning the entire R&D firm but rather in developing one specific product.
Moreover, in contrast with the classic relationship-specific investment problem, the researchers of
the financing company may not be able to benefit from residual control rights, simply because
they do not have the relevant research expertise. Our framework relates to the literature on
financial contracting and, in particular, Aghion and Bolton (1992). As in Aghion and Bolton, we
5

consider the decision of a financing company to provide capital to another company in return for
some decision rights. However, while the rights are contingent on default in Aghion and Bolton,
we consider non-contingent rights, namely, the unconditional option to terminate. And, while
Aghion and Bolton assume fixed transfers, payoffs are contingent (on the decision to exercise the
option) in our framework.2
On the empirical side, our paper relates to previous papers studying the design of realworld contract design in strategic alliances (Robinson and Stuart (2004)) or venture capital
contracts (Kaplan and Stromberg (2003)). Rather than focusing on the full set of contractual
contingencies as in those papers, we illustrate the role of contractibility of outcomes and other
variables for real-world contract design by studying its covariance with specific contractual
clauses (namely option rights to terminate).
Finally, the specific incentive conflict of “academic” versus “commercial” research has
been analyzed outside of contract theory. The explosion of knowledge in biology and
biochemistry in the 1970s triggered the adoption of scientific approaches, or “open science” in
Dasgupta and David’s (1994) terminology, within for-profit organizations such as major
pharmaceutical companies (Henderson and Cockburn (1994); Gambardella (1995)). A number of
firms encouraged researchers to pursue basic research, in addition to the applied projects that
characterized these organizations. The firms that did so enjoyed substantially higher R&D
productivity than their peers, apparently because their research were better able to identify
promising scientific developments and because the interaction with cutting-edge research made
these firms more attractive to top scientists.3 At the same time, the encouragement of “open
science” processes has led to difficulties in measuring performance and designing incentive
schemes (Cockburn, Henderson, and Stern (1999)). In fact, partly due to these challenges, firms
appear to be moving to less of an emphasis on basic science in their research facilities (for a
discussion, see Rosenbloom and Spencer (1996)).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present stylized
facts on research collaborations in the biotechnology sector, the incentive conflicts between the
contracting partners, and the empirical contract design. Section III presents a model that
2

Our approach is close to Aghion and Tirole (1994) in emphasizing the inefficiency implications of financial
constraints. Similar to their work, our model suggests that financial constraints of the research unit may prevent the
first-best outcome if research efforts are non-contractible, and that the allocation of product ownership helps to
alleviate this problem. Our model corresponds to a situation in Aghion and Tirole where the research unit has higher
marginal impact on the output, but the “customer” (i.e., the financing company) has all the bargaining power.
Differently from the Grossman and Hart (1986) setting employed by Aghion and Tirole, though, we do not explore the
impact of incentives and financial constraints on ex-ante product ownership, but rather on the “right to govern the
relationship,” in particular, termination and claims to the intellectual property. Similar to Baker, Gibbons, and Murphy
(2002) and Hart and Holmström (2002), we emphasize a contracting problem that differs from the classic problem of
relationship-specific investment.
3
Similarly, collaborations between university research labs and for-profit organizations are organized more often as
sponsored research (instead of ex-post licensing) if more basic research is involved (Thursby and Thursby (2003)).

6

reconciles the empirical contract design with the observed conflict of interest. We test the
predictions of the model empirically on a novel contracts data set, introduced in Section IV. The
empirical tests of our model’s predictions and alternative hypotheses are in Section V. Section VI
concludes the paper.

II.

Conflicts of Interest in Biotechnology Research Collaborations

Innovative activities in the biotechnology sector have been increasingly financed via research
collaborations. While the initial biotechnology companies relied primarily on capital raised from
the public market, research alliances surpassed public offerings in the 1990s as the dominant
source of financing for these firms.4 These research collaborations consist of three phases, a
research, a development, and a marketing and sales phase. Typically, the pharmaceutical
company provides the initial financing and the biotechnology company provides the bulk of the
research, though employees of the larger firm may undertake some as well. The “development” of
the drug is undertaken jointly. Finally, marketing and sales are mostly in the hands of the
pharmaceutical company. The research and development phases are characterized by
considerable uncertainty as to project success. In 200 alliances entered into between 1980 and
1995 analyzed by Lerner, Shane and Tsai (2003), only 14% had led to an approved project by
December 1998. Of those in the discovery stage at the time of the alliance signing, only 5% had
led to an approved drug: in fact, only 31% had reached clinical trials at all by this point.
As the dominant research-performing entity, the biotechnology firm typically receives the
intellectual property rights, but commits to license the relevant patent holdings and know-how to
its partner for the life of the agreement (and in many cases thereafter). The contract frequently
delineates the right to manufacture the product, which may be assigned to one of the parties or
divided between the two. Most of the profits from the final project go to the pharmaceutical
company, though the biotechnology company also reaps a certain percentage via the royalties
from licensing.
The pervasiveness of research agreements between pharmaceutical and biotechnology
companies is puzzling since the interests of the two partners are typically not fully aligned and
since it is often hard to contract on research activities. We conducted a number of interviews with
executives specializing in management, technology transfer, and legal affairs to clarify these
issues. From these interviews, we learned that project substitution and project cross-subsidization
by the biotechnology researchers are major concerns of pharmaceutical companies entering
research agreements. While it is the objective of the financing company to develop a certain
4

See Lerner and Merges (1998).

7

viable and profitable drug, the R&D firm has multiple interests. On the one hand, the researchers
in the biotechnology laboratories of the R&D firm are also interested in developing the proposed
drug and ensuring future cash flows. On the other hand, they are typically juggling several
research projects. Some of these projects may be commercialized in collaboration with other
pharmaceutical or biotechnology firms, on terms that may be more favorable than this
collaboration. In addition, the R&D firm may be seeking to develop wholly owned products, from
which they will receive all the profits. Success in these solely developed products may also be
particularly valued by the equity markets as an indicator of the acumen of the R&D firm’s
management. As a result, the researchers in the R&D firm may be tempted to employ resources
from a specific research agreement for other projects.5
In addition to these commercial conflicts, an additional challenge relates to the complex
goals of the biotechnology researchers. Researchers in biotechnology companies are typically
much more academically oriented than those in pharmaceutical companies. Biotechnology firms
are often founded and guided by long-time academics who may still want to impact the academic
discussion; they often employ post-doctoral students who are considering an academic career in
the future; and their reputation in the market for future research agreements depends to a large
extent on the external assessment of their research abilities. To cite a characteristic example, the
researchers of the biotechnology company may want to spend time and effort running additional
experiments to satisfy academic requirements for a publication in a top journal, even though there
is already enough evidence to start the process for approval by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration for the drug and the financing partner would like to press ahead with the approval
process. All these pressures may lead to biotechnology firms pursuing projects or research
activities that are more fundamental than the pharmaceutical company would prefer, and often
seeking to publish these results before the pharmaceutical company prefers. These forms of
conflict seem very important in this context, and have not been previously explored in the
literature on research collaborations.6
A variant of this incentive problem is that researchers of the biotechnology firm tend to
terminate unsuccessful projects too late. This can happen for several reasons. First, as described
above, additional research on a given project can be beneficial to the researcher’s scientific
reputation even though it is not profit maximizing for the pharmaceutical company. Second,
researchers and especially founders of biotechnology firms may be “attached” to the initial
5

For instance, in 1993, established biotechnology firm Alkermes sued the smaller firm, Cortex Pharmaceuticals, which
it had entered into a research agreement with the year before. It alleged that Cortex’s research on a calpain-inhibiting
drug for cerebral vasospasm violated Alkermes' exclusive right to develop applications for neurological disorders
(Alkermes, Inc. v. Cortex Pharmaceuticals Inc., Civil Docket no. 93-CV-12532, U.S. District Court for Massachusetts
(Boston), 1993.).
6
Stern (2003) points out that scientists are willing to accept lower wages in return for being able to pursue more
science-oriented research.

8

biotechnological component employed in a research agreement since it constitutes their principal
discovery. Such behavior has been labeled “founder syndrome.” In fact, we learnt in the course of
our interviews that founders often leave the company when the initial technology researched is
finally abandoned, asserting that they do not “morally own” the company any more. Third, it
appears to be hard for researchers to admit that a project ought to be terminated and they thus
tend to hold on to projects for too long.7 Fourth, the researchers in the biotechnology companies
may have empire-building preferences and thus attempt to maximize the number of ongoing
projects.
These types of moral hazard problems are closely related to the project crosssubsidization problem laid out initially. Here, the biotechnology researchers do not work on a
different project than the pharmaceutical company would like them to work on, but they continue
working on a project even though the pharmaceutical company would like them to declare the
research to be either completed or to have been unsuccessful. Similar to the original crosssubsidization problem, it is often hard for pharmaceutical companies to determine when the
biotechnology researchers are engaging in such undesired research. Both from a modeling and an
empirical perspective, we can re-interpret project substitution as substitution of project
termination with undesired research and thus capture these latter variants.
An illustration of the possibilities of opportunistic behavior that can emerge from the
behavior of the R&D firm is the research agreement between ALZA, a California-based drug
delivery company founded in 1968, and the Swiss pharmaceutical giant Ciba-Geigy.8 The two
firms signed a research agreement in 1978. ALZA also engaged in a variety of independent
activities, including forming alliances to exploit technologies that did not conflict with the topics
being jointly explored with Ciba-Geigy.
Due to ALZA’s financial weakness, Ciba-Geigy was able to obtain vast control rights,
such as eight of ALZA’s eleven board seats, majority voting control, extensive information rights,
and the ability to guide 90% of ALZA’s research activities through a number of review panels
that were dominated by Ciba-Geigy representatives. Nevertheless, numerous tensions arose over
the exact type of research the ALZA researchers should be conducting. In particular, Ciba-Geigy
was concerned about other research projects and research collaborations of ALZA. ALZA
representatives kept seeking to establish collaborations with third parties. Ciba-Geigy found it
difficult to control the activities of ALZA despite these seemingly ironclad control rights. While
the boards ultimately approved most of ALZA’s requests, ALZA representatives became
frustrated at the long delays associated with the process. As a result, ALZA scientists began

7
8

Cf. Stulz (1990).
This account is based on Angelmar and Doz (1987-1989).

9

bypassing the various review panels and directly contacting senior Ciba-Geigy officials for
permission to engage in outside arrangements. While detailed reporting and monitoring processes
had been stipulated in the original agreement, these proved very difficult to enforce. Ciba-Geigy
officials believed that ALZA scientists were publishing materials in journals that would have
been best reserved for the collaboration. Ciba-Geigy officials, worried that their proprietary
technology might be disclosed in these publications or employed in ALZA’s collaborations with
other pharmaceutical firms, became increasingly reluctant to disclose their own technologies in
the area of drug delivery to ALZA. Ultimately, these tensions led to the dissolution of the
research collaboration at the end of 1981. These conflicts, while perhaps extreme, illustrate the
difficulties that the types of problems delineated above can have on parties.
Only in a subset of these cases can the parties remedy this incentive conflict directly by
specifying the exact nature of the research activities to be undertaken by the researchers or by
conditioning on the outcomes of specific tests. In this subset of cases, the parties have typically
identified a specific lead product candidate at the beginning of their collaboration. It is thus
relatively easy for them to separate out unrelated research. In many cases, however, the exact lead
product candidate to be tested is not yet specifiable and the research agreement is entered without
a clear and concrete product in mind. The research agreements, then, have to account for
contractual incompleteness – for having “too many” future contingencies that are “too hard to
think of” to contract upon them. The risk for the financing company is then that the
biotechnology company forms multiple research agreements around a single promising but poorly
understood compound, partnering with one firm to address one disease and with another to
address a second.9 In these cases, it is likely to be very difficult to delineate the boundaries of
each project. In this paper, we are exploiting exactly this variation in contractibility, both from a
theoretical and an empirical perspective.

III.

Model

We present a simple model that illustrates how variations in contractibility affect the design of the
research agreements. We consider a financially constrained research company R and a financing
company F, both risk-neutral. (All variable definitions are summarized in Appendix A.) The
model distinguishes between an initial research phase and a reduced-form development,
marketing, and sales phase, as depicted in Figure 1. If the financing company provides initial
financing I–e. g., to set up a laboratory–then R can perform research. R’s research yields an
9

Given these conflicts, it is not surprising that a significant fraction of research collaborations are terminated before
their contractually specified life (Lerner, Shane, and Tsai (2003)). Indeed, in a number of cases, the failure of the
biotechnology company to assign activities allegedly in a research agreement’s scope to their collaborative partner has
triggered litigation. See footnote 5.

10

intermediate product, the production technology. If advanced through development, marketing,
and sales, the production technology generates two types of surplus. The “narrow” (or
“commercial”) surplus, denoted by N, results from the sales of the envisioned marketable product
of the research collaboration. The “broad” (or “scientific”) surplus, denoted as B, captures both
profits and scientific reputation from unrelated discoveries, which are less valuable to F. Both
types of surplus are ex ante uncertain.
In the initial research phase, the biotechnology researchers can either focus on the
narrowly defined research project or engage in broader research activities. Narrow (commercial)
research effort eN leads to a technology that generates a higher expected level of commercial
surplus, N , than broad (commercial) research eB, which results in N. At the same time, the
technology resulting from eN generates only a low expected level of scientific surplus, B , while
eB would result in a high level, B . Our analysis focuses on the case N > I . Both the high and the
low level of both types of surplus remain uncertain at the end of the research phase.
How much narrow and broad surplus the parties can extract also depends (i) on their
collaboration after the initial research phase and (ii) on the allocation of property rights.
As for the first determinant, we assume that the parties can extract the full amount of
narrow surplus N if they continue to collaborate. They can extract only a portion α, α ∈ (0,1), if
the collaboration is terminated after the research phase. The ex-post efficiency losses from
breaking up the research relationship and continuing the narrow research with another partner
reflect both the specialization of biotechnology researchers and the search costs associated with
finding a new partner. Specifically, the development phase involves the preliminary production
and also the approval process at the FDA. Changes and adjustments to regulatory requirements
will induce the parties to “go back to science” and thus benefit from the efforts of R as well as
from the procedural and production know-how of F. The amount of broad surplus B, on the other
hand, does not depend on the continued collaboration of the two initial research partners. It
captures the value of future projects with different research partners and general scientific
reputation. (We will not consider explicitly any development and transformation from research
technology into realized surplus.)
As for the second determinant of whether the parties garner the full surplus, the relevant
property rights in our context are licensing and intellectual property rights. The surplus is noncontractible and accrues to the holder of the intellectual property rights. By default, this is R as
the patent holder unless F has obtained the rights from R. Rights to the narrow surplus and to the
broad surplus can be contracted on separately.10 Narrow rights (typically licensing rights) allow
10
We assume that the relevant technologies entail an exclusive license. This assumption is consistent with the nature of
typical agreements, where the financing firm is granted exclusivity in an important range of applications.

11

F to sell the envisioned product of the collaboration and to reap the surplus N from its sales.
Broad rights allow F to develop and sell the less related side products.
Finally, we assume that R cannot extract any portion of N without granting F the narrow
(licensing) rights. This assumption captures that the final marketing and sales stages rely on the
capacity of F to undertake large-scale manufacturing as well as on F’s marketing and distribution
channels. Given R’s financial constraints as well as the stochastic and non-contractible nature of
N, R needs to grant F the narrow (licensing) rights to induce F’s collaboration, and thus F obtains
the narrow surplus. Otherwise, the narrow surplus is lost.
This does not hold for B. We assume that R can extract the full amount of broad surplus B
if R retains the broad rights, but that F can extract only a portion εB, ε ∈ (0,1) if granted the broad
rights. This assumption captures the different nature of B compared to N. Future research,
building on the broad technology, may lead to enhanced scientific reputation, which is more
valuable to the academically oriented researchers in the biotechnology company than to the
pharmaceutical company. Moreover, to the extent that B reflects the sales potential of unrelated
products, it may prove useful to R for other (current or future) research collaborations with
companies that have a different specialization and value the specific outcome more highly, but it
is of little interest to F. We also assume that
R chooses eB if indifferent between eN and eB.

(A.1)

Assumption A.1 can be interpreted as a reduced-form substitute for modeling explicitly nontransferable benefits of choosing eB. It may capture unalienable benefits to the biotechnology
researchers from pursuing the broader, more scientific research, such as acquiring nontransferable general human capital.
We assume that the financing company F makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer to R and
extracts the entire surplus beyond R’s reservation utility. This assumption reflects that there are
many biotechnology companies seeking funding, relative to the number of potential capital
providers. We do not model the effort costs of R explicitly. Rather, we assume that R is willing to
sign a contract only if the expected payoff amounts to at least the expected value of the broad
rights after narrow research, B :
The reservation utility of R is B .

(A.2)

For simplicity, we focus on the case11

B >εB.

(A.3)

In order to illustrate the role of option rights, we first derive the optimal contract under
the assumption that the research effort of R is contractible. Next, we derive the optimal no-option

11

This assumption simply reduces the number of cases to be considered (see Appendix B).

12

contract under the assumption that R’s research is observable12 but not verifiable. We then
introduce option rights and analyze whether they allow the financing company to extract a greater
share of the surplus. In particular, we consider the option to terminate the research collaboration
after F has observed R’s effort and the research output of the initial research phase. Note that this
implies that collaboration in the development phase is contractible and that the courts can observe
termination, i.e., which of the parties (if any) decided not to continue the collaboration after the
research phase. We assume
F terminates if indifferent between termination and continuation.

(A.4)

The focus on option rights to terminate the collaboration reflects the empirical purpose of the
model. While we do derive the optimality of a specific option contract among all option contracts
that condition intellectual property rights on the decision to terminate, we do not explore the
optimality of other option contracts.13
As depicted in Figure 1, the time-line is as follows. At t = 0, the two parties enter into a
contract. The contract specifies:
(i)

the initial payment I by the financing company F at t = 1,

(ii)

the conditions for termination (if any) at t = 2,

(iii)

the payments from F to R at t = 2,

(iv)

the rights F obtains from R, which may be narrow or broad.

After the initial investment I and research effort e, the parties observe the intermediate research
output and conditional expected values of N and B. In the case of option contracts, the option
holder decides whether to continue the research collaboration, and R obtains the resulting
payment. The narrow surplus is realized after commercialization at t = 3. The payoff from broad
surplus is generated via different (unmodeled) research activities in the future at or after t = 3.
Thus, R cannot use these payoffs for payments to F. In fact, since R is credit constrained, there is
no possibility of monetary transfers from R to F and hence, effectively, no bargaining between
the two parties.14

12

We also developed an alternative model specification where F cannot observe e directly but infers it from the
intermediate research output at the end of period 1. The alternative model also removes the assumption that the final
surplus N is non-contractible (which is a simplified way to capture the role of F in the last phase of the collaboration
and the potential moral hazard problems) and allows for royalty fees. Introducing signal extraction and surplus sharing
complicates the model, but the basic trade-off and determinants of the use of option rights are the same.
13
Most of the alternative option contracts are hard to implement practically, which can be captured with weak
additional assumptions. Consider, for example, a contract that gives F directly the option to seize intellectual property
rights (rather than a termination option, on which the rights are then conditioned). In practice, however, F cannot
simply “seize” the rights from R, and it is hard to imagine a contract that obliges R to grant both narrow and broad
rights at the will of F while continuing to collaborate.
14
We therefore do not explicitly model the initial “bargaining process” between F and R. There is scope for bargaining
after R has exerted the initial research effort e, however, and we will consider the bargaining process during
renegotiation (under the assumption of no commitment) explicitly.

13

In the benchmark case where the type of research to be undertaken by R is contractible,
the parties can condition (ii)–(iv) on the type of research effort e. In the case of limited
contractibility, e is observable but not verifiable and (ii)–(iv) cannot be conditioned on e.15 In the
case of the option contract, one party may obtain the right to terminate the collaboration at the
end of period 1. Whether or not the option-holder exercises the option right is verifiable, and (ii)(iv) can thus be conditioned on continuation or termination.
Formally, a contract A specifies an action a ∈ {C , T } , where C stands for continuation and
T for termination, payments pC ≥ 0 and pT ≥ 0 from F to R in case of continuation and
termination respectively, and property rights oC and oT accruing to F in case of continuation and
termination respectively.16 With some abuse of notation, we will denote the case that F receives
no intellectual property rights after action a as oa = ∅, the case that F receives broad rights as
oa = B, the case of narrow rights as oa = N, and the case of both broad and narrow rights as
oa = B + N. In the case of full contractibility, a, pC, pT, oC, and oT can be conditioned on e ∈ {eN,
eB}; in the case of limited contractibility, they cannot. An option contract gives one party

i ∈{R, F } the right to choose a and specifies the conditional payments and ownership rights. Note
that giving R the option right makes the game equivalent to having R choose simultaneously e and
a. Figure 2 summarizes the payoffs of both parties under different continuation (or termination)
and intellectual property (IP) rights scenarios.
Contractibility. In the case of contractible effort, it is easy to see that F maximizes its payoff by
inducing R to exert eN and claiming only the narrow rights. F can simply condition a higher
payoff on the desired action. The payoff of F is thus N − I , and R’s payoff is B .
Note that this is not necessarily the surplus-maximizing outcome since B + N may be
larger than B + N . In this case, the financial constraints of the biotechnology company prevent
the parties from agreeing on the first-best and having the biotechnology company compensate its
partner ex ante, akin to Aghion and Tirole (1994).
Limited contractibility without options. If the type of research undertaken by R is observable
but not verifiable, the parties cannot condition payments and actions on e. R will always choose

eB. Given Assumption A.3, it is profit-maximizing for F to acquire only the narrow rights since
this dispenses with the need to pay R’s reservation wage. Thus, F’s expected payoff is N – I, and
15

As mentioned above (footnote 12), the alternative assumption that not e but only intermediate output is observable
does not affect the basic insights about the use of option rights.
16
We leave out the initial financing I since it does not vary across contracts.

14

R gets B if a contract is signed. However, if N < I, the parties will not sign a research agreement
and forgo the narrow and broad surplus. We denote the set of contracts that maximize F’s profit
(including “no contract”) under limited contractibility in the class of contracts without options as
*
ANO
and the resulting expected payoff for F as Π *NO , with Π *NO = max{N − I ,0} .

Limited contractibility with options. In order to overcome the contracting problem, the parties
may generate other decision rights for which the outcome (i.e., the action taken) is contractible.
We consider the option right to terminate the relationship after the biotechnology researchers
have exerted their research effort and before the final surplus N is generated. We denote such
contracts as AO = (i, pC , pT , oC , oT ) . We focus on option contracts that strictly improve F’s payoff
over the highest payoff F can obtain from a contract without options. We first show that an option
contract that
•

grants F the right to terminate after R’s initial research effort and

•

allocates both the narrow and the broad rights to F if F terminates, but only narrow
rights if F continues

may yield a higher expected payoff for F than the second-best no-option contract (Lemmas 1 to
3). We then show that no other option contract can increase F’s expected payoff as much or more
beyond the highest payoff without options (Lemma 4) and derive the equilibrium contract design
and payoff (Proposition 1). All results are derived in a setting without renegotiation. In
Appendix C, we allow for contract renegotiation. There, we analyze explicitly when the derived
option contract is renegotiation-proof (Lemma 5) and account for renegotiation when deriving the
contractual choice of F (Proposition 2).
Lemma 1. An option contract (i, pC, pT, oC, oT) with i = F, oC = N, and oT = N + B implements eN
iff

(1 − α ) N − ε B > pC − pT ≥ (1 − α ) N − ε B .

(1)

Proof. We first show that prices (pC, pT) satisfying (1) are necessary and sufficient to induce F to
terminate if and only if R chooses eB. Under the contractual provisions described in Lemma 1, F
terminates upon observing eB if N − pC ≤ α N + ε B − pT , and F continues upon observing eN if

N − pC > α N + ε B − pT . Solving these two inequalities for pC - pT yields (1).
It remains to be shown that R chooses eN, given F’s conditional termination decisions. R receives
payoff pT for effort eB and B + pC for effort eN. Hence, R chooses eN if and only if pC − pT > − B .
This is implied by (1) since pC − pT ≥ (1 − α ) N − ε B > −ε B > − B with assumption A.3. Q.E.D.
15

To provide some intuition, note that the upper bound of the price differential between
continuation and termination, i.e., the left-hand side of double-inequality (1), ensures that F
chooses continuation after eN. Similarly, the lower bound and right-hand side of (1) ensures that F
chooses termination after eB. An option contract satisfying (1) relies on two main features to
implement eN. First, termination reduces the amount of narrow surplus F can obtain since α < 1 .
Thus, holding other payoffs constant, F prefers continuation over termination. Second, F attains
some of the broad surplus if allocated the broad rights since ε > 0 . Thus, the allocation of broad
rights can be used to make the threat of termination less costly to F.
Within the class of incentive compatible option contracts, satisfying (1), we can
characterize the set of contracts that generate the highest profits for F. Denote the left-hand side
of (1), (1 − α ) N − ε B , as Γ and the right-hand side of (1), (1 − α ) N − ε B , as ∆. The following
Lemma characterizes the solution to F’s maximization problem.
Lemma 2. In the set of option contracts (F, pC, pT, N, N + B) that implement eN, any contract with

⎧= 0
⎧= ∆
⎪
⎪
pC ⎨ = 0 and pT ⎨∈ [0,− ∆ ]
⎪∈ (−Γ,− ∆]
⎪= 0
⎩
⎩

if Γ > ∆ ≥ 0
if Γ > 0 > ∆

(2)

if 0 ≥ Γ > ∆

maximizes F’s payoff.
Proof. The maximization program of F within the set of option contracts satisfying (1) is

max N − pC − I
p C , pT

s.t. Γ > pC − pT ≥ ∆
pC + B ≥ B
pC ≥ 0, pT ≥ 0
where the first constraint ensures incentive compatibility for R and F, the second is the
participation constraint for R, and the constraints in the last line capture that R is financially
constrained. We can simplify this program to

min pC
p C , pT

s.t. pC < Γ + pT
pC ≥ ∆ + pT
pC ≥ 0, pT ≥ 0
We distinguish three sub cases. (a) If Γ > ∆ ≥ 0, then p C ≥ 0 is redundant and setting p C =

∆ and pT = 0 is optimal. (b) If Γ > 0 > ∆ , then the non-negativity constraint on pC is binding.
16

Therefore, setting pC = 0 and picking any pT ∈ [0, − ∆ ] is optimal. (c) If 0 ≥ Γ > ∆ , then the
non-negativity constraint on pC is again binding but setting p C = 0 requires − Γ < pT ≤ − ∆ .
Q.E.D.
Figure 3 provides a graphical illustration. Intuitively, Γ and ∆ capture the gain to F from
continuation (relative to termination) if R chooses eN or eB respectively. To ensure that F does
not choose continuation after R exerted the undesired broad effort eB, an optimal contract requires

F to pay the gain from continuation after eB, ∆, upon continuation (if there is a gain, i.e., if ∆ is
positive). If R were not financially constrained, F could implement termination at zero cost, i.e.
with pC = 0, by setting pT < 0. But since that is not possible, the outside option of termination is
not attractive unless F sets a positive continuation price. Similarly, to ensure that F does not
choose termination after R exerted the desired narrow effort eN, an optimal contract requires F to
pay more than the gain from termination, –Γ, upon termination (if there is a gain, i.e., if Γ is
negative).
Thus F’s total expected payoff is N − max{0, ∆} − I , which we denote as Π̂ O , and R’s
total expected payoff is B + max{0, ∆} . Denote the set of option contracts (F, pC, pT, N, N + B)
satisfying (2) as ÂO. We can now characterize the conditions under which Π̂ O > Π *NO , i.e., under
which F prefers any contract in ÂO to any contract in the set of profit-maximizing contracts in the
*
class of no-option contracts, ANO
.

Lemma 3. The expected payoff of F under contract in ÂO, Π̂ O , is higher than the expected payoff
*
, Π *NO , iff N − max{N , I } > ∆ .
under contracts in ANO

Proof. If

ˆ > Π * ⇔ N − N > max{∆,0} ⇔ N − N > ∆ , where the last
N − I ≥ 0 , then Π
O
NO

ˆ > Π * ⇔ Π̂ > max{0, ∆} ⇔
biconditional follows from N > N . If N − I < 0 , then Π
O
NO
O

N − I > ∆ , where the last biconditional follows from the assumption N > I . The two cases can
be summarized as Π̂ O > Π *NO ⇔ N − max{N , I } > ∆ . Q.E.D.
Lemma 3 implies that an option contract is more likely to improve over the best nooption contract the higher the outside options of F in case of termination are, as captured by a
high α and a high ε. For high enough α and ε, the gain from continuing after eB is either negative
(∆ < 0) or at least smaller than the increase in narrow surplus if R exerts eN rather than eB
17

( ∆ < N − N or ∆ < N − I ). Intuitively, the more surplus F can reap without the continued
collaboration of R – either narrow surplus (high α) or broad surplus (high ε) – the higher is the
threat for R that F may terminate and the cheaper is the option contract for F.

So far, we have focused on one type of option contract, contracts in ÂO , and shown they
induce R to exert narrow effort (Lemma 1) and may improve F’s payoff (Lemma 3). We now
consider the entire class of option contracts (i, pC, pT, oC, oT) and show that no other option
contract can increase F’s payoff over the highest non-option payoff Π *NO by as much or more
than contracts in ÂO .
Lemma 4. For all option contracts that are not in ÂO, the expected payoff Π O is characterized
by

Π O ≤ Π *NO

ˆ .
∨ ΠO < Π
O

Proof. See Appendix B.
Lemma 4 states that all other option contracts lead to lower payoffs than ÂO whenever ÂO is
preferred to the unconditional contract. As long as F sticks to the unconditional contract
whenever indifferent – e.g., due to other frictions in option contracting that are not modeled – we
should thus observe either the unconditional contract or ÂO, but no other option contracts. We
summarize the equilibrium contract design and payoff for F in the following Proposition.
Proposition 1. If ∆ < N − max{N , I } , F implements any option contract from ÂO and obtains
*
payoff Π̂ O = N − I . If ∆ ≥ N − max{N , I } , F implements any unconditional contract in ANO
and

obtains payoff Π *NO = max{N − I ,0} .

The

optimality

condition

for

the

option

contract,

∆ < N − max{N , I } ,

i.e.,

(1 − α ) N − εB < N − max{N , I } , is likely to be satisfied if the outside options of the financing
company are large, as captured by high α and ε. In other words, the lower the value of R’s
cooperation in the development phase and the lower the loss of surplus if B is diverted to F, the
more of a threat of termination R faces. Attractive outside options make it less costly for F to
induce R to exert eN , and the option contract becomes more profitable.
The simple model illustrates that the conflict of research interests between the financing
company and the R&D Company may prevent the parties from entering research collaboration
18

and generating surplus whenever the exact nature of the research activities is not contractible.
However, the parties can overcome this problem by assigning the unilateral and unconditional
right to terminate to the financing company. The higher the financing company’s outside options
are, the more likely is it that the option contract is optimal. However, to prevent opportunistic
exercise of the option right, payments conditional on termination and continuation need to be
specified. Given the financial constraints of the research company and the necessary difference
between continuation and termination payments, the financing company may not be able to
extract the full profit N – I. Without introducing financially unconstrained firms formally into the
model, we can thus conclude that the use of option contracts covaries with the contractibility of
research efforts for financially constrained firms but not necessarily for financially unconstrained
firms. If a research company is financially unconstrained, the option contract as well as other,
unconditional contracts allows the financing company to extract the full surplus. Thus, the option
contract may or may not be employed, regardless of the contractibility of research efforts.
We thus reach three main predictions:
Prediction 1. Option contracts assigning the right to terminate with reversion of broad property
rights to the financing company are more likely if research activities are not contractible.
Prediction 2. While research agreements with financially constrained R&D companies employ
the termination clause with broad access to the terminated project only if research is noncontractible, research agreements with financially less constrained or unconstrained
biotechnology companies may employ either the termination clause or other contract design with
or without research contractibility.
Prediction 3. If the research activities of the R&D Company cannot be contracted upon, the
higher is the ex-post outside option of the financing company in case of separation from the initial
R&D partner, the more likely is it that the research agreement employs an option design with
termination and broad rights (conditional on termination) for the financing company.
In the remainder of the paper, we will test these predictions empirically. In addition, we
will lie out alternative hypotheses for the correlation between the termination clause with broad
rights and non-contractible research efforts. Further empirical tests, which account for variations
in uncertainty, in informational asymmetry, in research abilities of the biotechnology company,
and in the misalignment of incentives, allow us to distinguish between the model and alternative
explanations.
19

IV.

Data

To test how the contractual design responds to variations in contractibility and, in particular, to
analyze different explanations for the prevalence of termination rights, we collected a novel data
set of research agreements. This section describes how we collected the sample and describes
some stylized features about the contract design.
In undertaking this analysis, we sought to employ as large a sample of research
agreements between biotechnology companies and commercial partners as possible. These
partners are either pharmaceutical companies or other (larger) biotechnology firms. We employed
all agreements between 1980 and 2001 that had been analyzed by Recombinant Capital and that
met certain criteria discussed below.
Recombinant Capital is a San Francisco-based consulting firm that specializes (since
1988) in tracking contracts in the biotechnology industry. They prepare summaries of the
contracts that are marketed directly to parties who are negotiating research agreements and
strategic alliances and who are seeking data on comparable transactions. In addition,
Recombinant Capital’s staff uses their database to prepare comparative studies of particular terms
in these agreements. The summaries are based on filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) and other regulatory bodies. The contracts are made public because the
publicly traded firms are required by the SEC to file “material documents.” Biotechnology
companies tend to interpret this requirement conservatively, and often file the contracts
specifying alliances as amendments to 10-K, 10-Q, S-1, or 8-K statements. In addition, a number
of state governments require privately held companies with employee stock option plans to file
“material documents,” which are made available to the public. Notice, however, that a large part
of the documents thus pertain to publicly traded biotechnology companies rather than early-stage
start-up companies. While some information in these agreements is redacted (not made publicly
available), Recombinant Capital’s staff culls through other SEC filings, news stories, and press
releases in order to compile as much data as possible.
We eliminated a number of the summarized transactions in the Recombinant Capital
database in an effort to minimize “undesirable” heterogeneity. The eliminated contracts are:
•

Research agreements involving universities, medical centers, other non-profit
organizations, and government agencies.

•

Research agreements where one of the parties had a controlling interest in the other,
either through a majority equity stake or through a purchase option (e.g. an alliance
between a firm and one of its R&D limited partnerships).
20

•

“Renegotiated agreements,” i.e., we excluded cases in which the two parties had a
previous research collaboration covering the same set of technologies.

•

“Marketing-only agreements” i.e., cases with neither a research nor a product
development component.

•

Contracts with more than two firms.

While a number of the above sub samples provide interesting variations on the conflict of interest,
in particular an exacerbated contrast between scientific and commercial interests in the case of
research collaborations with universities, the contract design in these cases varies substantially,
mostly reflecting institutional constraints. For examples, many universities require a minimum
duration of financial support in order to be able to staff the project and set up other infrastructure.
Also, the lack of trade secrets and the higher pressure to publish in universities induce additional
caution on the side of the pharmaceutical companies, resulting in more protective contract design.
Therefore, we eliminated the above sub samples and ended up with a total of 584 contracts. We
carefully examined the contracts and coded the key features of the greatest interest for our
analysis (see discussion below).
Table 1 summarizes the contractual features. The research agreements range from 1980
to 2001, with a disproportionate representation of later contracts due to the growth of activity in
the industry. The research collaborations range widely in length, averaging about four years.
We will wish to control for the quality of the biotechnology firms in the analyses below.
Biotechnology companies may differ substantially in quality: for instance, the seasoning of the
key executives and the scientific reputation of the advisors may differ sharply. These differences
are difficult to parameterize, though. As a proxy, we will use the reputation of the investment
banker who takes the biotechnology firm public: a biotechnology firm underwritten by Morgan
Stanley, all else being equal, is likely to be a higher-quality firm than one taken public by D.H.
Blair. We determine the ranking of the firm using the ratings compiled by Carter and Manaster
(1990), Carter, Dark, and Singh (1998), and Loughran and Ritter (2004). We use the rating that
covers the particular time period when the firm went public. If the rating for that period is not
available, we employ the rating in the most proximate period.
The focus of our analysis is on the differences in contract design depending on the degree
of contractibility of the research activities and (intermediate) research output. To capture such
variations in contractibility we examine variations in the condition of the lead product candidate
at the time the transaction is signed. Recombinant Capital provides a detailed description of how
concretely the main research target is specified. The primary distinction we will make in our
analysis is between agreements that build upon a well-defined (contractible) lead product
candidate and those where the research program is described in more general terms, without
21

referring to a specifiable lead product candidate. Our rationale is that in the latter settings (which
represent 37.5% of the total), it is hard to specify the exact research tasks and it is therefore least
likely that the contractual partners can deal with the cross-subsidization problem directly (in the
form of contingent contracting). We would thus expect the use of termination rights with
reversion to be more likely in this case.
We relied on the classification scheme of Recombinant Capital to identify contracts with
and without a pre-specified lead product candidate. The distinction is rather apparent from the
language used in the different types of contract. Lacking a specific compound or process, the
contract is less specific and involves a broader “discovery” phase. We illustrate the distinction
with a few examples from the “Field of Use” section or preamble of the contract (as specified by
Recombinant Capital), which define the scope of the research collaboration. Research agreements
that build upon a pre-specified lead product candidate read as follows:
“ISIS has discovered ISIS 3521, an antisense oligonucleotide, and is developing a
product containing ISIS 3521 for the treatment of cancer... ISIS will use
commercially reasonable efforts to complete ongoing clinical trials and studies of the
Product for non-small cell lung cancer and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, as further
described in the Development Plan set forth in Exhibit C hereto, and will participate
in related activities, including the provision of consulting support to LILLY, in
furtherance of the Development Program under the terms and conditions set forth in
this Agreement.... “ISIS 3521” means the phosphorothioate oligodeoxyribonucleotide
that targets human protein kinase C alpha disclosed and claimed (as SEQ IDNO 2)
in U.S. Patent No. 5,703,054.” (Development and License Agreement, ISIS
Pharmaceuticals and Eli Lilly & Co., August 14, 2001.)
“The Parties desire to engage in a joint research effort to identify or discover, on the
basis of Celgene's lead and library compounds, SERMs which are Er(alpha)Selective
in U2OS cells, including, without limitation, compounds in the SP500263 Series (as
defined below), as well as analogs thereof made by Celgene prior to the Effective
Date as part of its internal research program in the Oncology Field (as defined
below) to develop pharmaceutical products from such compounds for the treatment,
prevention and diagnosis of osteoporosis and for other indications as described
herein... “SP500263 Series” shall mean Celgene's proprietary compounds claimed in
U.S. Patent Application Serial No. 09/475,776, filed December 1999 (or any
continuation, continuation-in-part or division thereof), including, without limitation,
SP500263, SPC0001422 and SPC0001426. The SP500263 Series shall specifically
22

exclude Celgene's proprietary compound known as SPC0008490... “U2OS Cells”
shall mean (a) Celgene's patent U2OS cell line, (b) Celgene's ER(alpha)-transfected
U2OS cell line (clone #: B-11), or (c) Celgene's ER(beta)-transfected U2OS cell line
(clone#: 10).” (Collaborative Research and License Agreement, Celgene Corp and
Novartis Pharma AG, December 20, 2000.)
Examples of contracts without a pre-specified lead product candidate read instead as
follows:
“Cubist and Novartis will establish a research program to identify and validate a
limited number of antibacterial targets and to develop a select number of validated
assays for high-throughput screening to identify new lead compounds active against
such validated targets for the development of drugs... Cubist agrees to utilize its
proprietary VITA(TM) technology in the Research Program as determined by the
Joint Research Steering Committee... which couples the validation of the inhibition of
a target in an animal model during an established infection with assay development
and screening for the discovery of novel drug leads.” (Collaborative and License
Agreement, Cubist Pharmaceuticals and Novartis, February 3, 1999.)
“The goals of the MBI Discovery Program are (a) to identify and characterize Level I
Qualified Proteins employing various discovery methodologies, including without
limitation secreted protein trapping, genomic cluster mapping and EST sequencing,
(b) to identify the therapeutic utility of Program Proteins employing various
methodologies, including without limitation transcription expression profiling,
animal disease recovery modeling and use of transgenic and knock out models, and
(c) to qualify selected Program Proteins for further development by the Parties as
Therapeutic Products.” (Collaboration Agreement, Millennium BioTherapeutics and
Eli Lilly & Co., May 28, 1997.)
The level of detail and specificity is much lower in the latter set of contracts. As a result, it is
harder to pin down the concrete research tasks to be performed by the biotechnology researchers.
In supplemental regressions, we also consider a more narrow definition of contractibility,
restricted to projects with a well-defined lead product candidate that has also been tested. The
results are little changed.

23

In Table 1, we also present some summary data on the financial condition of the R&D
firm. Most firms have only very modest revenues and financial resources, though there are a few
positive outliers.

V.

Empirical Analysis

We analyze how the contractual design responds to different degrees of contractibility with
particular focus on termination and broad intellectual property rights. We face two choices
regarding the nature of the dependent variable used in the analysis. Which provisions should be
regarded as indicating whether the financing company had termination and broadened access to
the terminated project? And how should the dependent variable be measured?
We wish to determine the extent to which the financing firm was granted the
unconditional right to unilaterally terminate the agreement and obtain the rights to the product
upon termination. While a wide variety of clauses allow the financing firm to terminate the
agreement, most of those are conditional on specific events, such as bankruptcy or acquisition of
the R&D company. To capture contractual remedies that are based on non-verifiability
information, we focus on cases where the financing firm can terminate the agreement without a
clear trigger. Three cases appeared in the agreements we reviewed that met our criteria:
•

When the financing company can terminate the agreement for any cause, either within a
defined time period (e.g., after one year of the agreement’s signing) or at any stage of the
research collaboration.

•

When the financing firm can terminate the research collaboration for “misbehavior” or
“breach” of the agreement.

•

When the financing company believes the continuation of the research collaboration
would be “unwise.”

Note that, in theory, the second termination criterion differs from the others. When a party
terminates because of “breach” a court may later find it to be the actual breaching party. With the
other two termination provisions, this is almost impossible; no court would second-guess a firm's
decision to terminate because continuing was “unwise.” As a practical matter, however, the
termination right for “material breach” enables the terminating party to move forward with
various self-help remedies unless and until the other party goes to court to litigate the issue. In
addition, the burden is then on the non-terminating party to show the termination was not
justified. Thus, these provisions give the terminating party the right to act unilaterally. Especially

24

when the other party is a cash-constrained biotechnology company, it is practically the equivalent
of an open-ended termination right like the first and third ones listed.17
As noted in Table 1, termination rights appear to be a widespread feature of contracts. In
almost all contracts some kind of termination right is specified (97.7%) and is assigned to the
financing company or both parties (96.7%). More than half of those termination rights are
conditional on specific events, while about 39% of the research agreements have provisions for
the financing firm to terminate the collaboration unconditionally. In 11%, the financing firm has
both termination rights and broad access to the intellectual property after the termination of the
agreement.
As the theory above suggests, we are interested in contractual provisions that exclude the
R&D company from retaining all the value generated during the collaboration if the research
collaboration is terminated. This is the case when the intellectual property rights revert to the
financing company. Arguably, patents and other intellectual property rights are worth less in the
hands of the financing company, and thus should be always assigned to the R&D company if the
collaboration is successful. However, the threat of reversion enables the financing company to
ensure profit-maximizing research efforts on the part of the R&D researchers. We identify all
situations where the financing company retains rights to the intellectual property employed in the
research alliance after its termination. The interaction between this dummy variable and the fourpart measure of termination rights will be the primary dependent variable in our analysis.
We construct the dependent variable in several ways. We use both a simple binary
variable, which takes the value of one if the financing company has at least one unconditional
termination right (along with broadened rights), and a more refined integer variable, which
accounts for the number of termination rights of the financing company. In the latter case the
dependent variable takes on measures from zero to +3. Furthermore, in light of alternative
explanations for the right to terminate, both on the side of the financing company and the R&D
company, we consider only cases where the financing company has the right to terminate (with
broad rights) and the R&D company has no right to terminate (with or without broadened rights).
Again, we construct both the simple binary variable, which takes the value of one if the financing
company has at least one termination right and the R&D company has none, and as well as
integer variables with values from –3 to +3, counting the “net” termination rights of the financing
company minus those of the R&D company. All approaches deliver approximately the same
results.
We begin by testing Prediction 1. We examine the extent to which projects without a
contractible lead product candidate at the time the research agreement is signed are more likely to
17

For a discussion of some of these issues in a recent licensing case, see Judge Easterbrook's opinion in Baldwin Piano
Inc. v. Deutsche Wurlitzer GmbH, 73 USPQ2d 1375 (CA 7 2004).

25

grant the financing company the right to terminate the collaboration while obtaining broad access
to the intellectual property involved.
In Table 2, we present a series of cross-tabulations. In Panel A, we undertake simple
univariate comparisons. When there is no specifiable lead product candidate at the time the
alliance is signed, the agreement is significantly more likely to assign termination and broad
rights to the financing firm. This is also likely to be the case when the agreement is between two
biotechnology firms.
In Panel B, we undertake a series of cross-tabulations. We show that the differences
between projects where there is no specifiable lead product is only statistically significant when
the firm is ranked above the median of biotechnology firms in terms of underwriter reputation,
the agreement is between two biotechnology firms, and the R&D firm’s financial condition is
below the median. As we will argue below, these results are consistent with theoretical
predictions.
We now turn to econometric analyses. The baseline regression analysis is reported in
Table 3. We employ a variety of control variables:
•

We are concerned that there may be a time trend in the transactions, so we control for the
date of the agreement. In the initial regressions, we employ a continuous date variable; in
supplemental regressions, we use dummy variables for each year.

•

Diagnostic and veterinary products are likely to face a substantially different information
environment from therapeutic products. Not only are the scientific uncertainties often
significantly reduced for a diagnostic product, but also the regulatory hurdles for both
classes of products are considerably reduced.

•

The cross-subsidization problems may be more severe if the biotechnology firm holds
large number of patents, indicating numerous related research avenues. We identify in
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office databases all patent awards to the biotechnology firm
at the time the alliance is signed.

•

Capital constraints may affect the transactions that the parties reach. In the baseline
regression, we control for the amount of time the firm has until it runs out of cash. In
particular, we take the absolute value of the ratio of the firm’s current cash flow to its
cash in hand (“cash burn rate”). If the firm has positive cash flow, we code this measure
as zero. A higher value implies that it is sooner until the firm runs out of money.

•

Previous research agreements may ease the contracting between the two firms. In
particular, the reputational capital that the two parties built up in previous alliances may
allow firms to overcome problems that would be difficult to contract around if the parties
suspected each other of being opportunistic.
26

The table presents a number of regressions, which use some or all of these independent variables.
In addition, we employ both ordinary least squares and ordered logit specifications, which may
better reflect the ordinal, non-negative nature of the dependent variable. Finally, we employ fixed
effects for each year instead of the continuous date variable.
Across the reported regressions—and the many dozens of similar though unreported
analyses—we find a consistent pattern. Research collaborations that encounter considerable
contracting difficulties at the time that the transaction is signed are associated with a substantial
boost in the probability of broadened property rights and termination rights being assigned to the
financing firm. This result is not only statistically, but also economically significant: the average
coefficient across the four ordinary least squares regressions of 0.11 is significant relative to the
mean of the dependent variable (0.15).18
A natural concern in this analysis has to do with endogeneity. For instance, a major issue
affecting the entire empirical literature on (research) alliances is the (endogenous) choice to enter
an alliance. The pharmaceutical companies entering into research alliances are likely to be
different from those not entering alliances. These differences may affect the observed contract
design. While there is no obvious reason why the endogenous entry decision would affect the
empirical results reported above, we attempt to address at least part of the selection issue. In
particular, we would like to make sure that our results are not driven by endogenous matching
between low-ability research types and pharmaceutical companies who (opportunistically) insist
on termination rights.
To address this possibility, we employ fixed effects for the 13 most frequently
represented pharmaceutical companies in Table 4, thus holding the type of pharmaceutical
companies constant. When we employ a variety of specifications, we still find a consistently
strong relationship between the difficulty of contracting and the assignment of termination and
broad intellectual property rights to the financing firm. The addition of the pharmaceutical
company dummy variables has little impact on the other coefficients. These results suggest that,
for a given pharmaceutical company, the variation in termination and reversion rights is indeed
related to the research program. The results also alleviate partly the larger endogeneity concerns
pointed out before. The occurrence of different types of contracts within the same pharmaceutical
firm ensure that our results are not driven by the fact that certain types of companies only enter
research agreements with specified lead-product candidates, while other types of companies only
enter those without.19

18

The R2 is comparable to other empirical studies analyzing non-standardized contracts, Robinson and Stuart (2004).
In unreported analyses, we repeat the regressions, clustering the standard errors in the analyses by pharmaceutical
company. This modification has little impact on the results.

19

27

Additional predictions
We now turn to examining the two additional predictions of our theory, relating to the impact of
financial constraints and outside options.
Financial constraints. We first test Prediction 2 and examine the impact of financial constraints
on the contract design. As noted in the introduction, our paper—in a manner similar to Aghion
and Tirole (1994)—suggests that the financial constraints of the biotechnology firm (the research
unit, in their parlance) may preclude arriving at the first-best outcome. We should thus anticipate
that the relationship between the assignment of termination and broad intellectual property rights
to the larger firm and a non-contractible lead product candidate should be stronger among
financially constrained firms.
The assumption that the biotechnology company faces financial constraints, implicit in
the above theoretical analysis, is certainly appropriate for the vast majority of biotechnology
companies. Our sample of biotechnology firms is peculiar, however, in that many firms have
undergone an initial public offering and are thus relatively large and established firms. As a
result, many of the biotechnology firms in our sample are not subject to financial constraints to
the same extent as a typical biotechnology start-up company. Since the systematic correlation
between the assignment of termination and revision rights to the financing firm and a noncontractible lead product candidate depends on the presence of financial constraints, we now test
whether this dependence is borne out in the data: i.e., whether our results are driven by contracts
with those biotechnology firms that are (most) financially constrained.
To identify biotechnology firms that are capital constrained, we employ several simple
approaches. In the reported regressions in Table 5, we divide the firms based on their net income
in the year prior to the research collaboration being formed and cash and equivalents at the end of
that year. (We employed a similar approach in the cross-tabulations reported in Table 2, which
corroborated the predicted pattern.) Cases where the biotechnology firm has net income or
revenue above and below that of the median firm (in 2002 dollars) are considered separately. We
find that consistent with our hypothesis, firms that are below the median along these measures are
the only ones that display a statistically significant relationship between the provisions of broad
intellectual property and termination rights to the financing firm and projects that are especially
difficult to contract upon. In research alliances where the parties were above the median on these
measures, the coefficient on this variable is roughly half the size and not statistically significant.
In unreported regressions, we explored the robustness of these results to other divisions
of the firms. In this analysis, our choice of the median to divide firms was somewhat arbitrary: it
is not obvious where capital constraints will become severely binding. It appeared that the results
became even sharper when we isolated even more extremely constrained subsets of firms. For
28

instance, the differences are more dramatic when we employ the bottom quartile of firms in terms
of net income and cash and equivalents.
Outside options. We then turn to testing whether higher ex-post outside options of the
pharmaceutical company in case it owns the patents make the option contract more attractive, and
thus more frequently employed in contractually difficult environments. We hypothesize that,
while pharmaceutical companies are less likely to gain from broader rights – all they are
interested in is the license to the specific product allowing for production and sales – other
biotechnology firms may benefit more from these rights. Those biotechnology companies that
have grown large and enter research collaborations with other (typically much smaller)
biotechnology companies in the role of the financing parties are likely to have more research
capacity to use the patents for future projects, even without the collaboration of the original
contract partners. In terms of the model, α is likely to be large.
We thus split up our sample into research agreements between a pharmaceutical company
and a biotechnology company and those between two biotechnology firms. Our data set contains
77 cases of research agreements between biotechnology companies and 453 cases of research
agreements between a biotechnology and a pharmaceutical company.20 We rerun the regression of
Table 3 on those two sub-samples (Table 6). We find that the effect of a non-specifiable lead
product on option contract design is much larger and, despite the smaller sample size,
considerably more precisely estimated in the sample of contracts between biotechnology firms.
This result—which is consistent once again with the cross-tabulations in Table 2—confirms
Prediction 3 of our model.
In Table 7, we take another approach, estimating pooled regressions that include all
observations. We first repeat the financial constraints analysis. We include separate dummy
variables for R&D firms that are above and below the median net income, as well as interactions
between these dummies and an indicator of whether there was no specifiable lead product
candidate at the time the research agreement was signed. Only the interaction term indicating
projects where the R&D firm is financially constrained and the project is not specifiable proves to
be significantly positive.
In the second column of Table 7, we repeat the analysis in Table 6, now pooling the
observations. We again employ dummy variables for agreements that are and are not between two
biotechnology firms, as well as interactions with an indicator of whether there is a no specified

20
In the regressions in Table 5, the sample size in one regression is always relatively modest (either due to the low
number of biotechnology-biotechnology agreements or the “lumpiness” in the underwriter rank measure). As a result,
we estimate these regressions without three of the additional control variables. The results are quite similar, however,
when we do employ these controls, though the sample size shrinks considerably.

29

lead product candidate at the time of the signing of the agreement. Once again, only the
coefficient on the variable denoting the agreements between biotechnologies companies without a
specified lead product candidate proves to be statistically significant.

Alternative explanations
Our proxy for contractibility is, naturally, noisy and leaves room for a number of alternative
explanations. In this section, we consider what we believe to be the three main alternative
interpretations of the observed contract design.
Research abilities of the biotechnology company. The contract design may be related to
uncertainty or asymmetric information about the “type” of the biotechnology company. When
entering the research collaboration, the financing company cannot perfectly assess the abilities of
the biotechnology researchers with respect to the joint project and the chances of a successful
collaboration. Termination rights allow the financing company to end the relationship as soon as
it has recognized the biotechnology partner to have relatively low ability. For this story to explain
our results, the “unspecified lead product” variable would need to capture higher uncertainty
about research abilities or collaboration success.
For two reasons, however, this adverse-selection story is an unlikely explanation for the
observed variations in contract design. First, we attempt to control for the research abilities
directly. To do this, we examine the underwriter who took the biotechnology firms public. We
anticipate that those firms that went public with the highest quality underwriters are likely to be
higher quality than those that did not. Following previous literature, we use a Carter-Manaster
(1990) style score to proxy for underwriter reputation. Table 3 indicated already that our results
are independent of this control. In addition, we run separate regressions for firms ranked above
and below the median on their Carter-Manaster (1990) score. We find in Table 8 that the effects
are much stronger among the high-quality firms, i.e., among the biotechnology firms that went
public with the best underwriters. (Again, this result is consistent with the cross-tabulations
above.) The result runs against the alternative hypothesis delineated above. If the difficulty of
discerning the R&D firm’s type were the critical consideration behind the use of these provisions,
we might anticipate that the relationship between the assignment of termination and broader
intellectual property rights to the financing firm and difficulty of contracting would be instead
stronger among the lower-reputation firms. Moreover, the above-median firms are not only likely
to have higher abilities and better prospects, but should also benefit from the “certification” of
their research abilities that is implicit in the underwriter quality. The high reputation rank of their
underwriter should thus reduce the uncertainty about their “type” and render the termination and
30

broader access rights more dispensable. The empirical results of Table 3 suggest, however, that
these considerations do not trigger the analyzed contractual clauses.21
Second, this story lacks a reason why the pharmaceutical company should also want to
obtain broader rights. Quite to the contrary, intellectual property produced by “low research
types” is likely to be least attractive to the pharmaceutical company. In other words, for this
alternative explanation to hold, our results would need to be driven by the termination right, and
not by the broad intellectual property rights. To distinguish between this alternative and the
incomplete-contracts hypothesis, we repeat the analysis above, now using a dummy denoting
whether the pharmaceutical company has the right to terminate the agreement (again coded as 0
to +3) as the dependent variable, but without the interaction with the measure of broad
intellectual property rights. We find in the first four columns of Table 9 that under various
specifications, the difficulty of contracting has no significant impact on the assignment of
termination rights by themselves.
Variations in uncertainty, informational asymmetry, or incentive misalignment. The
contractibility hypothesis put forward in this paper builds on misaligned research incentives and
non-contractibility of research effort. We attribute the variation in contractual termination and
reversion clauses to variations in contractibility, holding incentive conflicts, informational
asymmetry, monitoring costs, etc. constant. Alternatively, variations in the latter variables may
determine the implementation of termination and reversion rights. For instance, the parties may
employ termination and broad intellectual property rights whenever they are facing higher
uncertainty about the outcome, or whenever the informational asymmetry between
pharmaceutical and biotechnology company is higher, or whenever the incentive conflict between
the parties is higher. Any of these alternative suggestions would build on a model where
termination and broad rights help to solve the incentive problem, but do so at a cost. The cost may
be lower profit extraction for the pharmaceutical company (due to financial constraints of the
biotechnology firm). Or it may be the risk of opportunistic exercise of the termination right on the
side of the pharmaceutical company. Then, the termination and broader rights are employed only
if the incentive problem is “severe enough,” i.e., if uncertainty, informational asymmetry, or the
incentive misalignment are big enough.
Before we present additional results that attempt to distinguish between the alternative
explanations and our hypothesis, it is noteworthy that all of these stories need contractual
incompleteness as a key ingredient. If the parties could write contracts on the exact action to be
21

While these results allow us to reject the alternative hypothesis, they raise the question as to why this relationship
should be stronger among the high-quality firms. One possibility is that the observations of firms with lower-quality
underwriters are much noisier. Endogenous selection may lead to only “safe” (contractible) cases being contracted.

31

taken by the biotechnology researchers or condition on all possible outcomes, termination rights
would not be employed since they come at a cost relative to writing complete contracts. Thus,
even under these alternative explanations our results provide evidence on the impact of contract
design when actions or outcomes are non-contractible.
However, additional empirical results cast some doubt on these alternative hypotheses.
One first indicator that variations in uncertainty or informational asymmetry are unlikely to drive
all of our results is the regressions that control for the type of research program (therapeutic,
diagnostic, and veterinary). As noted above, the scientific and regulatory uncertainty is
substantially higher for the development of therapeutic products. Nevertheless, we do not find a
consistent, significantly positive correlation between the termination and reversion clauses and
therapeutic products. Moreover, even if we eliminate undesired heterogeneity in uncertainty and
we examine only agreements focusing on therapeutic products, our baseline results go through as
before, with a coefficient of 0.11 (and a standard error of 0.05)22
What may be related to uncertainty and informational asymmetry is the termination right
per se, not bundled with broad intellectual property rights. In the first four columns of Table 9,
where we analyze “termination rights only” as the dependent variable, we find no relation
between unspecified lead product candidate and termination rights. However, we also find that
termination rights are negatively related to diagnostic and veterinary products. To the extent that
the parties face less uncertainty with these types of products or less informational asymmetry
about the prospects of the research program, the table indicates that other types of termination
clauses may well be driven by variations in uncertainty. At the same time, these “non-results”
help us feel comfortable that the results on the termination rights with broadened rights do not
simply stem from the fact that the pharmaceutical company just learns the type of the
biotechnology company over time.
In the last two columns of Table 9, we also undertake a regression analysis employing
specified termination provisions: that is, those triggered by distinct events. We focus on four
classes of provisions: those triggered by the bankruptcy of one of the firms, change in control of
one of the firms, the termination of another agreement by one or both of the parties, and other
pre-specified events. As before, we employ as the dependent variable the interaction between a
count of the number of provisions present (between zero and four) and a dummy variable that
takes on the value one if intellectual property reverts (at least in part) to the financing firm. Since
our predictions are specific to the combination of unconditional termination rights and broad
22

When we focus on diagnostic and veterinary products, however, there is no meaningful relationship between the
difficulty of contracting and the assignment of termination and broad intellectual property rights to the financing firm.
The latter result may either be due to the small sample size (less than one-fifth of the observations fall into either of
these categories) or because researchers of the pharmaceutical company can closely monitor and direct the research
activities.

32

intellectual property rights, we would like to make sure that not “any” of the other termination
rights, combined with broader rights, have a similar correlation with the nature of the research
program.
The results are quite different from those in the earlier tables. In transactions without a
specified lead product at the time the agreement is signed, there is no significant tendency for
these termination and reversion rights to be more frequently assigned to the financing firm. This
result is again consistent with our hypothesis: the termination and broad intellectual property
rights are a substitute for conditional contracting.
The above results address uncertainty and informational asymmetry. As mentioned
before, one may also attribute the correlation between termination rights with broader access to
the intellectual property and lead-product specification to variations in the degree of incentive
conflict. In other words, research programs with an unspecified lead product candidate are more
likely to imply different research interests than those for which the parties have agreed on a
candidate. Based on our conversations with practitioners, however, the opposite appears to be the
case. A biotechnology company that enters a research agreement with a pre-specified and
potentially even tested product candidate is more likely to be involved in parallel research
collaborations and simultaneous, related research projects, increasing rather than decreasing the
scope for project cross-subsidization. In other words, while it is harder to control project crosssubsidization in research collaborations without a specified lead product candidate, the prospect
for cross-subsidization may in fact be smaller.
Bargaining power. Another alternative explanation for the contracting pattern analyzed above is
the relative bargaining power of the two parties. Biotechnology firms without well-developed and
thus specifiable products may be less able to resist the demands of prospective partners for strong
control rights.
We cannot observe the bargaining power of the two parties, and thus cannot reject this
possibility with absolute certainty. We believe that the evidence presented above, however, is
inconsistent with this alternative explanation. Most convincing is the analysis presented in Table
3 (and in similar unreported regressions). If unobserved differences in bargaining power were
behind the seeming importance of the “No specifiable lead product at the time of the signing of
the research agreement” variable, then we would anticipate that the addition of more control
variables would lead to the coefficient’s magnitude and significance falling. Control variables,
such as the number of patents of the biotechnology firm, its financial strength, and the number of
other research alliances, should at least partially capture variations in the bargaining power of the
biotechnology company, and thereby reduce the partial correlation between the “No specifiable
lead product” variable and the unobserved bargaining power. However, quite the opposite occurs:
33

as we add independent variables that should be correlated with bargaining power, the magnitude
and significance of the “No specifiable lead product” actually increases. This pattern continues to
hold when we add independent variables measuring the biotechnology firm’s financial condition
and patent holdings in greater detail, as well as the financing environment for biotechnology
firms more generally. The failure of these variables to reduce the explanatory power of the key
independent variable leads us to reject this alternative explanation.

VI.

Conclusion

Overall, the empirical evidence on contract design in biotechnology research agreements provides
an example of firms reacting to limited contractibility by designing decision rights and combining
these with payments conditional on the exercise of the decision right. Our approach differs from
the previous empirical literature following the property-rights approach in that we focus on a
property right different from the allocation of asset ownership; in fact, it appears, that the parties
endogenously “generate” a decision right to solve the problem of contractual incompleteness.
At the same time, part of the contribution of this paper is that we shed light on the nature
of the incentive and contracting problem in research alliances, in particular the problem of project
substitution or project cross-subsidization. Moreover, we provide new details on the contractual
design in research agreements, which are consistent with the theory proposed in this paper, but
which also may be of interest for a better understanding of inter-firm organizations.
To be sure, the right to terminate is only one of a complex array of decision rights
inherent in research collaborations. Moreover, there may well be other empirical approaches to
testing the theoretical hypotheses in this paper: for instance, examining the shifting terms of
agreements that are renegotiated. But the analysis suggests the promise of combining theoretical
and empirical approaches to understanding contract design.

34

Appendix A. Notation of Model
R

Research company (typically biotechnology company)

F

Financing company (typically pharmaceutical company)

t

Time period in the model (0, 1, 2 and 3)

I

Initial investment, required to generate any research surplus

eN

“Narrow” research effort by R

eB

“Broad” research effort by R

N

Expected narrow surplus, i.e., profits from product targeted in the collaboration.

N

High value of expected narrow surplus, resulting from narrow research effort.

N

Low value of expected narrow surplus, resulting from broad research effort.

B

Expected broad surplus, i.e., profits from other products and, for R, value of entering
collaborations with other firms.

B

High value of expected broad surplus, resulting from broad research effort.

B

Low value of expected broad surplus, resulting from narrow research effort.

ε

Share of B that F can capture if it has the rights for the broad research.

α

Share of N that F can capture without the collaboration of the original research
partner R if F has the rights for the narrow research.

pT

Payment from F to R conditional on termination

pC

Payment from F to R conditional on continuation

∆

(1 − α ) N − ε B

Γ

(1 − α ) N − ε B

35

Appendix B.
Proof of Lemma 4.
We consider separately option contracts with i = F and with i = R. For the class of all option
contracts with i=F, we first show that F’s payoff Π O from any option contract that does not both
(i) induce continuation in equilibrium and (ii) allocate at least the narrow rights to F after
continuation is weakly smaller than Π *NO or strictly smaller than Π̂ O .
For the set of contracts violating (i), i.e., inducing termination in equilibrium, we distinguish four
cases.
If oT = ∅, then Π O = − pT − I < 0 ≤ Π *NO (given pT ≥ 0 ).
If oT = B , then Π O = εB − pT − I where R’s participation constraint implies pT ≥ B and
thus (with A.3) Π O < 0 ≤ Π *NO .

ˆ .
If oT = N , then Π O = αN − pT − I ≤ αN − I < Π
O
If oT = N + B , then Π O = αN + εB − pT − I where R’s participation constraint implies

ˆ .
pT ≥ B and thus (with A.3) Π O < αN − I < Π
O
For the set of contracts satisfying (i) but violating (ii), i.e. inducing continuation in equilibrium
but not allocation of the narrow rights to F, we distinguish two cases.
If oC = ∅, then Π O = − p C − I ≤ 0 ≤ Π *NO .
If oC = B , then Π O = εB − p C − I , where R’s participation constraint implies p C ≥ B
and thus Π O < 0 ≤ Π *NO .
This leaves two types of contracts, which satisfy both (i) and (ii): contracts inducing continuation
and allocating both broad and narrow rights to F after continuation (oC = B + N ) , and contracts
inducing continuation and granting narrow rights after continuation (oC = N ) . Contracts with

oC = N + B , however, have to satisfy the following four constraints: (a) The participation
constraint for R is pC ≥ B . (b) The incentive-compatibility constraint ensuring that F continues
after R exerted eN is

p C − pT <

N +εB

if oT = ∅

N

if oT = B

(1 − α ) N + ε B

if oT = N

(1 − α ) N

if oT = B+N
(c) The contract also needs to satisfy incentive-compatibility for F to terminate after eB .
Otherwise R would choose eB instead of e N , given A.1.
36

p C − pT ≥

if oT = ∅

N +εB
N

if oT = B

(1 − α ) N + ε B
(1 − α ) N

if oT = N
if oT = B+N

(d) The incentive-compatibility constraint ensuring that R chooses e N is

B

p C − pT >

if oT = ∅

0

if oT = B

B

if oT = N

0

if oT = B+N

An equilibrium exists, i.e., all four conditions are satisfied if

B < N + ε B and

for oT = ∅

N − N > ε ( B − B)

B<N

for oT = B

B < (1 − α ) N + ε B and

(1 − α ) N > (1 − ε ) B

B < (1 − α ) N

for oT = N
for oT = B+N

In these cases, the maximization problem of F amounts to minimizing pC under the above
participation constraint and incentive compatibility conditions. We can characterize the optimal

pC* (if it exists) as follows:

pC* ≥

max{B, N + ε B}

for oT = ∅

max{B, N }

for oT = B

max{B, (1 − α ) N + ε B}

for oT = N

max{B, (1 − α ) N }

for oT = B+N

It is easy to check that the payoff Π O = N + ε B − p C* − I is smaller than Π̂ O in all four cases,
even if we set pC* equal to its lower bound.
It remains to be shown that contracts with oC = N but oT ≠ N + B do not yield a higher or equal
payoff for F than the contract considered in Lemma 2 ( oC = N , oT = N + B ). Note first that

oC = N implies that the participation constraint for R is not binding since R receives the broad
surplus. The incentive compatibility constraint ensuring that F continues after eN is

N

p C − pT <

for oT = ∅

N −εB

for oT = B

(1 − α ) N

for oT = N

The contract needs to induce F to terminate if R chooses e B ; otherwise R would choose e B over

eN and receive B + pC > B + pC . The incentive compatibility constraint for F is thus
37

N

if oT = ∅

N −εB

if oT = B

(1 − α ) N

if oT = N

p C − pT ≥

and the incentive compatibility constraint ensuring that R chooses eN is

p C − pT >

B−B

if oT = ∅

−B

if oT = B

B−B

if oT = N

The resulting conditions for existence are

B−B<

N

if oT = ∅

(1 − α ) N

if oT = N

In these cases or for oT = B, the maximization problem of F amounts to minimizing pC under the
above pC incentive compatibility constraints and yields the solution

pC* =

max{B − B, N }

for oT = ∅

N −ε B

for oT = B

max{B − B, (1 − α ) N }

for oT = N

and the resulting payoff Π O = N − p C* − I is smaller than Π̂ O in all three cases.
Thus, we have shown that there is no option contract with i = F and a payoff Π O such that

ˆ .
Π O > Π *NO and Π O ≥ Π
O
Finally, consider the class of contracts where R has the right to terminate. Contracts that do not (i)
induce continuation in equilibrium and (ii) allocate narrow rights to F after continuation are ruled
out the same way as for i = R. Further, contracts satisfying (i) and (ii) allocate at least narrow
rights after continuation and will thus always induce R to choose eB since R’s payoff after
continuation if choosing eN is always weakly (for oC = N + B ) or strictly (for oC = N ) smaller
than if choosing e B . However the maximum payoff resulting from any contract inducing R to
choose eB is Π *NO . Thus, there is also no option contract with i = R and payoff Π O satisfying

ˆ . Q.E.D.
Π O > Π *NO and Π O ≥ Π
O

Appendix C. Renegotiation
The results in Section III have been derived under the assumption that the parties can commit not
to renegotiate. We now allow for renegotiation of the original contract after period 1. As in
Nöldeke and Schmidt (1995), we assume that, at one point in time between periods 1 and 2, both
p and ~
p as well as a new
R and F can send signed offers to each other, specifying new prices ~
C

T

(conditional) allocation of property rights. After F has decided whether to continue or to
38

terminate at time 2, the parties can both present any signed offer they received in court. The court
can observe whether F initiated termination or not and will enforce the respective payment as
specified in the original contract unless
exactly one party presents a signed renegotiation offer from the other party to the court
both sides present the same renegotiation offer to the court.
In those two cases, the court enforces the renegotiated contract. We assume that
(A.5) R and F are willing to accept the best renegotiation offer received from the other party if
their own equilibrium payoff in the continuation game (after t = 1) under the renegotiated contract
is weakly larger than the equilibrium payoff under the original contract. They are willing to make
a renegotiation offer if their renegotiated equilibrium payoff in the continuation game is strongly
larger than the original equilibrium payoff.
For example, if R exerts eB and F does not send any signed offers to R but R sends a
signed offer, F will accept R’s offer if the resulting equilibrium allocation of surplus to F is at
least as high as the equilibrium payoff under the original contract. We apply the concept of sub
game-perfect equilibrium. Given this renegotiation mechanism, we can specify when the contract
derived in Lemma 2 is renegotiation-proof.
Lemma 5. For ∆ ≥ 0, contracts in ÂO are not renegotiation-proof. For ∆ < 0, contracts in ÂO
with pT < − ∆ are renegotiation-proof.
Proof. We first determine in which subgames, after R has chosen e, renegotiation may occur. In
any subgame following effort choice eN, the original contract allows for extraction of the full
surplus, with expected value N + B . Any reallocation is either a mere transfer or reduces the total
surplus. Both parties can guarantee themselves the payoff resulting from the original contract by
not making any renegotiation offers and not presenting any offers they receive. Thus, there is no
scope for renegotiation. In any subgame following effort choice eB, the surplus under the original
contract, α N + ε B , is smaller than the surplus that can be extracted if F does not terminate.
Hence, there is scope for renegotiation-inducing continuation. (Since the original contract
recommends termination in the sub-game, any other contract that leads to termination is a mere
transfer.)
We now show that a necessary condition for R to exert eB and for subsequent renegotiation to
succeed after eB is that R offers a new contract. Suppose, instead, that R exerts eB, but does not
make a renegotiation offer. If F makes an offer, F will allocate an equilibrium continuation
39

payoff of exactly pT to R since this suffices to induce R to accept the offer (with A.5).
Anticipating this, R will exert eN instead of eB to ensure a renegotiation-proof payoff of

B + pC = B + max{0, ∆} , which is strictly larger than pT for all subcases specified in Lemma 2.
This contradicts the initial assumption that R exerts eB. Successful renegotiation thus requires R to
make an offer.
With assumption A.5, two conditions need to be satisfied to induce R to choose eB and to make a
renegotiation offer upon which F continues and which F would enforce:
1. Conditional on R choosing eB, F’s payoff after continuation and enforcing R’s renegotiation
offer is weakly higher than F’s payoff after termination and enforcing the original contract.
2. Given F’s equilibrium strategies in the continuation games, R’s payoff after eB and
continuation under the renegotiated contract is strictly higher than after eN and continuation
under the original contract.
We consider separately renegotiation offers that (re-)assign (i) both broad and narrow rights and
(ii) only narrow rights to F upon continuation.
(i) Broad and narrow rights. In order to accept R’s renegotiation offer and to choose

pC that is weakly higher than the
continuation, F requires a continuation payoff N + ε B − ~
continuation payoff after termination under the original contract, α N + ε B − pT . The

pC is ~
pC ≤ (1 − α ) N + pT . Thus, R can at most ensure a payoff of
resulting upper bound of ~
(1 − α ) N + pT instead of B + pC under the original contract. It is easy to check that, for all
three subcases specified in Lemma 2, R’s continuation payoff under the original contract is
strictly higher. Hence, R will not choose eB and then make a renegotiation offer allocating
both the narrow and the broad rights to F in case of continuation.
(ii) Narrow rights. F accepts R’s renegotiation offer and chooses continuation if the continuation
p is weakly higher than the continuation payoff after termination under the
payoff N − ~
C

original contract, α N + ε B − pT , i. e. if ~
pC ≤ (1 − α ) N − ε B + pT .

pC only if the original pT was set equal to –∆ (given the nonFor ∆ < 0, we can find such a ~
negativity constraint). Thus, by choosing pT < – ∆ (within the ranges specified in Lemma 2),
F avoids renegotiation, induces R to exert eN, and obtains the resulting higher payoff.
p ∈ [0, ∆ ] satisfies the above condition and the non-negativity constraint.
For ∆ ≥ 0, any ~
C

Conditional on having chosen eB, R will thus make a renegotiation offer, proposing the
highest possible ~
pC , i.e., ~
pC = ∆ , and receive B + ∆ . Moreover, R prefers choosing eB and
renegotiating to choosing eN, since B + ∆ > B + ∆ . Q.E.D.

40

ˆ > Π * (Lemma 3), F will offer a
Lemma 5 immediately implies that for ∆ < 0, where Π
O
NO
ˆ ≤ Π*
contract from the set ÂO with pT < − ∆ . Similarly, for ∆ ≥ N − max{N , I } , where Π
O
NO
*
. It remains to be shown
(Lemma 3), F will offer a (renegotiation-proof) contract from the set ANO

which contract generates the highest payoff for F in the range 0 ≤ ∆ < N − max{N , I } . We focus
*
on the choice between renegotiation-proof contracts in ANO
and option contracts (F, pC, pT, N,

N + B) satisfying (1), i.e., inducing eN in a setting without renegotiation.
~
~
Denote with ∆ the maximum of αN + ε B , N , and I, i.e., ∆ = max{αN + ε B, N , I } .
Using Lemma 5, we can summarize F’s contractual choice as follows.

Proposition 2. If ∆ < 0, F implements any option contract in ÂO with pT < –∆ and obtains payoff

Π̂ O = N − I .

If

~
0 ≤ ∆ < N − ∆ − ( B − B) ,

F

implements

the

option

contract

(i = F ,

~
pC = B − B + ∆ , pT = 0 , oC = N , oT = N + B ) and obtains payoff Π O = N − ( B − B ) − ∆ − I . If
~
*
0 ≤ N − ∆ − ( B − B ) < ∆ , F implements any renegotiation-proof contract in ANO
and obtains
payoff Π *NO = max{N − I ,0} .
Proof. For ∆ < 0, any contract in ÂO maximizes F’s payoff under the assumption of no
renegotiation (Lemma 3). The subset of contracts with pT < –∆ are renegotiation-proof (Lemma
5). Since renegotiation reduces F’s payoff, F will choose a contract with pT < –∆, resulting in
payoff Π̂ O = N − I .
*
For ∆ ≥ N − max{N , I } , any contract in ANO
maximizes F’s payoff (Lemma 3), and F obtains

payoff Π *NO = max{N − I ,0} .

ˆ > Π * (Lemma 3) but no option contract in ÂO is renegotiationFor 0 ≤ ∆ < N − max{N , I } , Π
O
NO
*
proof (Lemma 5). We analyze whether F will implement a contract in ANO
or an option contract

(F, pC, pT, N, N + B) that satisfies (1). We first compare Π *NO to the maximum payoff F can
obtain from option contracts that are not renegotiation-proof. We then compare Π *NO to the
maximum payoff from option contracts that are renegotiation-proof.
For both cases note that for any option contract (F, pC, pT, N, N + B) with prices pC and pT
p such that, conditional on R having chosen e , F accepts the
satisfying (1), R can find a price ~
C

B

pC , pT, N, N + B) and chooses continuation, namely any non-negative ~
pC
renegotiation offer (F, ~
41

pC , i. e. ~
pC ∈ [0, ∆ + pT ] . Whether R chooses eB and renegotiation
for which α N + εB − pT ≤ N − ~
over eN and the original contract, depends on the original prices (pC, pT). R prefers eB (and the
contract is thus not renegotiation-proof) iff B + pC < B + ~
pC for some ~
pC ∈ [0, ∆ + pT ] .

pC = ∆ + pT , we can rewrite the condition as pC < B − B + ∆ + pT .
Substituting ~
Consider now the first the case (contracts that are not renegotiation-proof), i. e., option contracts
(F, pC, pT, N, N + B) satisfying (1) and pC < B − B + ∆ + pT . F’s payoff from implementing such

pC − I = N − ∆ − pT − I , which is weakly smaller
a contract, after renegotiation, amounts to N − ~
than

α N + εB − I and thus weakly smaller than

Π *NO

for any

pT in the range

0 ≤ ∆ < N − max{N , I } . Hence, F will not implement this type of option contract.
Consider now the second case (contracts that are renegotiation-proof), i. e., option contracts
satisfying pC ≥ B − B + ∆ + pT . F can find prices (pC, pT) satisfying both this inequality and (1) iff

∆ + B − B < Γ , i. e. ∆ < N − (αN + ε B ) − ( B − B ) . Given any option contract satisfying these
conditions, R will exert eN and not renegotiate. The resulting payoff for F, N − pC − I is
maximized by setting pC = B − B + ∆ and pT = 0 . F prefers this option contract over a contract
*
if N − ( B − B ) − ∆ − I > max{N − I ,0} , i. e. if ∆ < N − max{N , I } − ( B − B) . We can thus
in ANO

summarize as follows: For 0 ≤ ∆ < N − max{αN + ε B, N , I } − ( B − B ) , F chooses option contract

~
(F, B − B + ∆ , 0, N, N + B) and obtains payoff Π O = N − ( B − B ) − ∆ − I . Q.E.D.

Proposition 2 shows that renegotiation may reduce the range over which an option contract with
termination

rights

and

reversion

of

intellectual

property

is

optimal

(namely

if

∆ < N − (αN + ε B ) − ( B − B ) ). The basic finding, however, remains the same: the option
contract is optimal for small ∆ and thus for high α and ε. The intuition is that large outside
options of the financing company correspond to a lower the value of R’s cooperation in the
development phase. As a result, it is less costly for F to induce R to exert eN , and the option
contract becomes more profitable.

42

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Aghion, Philippe, Griffith, Rachel, and Zilbotti, Fabrizio, 2003,
“Vertical Integration and Technology,” Unpublished working paper, MIT, Harvard University,
University College London, and Institute for International Economic Studies.
Aghion, Philippe, and Bolton, Patrick, 1992, “An Incomplete Contracts Approach to
Financial Contracting,” Review of Economic Studies, 59, 473-494.
Aghion, Philippe, and Triole, Jean, 1994, “On the Management of Innovation,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 109, 1185-1207.
Angelmar, Reinhard, and Doz, Yves, 1987-1989, “Advanced Drug Delivery Systems:
ALZA and Ciba-Geigy,” Unnumbered case study series, INSEAD, Fontainebleau Cedex, France.
Baker, George P., Gibbons, Robert, and Murphy, Kevin J., 2002, “Relational Contracts in
Strategic Alliances.” Unpublished working paper, Harvard University, MIT, and University of
Southern California.

Baker, George P., and Hubbard, Thomas, 2003, “Make or Buy in Trucking: Asset
Ownership, Job Design, and Information,” American Economic Review, 93, 551-572.
Baker, George P., and Hubbard, Thomas, 2004, “Contractibility and Asset Ownership:
On-Board Computers and Governance in U.S. Trucking,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119,
1443-1479..
Carter, Richard, Dark, Frederick H., and Singh, Ajai K., 1998, “`A Comparative Analysis
of Underwriter Prestige Measures,” Journal of Finance, 53, 285-311.
Carter, Richard, and Manaster, Steven, 1990, “Initial Public Offerings and Underwriter
Reputation,” Journal of Finance, 45, 1045-1067.
Chiappori, Pierre-André and Salanié, Bernard, 2003, “Testing Contract Theory: a Survey
of Some Recent Work.” In: M. Dewatripont, L. Hansen and P. Turnovsky, (eds.), Advances in
Economics and Econometrics - Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress, Econometric
Society Monographs, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., pp. 115-149.
Cockburn, Iain, Henderson, Rebecca, and Stern, Scott, 1999, “Balancing Incentives: The
Tension Between Basic and Applied Research,” Working Paper 6882, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Cornelli, Francesca, and Yoshi, Oved, 2003, “Stage Financing and the Role of
Convertible Securities,” Review of Economic Studies, 70, 1-32.
Dasgupta, Partha, and David, Paul, 1994, “Towards a New Economics of Science,”
Research Policy, 23, 487-521.
Dessein, Wouter, 2003, "Information and Control in Ventures and Alliances,”
Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago.
Gambardella, Alfonso, 1995, Science and Innovation: The US Pharmaceutical Industry
During the 1980's, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
43

Gompers, Paul A., 1995, “Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture
Capital,” Journal of Finance, 50, 1461-1489.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Hart, Oliver D., 1986, “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A
Theory of Lateral and Vertical Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 94, 691-719.
Hart, Oliver D., 1995, Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure, Clarendon Press,,
Oxford.
Hart, Oliver D. and Holmström, Bengt, 2002, “A Theory of Firm Scope.” Unpublished
working paper, Harvard University and MIT.
Hart, Oliver D. and Moore, John, 1988, “Incomplete Contracts and Renegotiations,”
Econometrica, 56, 755-786.
Hart, Oliver D. and Moore, John, 1990, “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,”
Journal of Political Economy, 98, 1119-1158.
Henderson, Rebecca, and Cockburn, Iain, 1994, “Measuring Competence? Exploring
Firm Effects in Pharmaceutical Research,” Strategic Management Journal, 15 (Winter Special
Issue), 63-84.
Holmström, Bengt, and Milgrom, Paul, 1991, “Multitask Principal-Agent Analysis:
Incentive Contracts, Asset Ownership and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization, 7, 24-51.
Kaplan, Steven, and Stromberg, Per, 2003. “Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real
World: An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts,” Review of Economic Studies, 70,
281-315.
Kaplan, Steven, and Stromberg, Per, 2004. “Characteristics, Contracts, and Actions:
Evidence from Venture Capitalist Analyses,” Journal of Finance, 59, 2173-2206.
Lazear, Edward P., 1979, "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?," Journal of Political
Economy, 87, 1261-84.
Lerner, Josh, and Merges, Robert P., 1998, “The Control of Technology Alliances: An
Empirical Analysis of the Biotechnology Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 46, 125156.
Lerner, Josh, Shane, Hilary, and Tsai, Alexander, 2003, “Do Equity Financing Cycles
Matter? Evidence from Biotechnology Alliances,” Journal of Financial Economics, 67, 411-446.
Loughran, Tim, and Ritter, Jay R., 2004, “Why Has IPO Underpricing Changed Over
Time?,” Financial Management, 33 (Fall), 5-37.
Monteverde, Kirk and Teece, David J., 1982, “Appropriable Rents and Quasi-Vertical
Integration,” Journal of Law and Economics, 25, 321-328.
Nöldeke, Georg and Schmidt, Klaus M., 1995, “Option Contracts and Renegotiation: A
Solution to the Hold-Up Problem,” RAND Journal of Economics, 26(2), 163-179.
44

Nöldeke, Georg and Schmidt, Klaus M., 1998, "Sequential Investments and Options to
Own," RAND Journal of Economics, 29, 633-653.
Robinson, David and Stuart, Toby, 2004, “Financial Contracting in Biotech Strategic
Alliances.” Unpublished working paper, Columbia University and Duke University.
Rosenbloom, Richard S., and Spencer, William J., editors, 1996, Engines of Innovation:
U.S. Industrial Research at the End of an Era (Harvard Business School Press, Boston).
Schmidt, Klaus, 2003, "Convertible Securities and Venture Capital Finance," Journal of
Finance, 58, 1139-66.
Somers, Jeffrey P., 2003, “Biotech Patent Licensing: Key Considerations in Deal
Negotiations,” Journal of Biolaw and Business, 6 (no. 3), 11-18.
Stern, Scott, 2003, “Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists?,” Working Paper 7410, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Stulz, René, 1990, “Managerial Discretion and Optimal Financing Policies,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 26, 3-26.
Thursby, Jerry G., and Thursby, Marie C., 2003, “Are Faculty Critical? Their Role in
University-Industry Licensing,” Working Paper 9991, National Bureau of Economic Research.

45

Figure 1. Timeline

t=0
Contract

t=1
Research
– F invests I
– R exerts research
effort e

t=2
Termination?
– Payments pc or pt
If continued:
Development
– F & R: preliminary
manufacturing
– F & R: approval
process

t=3
Marketing and Sales

Figure 2. Table of Payoff

Continuation

Termination

IP Rights

F’s payoff

R’s payoff

oC = ∅

– pC

B + pC

oC = N

N– pC

B + pC

oC = B

εB– pC

pC

oC = N + B

N + εB– pC

pC

oT = ∅

– pT

B + pT

oT = N

αN – pT

B + pT

oT = B

εB – pT

pT

oT = N + B

αN + εB – pT

pT

Figure 3. Illustration of Proposition 2

(a) Γ > ∆ ≥ 0
pC

Γ
∆
pT

(b) Γ ≥ 0 > ∆
pC

Γ
∆

(c)

[

pT

]

-∆

0>Γ>∆
pC

Γ
∆

(

-Γ

]

-∆

pT

Table 1. Summary statistics. The sample consists of 584 research agreements entered into between
biotechnology firms (“R&D firms”) and pharmaceutical or larger biotechnology companies (“financing
companies”). Date of agreement is coded as year plus one twelfth of the month in which the agreement is signed.
The Carter-Manaster rank is the rating of the leading underwriter in the R&D firm’s initial public offering ratings
as compiled by Carter and Manaster [1990], Carter, Dark, and Singh [1998], and Ritter [2003]. The “cash burn
rate” is the absolute value of the ratio of cash flow over cash and equivalents of the R&D firm.
Mean Stan. Dev.
Min. Max.
Date of agreement
1995.3
3.7 1980
2001
Length of agreement (years)
3.9
3.2
0.9
31.0
Carter-Manaster rank of R&D firm’s IPO lead underwriter
7.7
2.0
1.0
9.0
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement
37.5%
0
1
Agreement involves diagnostic product
13.0%
0
1
Agreement involves veterinary product
5.3%
0
1
Agreement between two biotechnology firms
15.1%
0
1
Total patents of R&D firm at signing of research agreement
8.6
20.1
0
178
R&D firm’s revenue in previous fiscal year ($ millions)
17.6
44.9
0 523.2
R&D firm’s net income in previous fiscal year ($ millions)
-14.4
29.1 -351.9
44.3
R&D firm’s cash and equivalents at end of previous year ($ millions)
46.1
134.2
0 1452.4
“Cash burn rate” of R&D firm (years)
3.2
17.6
0 295.5
Does agreement assign …
… any termination rights?
97.7%
0
1
… any termination rights to financing firm?
96.7%
0
1
… unconditional termination rights to financing firms?
38.9%
0
1
… unconditional termination rights to financing firms that also trigger 11.3%
0
1
broad access to the terminated project?

Table 2. Cross-tabulation of the financing firm’s termination and broad licensing rights. The sample consists of
584 research agreements entered into between biotechnology firms (“R&D firms”) and pharmaceutical or larger
biotechnology companies (“financing companies”). The Table presents the mean number of specified termination and
broad intellectual property rights of the financing company. In Panel A, the observations are divided by whether the
product was unspecifiable at the signing of the research agreement, whether the leading underwriter in the R&D firm’s
initial public offering is above the median Carter-Manaster style rank, whether the agreement is between two
biotechnology firms, whether the R&D firm has above the median net income in the year before the signing of the
research agreement, whether the R&D firm has above the median cash and equivalents at the end of the year before the
research agreement, and whether the product involves a diagnostic or veterinary application. In Panel B, the
observations are divided by whether the product was unspecifiable at the signing of the research agreement as well as
other features of the research agreement. p-Values from t-tests of the null hypothesis that these distributions are identical
are reported in the final column.
Panel A: Simple Comparisons of Termination and Broad Intellectual Property Rights
Mean number of unconditional termination
and broad intellectual property rights
assigned to financing firm
Yes
No.
p-Value
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement?
0.20
0.12
0.039
Carter-Manaster rank of R&D firm’s IPO lead underwriter above median?
0.16
0.15
0.923
Agreement between two biotechnology firms?
0.26
0.13
0.009
R&D firm’s net income in previous year above median?
0.14
0.14
1.000
R&D firm’s cash and equivalents at end of previous year above median?
0.14
0.14
0.934
Does agreement involve diagnostic product?
0.05
0.16
0.047
Does agreement involve veterinary product?
0.03
0.15
0.139
Panel B: Cross-Tabulations of Termination and Broad Licensing Rights
Mean number of unconditional termination
and broad intellectual property rights
assigned to financing firm
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement?
If Carter-Manaster rank of R&D firm’s IPO lead underwriter above median
If Carter-Manaster rank of R&D firm’s IPO lead underwriter below median
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement?
If agreement is between two biotechnology firms
If agreement is not between two biotechnology firms
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement?
If R&D firm’s net income in previous year above median
If R&D firm’s net income in previous year below median
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement?
If R&D firm’s cash and equivalents at end of previous year above median
If R&D firm’s cash and equivalents at end of previous year below median

Yes

No.

p-Value

0.23
0.19

0.11
0.14

0.027
0.468

0.44
0.14

0.11
0.12

0.006
0.590

0.17
0.22

0.12
0.11

0.398
0.068

0.17
0.21

0.13
0.10

0.472
0.043

Table 3. Regression analysis of the financing firm’s termination and broad licensing rights. The sample consists of 584 research agreements entered into between
biotechnology firms (“R&D firms”) and pharmaceutical or larger biotechnology companies (“financing companies”). The dependent variable is the number of specified
termination and broad intellectual property rights of the financing company. The independent variables in all regressions include the date of the research agreement, a
dummy for agreements without specifiable lead product candidate at the signing of the research agreement, dummies for diagnostic or veterinary applications, and the
Carter-Manaster style rank of the leading underwriter in the R&D firm’s initial public offering. In selected regressions, the independent variables also include the count
of the R&D firm’s total patents at the time of the agreement, the absolute value of the ratio of cash flow over cash and equivalents of the R&D firm (“cash burn rate”) at
the time of the agreement, the count of previous research agreements between the two firms, and dummy variables for the year of the research agreement (not reported).
The first two and last two regressions employ an ordinary least squares specification; the third and fourth, an ordered logit specification. Standard errors in brackets.

Date of agreement
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement
Agreement involves diagnostic product
Agreement involves veterinary product
Carter-Manaster rank of R&D firm’s IPO lead underwriter
Total patents of the R&D firm
“Cash burn rate” of R&D firm
Number of previous research agreements between the two firms
Constant
Year fixed effects
Number of observations
χ2-statistic or F-statistic
R2

Dep. Var.: Termination and Broad Intellectual Rights of Financing Firm
0.003
0.01
0.01
0.03
[0.01]
[0.01]
[0.04]
[0.04]
0.09
0.11
0.51
0.59
0.11
0.13
[0.04]**
[0.05]**
[0.28]*
[0.30]**
[0.04]***
[0.05]***
-0.10
-0.09
-0.86
-0.75
-0.10
-0.09
[0.06]*
[0.06]
[0.54]
[0.54]
[0.06]*
[0.06]
-0.12
-0.13
-1.40
-1.37
-0.13
-0.13
[0.09]
[0.09]
[1.03]
[1.04]
[0.09]
[0.09]
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.01
0.01
[0.01]
[0.01]
[0.07]
[0.08]
[0.01]
[0.01]
0.001
0.01
0.001
[0.001]
[0.01]
[0.001]
-0.0003
-0.004
-0.0004
[0.001]
[0.01]
[0.001]
-0.005
-0.004
-0.002
[0.05]
[0.35]
[0.05]
-5.79
-10.29
[10.48]
[11.59]
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
530
480
530
480
530
480
2.44
2.03
10.23
12.15
1.09
1.06
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.06

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

Table 4. Regression analysis of the financing firm’s termination and broad intellectual property rights with pharmaceutical company fixed effects. The sample
consists of 584 research agreements entered into between biotechnology firms (“R&D firms”) and pharmaceutical or larger biotechnology companies (“financing companies”).
The dependent variable is the number of specified termination and broad intellectual property rights of the financing company. The independent variables in all regressions
include the date of the research agreement, a dummy for agreements without specifiable lead product candidates at the signing of the research agreement, dummies for diagnostic
or veterinary applications, the Carter-Manaster style rank of the leading underwriter in the R&D firm’s initial public offering and dummy variables for the financing companies
(not reported). In selected regressions, the independent variables also include the count of the R&D firm’s total patents at the time of the agreement, the absolute value of the
ratio of cash flow over cash and equivalents of the R&D firm (“cash burn rate”) at the time of the agreement, the count of previous research agreements between the two firms,
and dummy variables for the year of the research agreement (not reported). All regressions employ an ordinary least squares specification. Standard errors in brackets.

Date of agreement
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement
Agreement involve diagnostic product
Agreement involve veterinary product
Carter-Manaster rank of R&D firm’s IPO lead underwriter lead
Total patents of the R&D firm
“Cash burn rate” of R&D firm
Number of previous research agreements between the two firms
Financing company fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Number of observations
F-statistic
R2

Dependent Variable:
Termination and Broad Intellectual Property Rights of
Financing Firm
0.002
0.005
[0.01]
[0.01]
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.13
[0.04]**
[0.05]**
[0.04]**
[0.05]***
-0.10
-0.09
-0.10
-0.08
[0.06]*
[0.06]
[0.06]
[0.07]
-0.11
-0.11
-0.12
-0.11
[0.09]
[0.09]
[0.09]
[0.10]
0.01
0.01
0.005
0.01
[0.01]
[0.01]
[0.01]
[0.01]
0.001
0.001
[0.001]
[0.001]
-0.0003
-0.0003
[0.001]
[0.001]
-0.02
-0.02
[0.05]
[0.05]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
530
480
530
480
1.30
1.28
1.04
1.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

Table 5. Regression analysis of the financing firm’s termination and broad intellectual property rights, divided by proxies for R&D firm’s financial constraints. The
sample consists of 584 research agreements entered into between biotechnology firms (“R&D firms”) and pharmaceutical or larger biotechnology companies (“financing
companies”). The dependent variable is the number of specified termination and broad intellectual property rights of the financing company. The independent variables in all
regressions include the date of the research agreement, a dummy for agreements without specifiable lead product candidate at the signing of the research agreement, dummies for
diagnostic or veterinary applications, the Carter-Manaster [1990] style rank of the leading underwriter in the R&D firm’s initial public offering, the count of the R&D firm’s total
patents at the time of the agreement, the absolute value of the ratio of cash flow over cash and equivalents of the R&D firm (“cash burn rate”) at the time of the agreement, and the
count of previous research agreements between the two firms. In the first pair of regressions, observations are divided by whether the R&D firm has above or below the median
net income (-$7.7 million); in the third and fourth, whether the R&D firm has above or below the median cash and equivalents ($12.7 million). All employ an ordinary least
squares specification. Standard errors in brackets.

Date of agreement
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement
Agreement involve diagnostic product
Agreement involve veterinary product
Carter-Manaster rank of R&D firm’s IPO lead underwriter
Total patents of the R&D firm
“Cash burn rate” of R&D firm
Number of previous research agreements between the two firms
Constant
Number of observations
F-statistic
R2

Dependent Variable: Termination and Broad Intellectual Property Rights of
Financing Firm
Measured on Net Income
Measured on Cash and Equivalents
Below Median
Above Median
Below Median
Above Median
0.004
0.01
0.01
-0.003
[0.01]
[0.01]
[0.01]
[0.01]
0.15
0.07
0.14
0.07
[0.07]**
[0.06]
[0.07]**
[0.06]
-0.07
-0.07
-0.15
-0.004
[0.09]
[0.09]
[0.09]*
[0.08]
-0.10
-0.13
-0.12
-0.09
[0.13]
[0.13]
[0.12]
[0.13]
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
[0.01]
[0.02]
[0.02]
[0.01]
0.002
0.004
-0.004
0.002
[0.001]
[0.004]
[0.006]
[0.001]
-0.0002
-0.0003
-0.001
-0.09
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.001]
[0.06]
-0.03
0.02
0.03
-0.01
[0.07]
[0.09]
[0.11]
[0.06]
-8.47
-20.21
-28.57
6.48
[22.19]
[14.85]
[16.20]*
[18.23]
247
233
235
245
1.36
1.09
2.08
1.14
0.04
0.04
0.07
0.04

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

Table 6. Regression analysis of the financing firm’s termination and broad intellectual property rights, divided by proxies for the type of financing firm. The sample
consists of 584 research agreements entered into between biotechnology firms (“R&D firms”) and pharmaceutical or larger biotechnology companies (“financing companies”).
The dependent variable is the number of specified termination and broad intellectual property rights of the financing company. The independent variables in all regressions
include the date of the research agreement, a dummy for agreements without specifiable lead product candidate at the signing of the research agreement, dummies for diagnostic
or veterinary applications, and the Carter-Manaster [1990] style rank of the leading underwriter in the R&D firm’s initial public offering (in the first pair of regressions only).
Observations are divided by whether by whether the research agreement is between two biotechnology firms. All employ an ordinary least squares specification. Standard
errors in brackets.

Date of agreement
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement
Agreement involve diagnostic product
Agreement involve veterinary product
Carter-Manaster rank of R&D firm’s IPO lead underwriter
Constant
Number of observations
F-statistic
R2

Dependent Variable: Termination and Broad IntellectualProperty Rights of
Financing Firm
Divided by Whether Agreement is Between Two Biotechnology Firms
Yes
No
-0.03
0.01
[0.02]
[0.01]
0.29
0.05
[0.13]**
[0.04]
-0.27
-0.07
[0.23]
[0.06]
-0.23
-0.09
[0.29]
[0.09]
0.03
0.001
[0.03]
[0.01]
56.46
-9.91
[47.71]
[10.43]
77
453
2.05
1.15
0.13
0.01

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

Table 7. Regression analysis of the financing firm’s termination and broad intellectual property
rights, with interaction terms for firm profitability and the type of financing firm. The sample
consists of 584 research agreements entered into between biotechnology firms (“R&D firms”) and
pharmaceutical or larger biotechnology companies (“financing companies”). The dependent variable is the
number of specified termination and broad intellectual property rights of the financing company. The
independent variables in all regressions include the date of the research agreement, a dummy for
agreements with diagnostic or veterinary applications, the Carter-Manaster [1990] style rank of the leading
underwriter in the R&D firm’s initial public offering, the count of the R&D firm’s total patents at the time
of the agreement, the absolute value of the ratio of cash flow over cash and equivalents of the R&D firm
(“cash burn rate”) at the time of the agreement, and the count of previous research agreements between the
two firms. The first regression also includes dummies for whether the firm is above or below the median
net income in the fiscal year prior to the research agreement, and interactions between these dummies and a
dummy for agreements without specifiable lead product candidate at the time of the research agreement.
The second regression also includes dummies for whether the financing company is a biotechnology firm
or a pharmaceutical company, and interactions between these dummies and a dummy for agreements
without specifiable lead product candidate at the time of the research agreement. All employ an ordinary
least squares specification. Standard errors in brackets.

Date of agreement
Agreement involves diagnostic product
Agreement involves veterinary product
Carter-Manaster rank of R&D firm’s IPO lead underwriter
Total patents of the R&D firm
“Cash burn rate” of R&D firm
Number of previous research agreements between the two firms
Above median net income
Below median net income
Agreement between two biotechnology firms
Agreement between a biotechnology and a pharmaceutical firm
Above median net income and no specified lead product at signing
Below median net income and no specified lead product at signing
Biotech-biotech agreement and no specified lead product at signing
Biotech-Pharma agreement and no specified lead product at signing
Number of observations
F-statistic
R2

Dependent Variable: Termination and
Broad Intellectual Property Rights of
Financing Firm
Type-ofNet-Income
Financing-Firm
Interaction
Interaction
0.01
0.004
[0.01]
[0.006]
-0.08
-0.09
[0.08]
[0.06]
-0.16
-0.11
[0.11]
[0.09]
0.01
0.01
[0.01]
[0.01]
0.003
0.001
[0.001]*
[0.001]
-0.001
-0.001
[0.001]
[0.06]
-0.01
0.0003
[0.06]
[0.05]
-18.97
[15.51]
-19.10
[15.54]
-8.91
[11.61]
-8.90
[11.60]
0.08
[0.08]
0.20
[0.08]**
0.31
[0.11]***
0.07
[0.05]
480
480
6.88
7.21
0.14
0.14

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

Table 8. Regression analysis of the financing firm’s termination and broad intellectual property rights, divided by proxies for the R&D company
quality. The sample consists of 584 research agreements entered into between biotechnology firms (“R&D firms”) and pharmaceutical or larger biotechnology
companies (“financing companies”). The dependent variable is the number of specified termination and broad intellectual property rights of the financing
company. The independent variables in all regressions include the date of the research agreement, a dummy for agreements without specifiable lead product
candidate at the signing of the research agreement, dummies for diagnostic or veterinary applications, and the Carter-Manaster [1990] style rank of the leading
underwriter in the R&D firm’s initial public offering (in the first pair of regressions only). Observations are divided by whether by whether the R&D firm has
above or below the median Carter-Manaster rank of the lead underwriter (8.75). All employ an ordinary least squares specification. Standard errors in brackets.

Date of agreement
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement
Agreement involve diagnostic product
Agreement involve veterinary product
Carter-Manaster rank of R&D firm’s IPO lead underwriter
Constant
Number of observations
F-statistic
R2

Dep. Var.: Termination and Broad Intellectual Property Rights of Financing Firm
Divided by Underwriter Reputation
Above Median
Below Median
0.005
0.001
[0.01]
[0.01]
0.13
0.04
[0.06]**
[0.07]
-0.14
-0.04
[0.08]*
[0.09]
-0.12
-0.08
[0.11]
[0.15]
-0.0004
0.01
[0.27]
[0.01]
-8.88
-2.03
[14.84]
[14.61]
307
223
2.87
0.44
0.04
0.01

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

Table 9. Regression analyses using alternative dependent variables. The sample consists of 584 research agreements entered into between biotechnology
firms (“R&D firms”) and pharmaceutical or larger biotechnology companies (“financing companies”). The dependent variable in the first four regressions is the
number of specified termination rights of the financing company. The dependent variable in the fifth and sixth regressions is the number of specified provisions
assigning termination and broad intellectual property rights to the financing company only in well-defined circumstances (“conditional termination and licensing
rights”). The independent variables in all regressions include the date of the research agreement, a dummy for agreements without specifiable lead product
candidate at the signing of the research agreement, dummies for diagnostic or veterinary applications, and the Carter-Manaster style rank of the leading
underwriter in the R&D firm’s initial public offering. In selected regressions, the independent variables also include the count of the R&D firm’s total patents at
the time of the agreement, the absolute value of the ratio of cash flow over cash and equivalents of the R&D firm (“cash burn rate”) at the time of the agreement,
and the count of previous research agreements between the two firms. The first two regressions employ an ordinary least squares specification; the third and
fourth, an ordered logit specification. Standard errors in brackets.

Date of agreement
No specifiable lead product candidate at signing of research agreement
Agreement involve diagnostic product
Agreement involve veterinary product
Carter-Manaster rank of R&D firm’s IPO lead underwriter
Total patents of the R&D firm
“Cash burn rate” of R&D firm
Number of previous research agreements between the two firms
Constant
Number of observations
χ2-statistic or F-statistic
R2

Dependent Variable:
Conditional Termination
Termination Rights of Financing Firm
and Broad Property
Rights
-0.004
-0.01
-0.03
-0.03
0.003
0.005
[0.01]
[0.01]
[0.02]
[0.02]
[0.003]
[0.003]
-0.11
-0.09
-0.29
-0.22
0.03
0.02
[0.07]
[0.08]
[0.19]
[0.20]
[0.03]
[0.03]
-0.28
-0.28
-0.87
-0.86
-0.04
-0.04
[0.10]***
[0.10]*** [0.29]*** [0.30]***
[0.03]
[0.04]
-0.16
-0.17
-0.47
-0.45
0.06
0.01
[0.15]
[0.15]
[0.41]
[0.42]
[0.05]
[0.01]
0.02
-0.01
0.001
0.005
0.01
0.01
[0.02]
[0.02]
[0.05]
[0.05]
[0.01]
[0.01]
-0.0001
-0.002
-0.001
[0.002]
[0.01]
[0.001]
-0.001
-0.002
0.0003
[0.002]
[0.005]
[0.0006]
0.01
0.08
0.03
[0.09]
[0.21]
[0.03]
8.39
10.91
-6.90
-9.32
[17.92]
[19.77]
[6.01]
[6.74]
530
480
530
480
530
480
2.96
1.53
15.76
13.70
1.57
0.96
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

