NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A GLOBAL VIEW OF ECONOMIC GROWTH
Jaume Ventura
Working Paper 11296
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11296
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2005

I dedicate this research to the memory of Rudi Dornbusch, the best mentor, colleague and friend a young
economist could have hoped for, and always capable of making others see things differently. This is a draft
of a chapter in the forthcoming Handbook of Economic Growth edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven
Durlauf. I am thankful to Fernando Broner, Gino Gancia and Francesc Ortega for their useful comments and
to Matilde Bombardini, Philip Sauré and Rubén Segura-Cayuela for providing excellent research assistance.
I am also grateful to the Fundación Ramón Areces for its generous financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Jaume Ventura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Global View of Economic Growth
Jaume Ventura
NBER Working Paper No. 11296
April 2005
JEL No. F10, F15, F40, F43, O11, O40, O41

ABSTRACT
This paper integrates in a unified and tractable framework some of the key insights of the field of
international trade and economic growth. It examines a sequence of theoretical models that share a
common description of technology and preferences but differ on their assumptions about trade
frictions. By comparing the predictions of these models against each other, it is possible to identify
a variety of channels through which trade affects the evolution of world income and its geographical
distribution. By comparing the predictions of these models against the data, it is also possible to
construct coherent explanations of income differences and long-run trends in economic growth.
Jaume Ventura
CREI
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005-Barcelona SPAIN
and NBER
jaume.ventura@upf.edu

Table of Contents
0. Introduction 2
1. The integrated economy 5
1.1 A workhorse model 6
1.2 Diminishing returns, market size and economic growth 12
1.3 The effects of economic integration 18

2. Specialization, trade and diminishing returns 25
2.1 Economic growth in autarky 28
2.2 Factor price equalization 32
2.3 Formal aspects of the model 41
2.4 Limits to structural transformation (I): factor proportions 44
2.5 Limits to structural transformation (II): industry productivities 56

3. Transport costs and market size 66
3.1 Nontraded goods and the cost of living 68
3.2 Agglomeration effects 79
3.3 The role of local markets 89

4. Final remarks 92
5. References 95

1

“All theory depends on assumptions that are not quite true. That is
what makes it theory. The art of successful theorizing is to make the
inevitable assumptions in such a way that the final results are not
very sensitive. A “crucial” assumption is one on which the
conclusions do depend sensitively, and it is important that crucial
assumptions be reasonably realistic. When the results of a theory
seem to flow specifically from a special crucial assumption, then if
the assumption is dubious, the results are suspect.”
Robert M. Solow [1956, p. 65]

0. Introduction
The world economy has experienced positive growth for an extended period
of time. Figure 1 plots average world per capita income from 1500 to today, using
data from Maddison’s classic study of long run trends in the world economy. The
most salient feature of the growth process is its nonlinear nature. For most of the
past five hundred years, the world economy settled in a path of stagnation with little
growth. But sometime around the early nineteenth century the world economy
entered a path of sustained and even accelerating growth. While per capita income
grew only by eighteen percent from 1500 to 1820, it has then grown by more than
seven hundred and fifty percent from 1820 to today. And this growth has been far
from steady. It averaged 0.53 percent from 1820 to 1870, and more than doubled to
1.30 from 1870 to 1913. Growth declined to 0.91 percent during the turbulent period
that goes from 1913 to 1950, and then exploded to an unprecedented 2.93 percent
from 1950 to 1973. Since then growth has markedly declined to 1.33 percent, even
though this period still constitutes the second best growth performance in known
human history.
This economic growth has not been distributed equally across the different
regions of the world economy. Figure 2 shows per capita income growth for the
different regions of the world economy in various time periods. Differences in

2

regional growth experiences are quite remarkable.1 Growth took off in Western
Europe and its offshoots in the early nineteenth century and never stopped again.
But other regions took longer to participate in the growth of the world economy.
Perhaps the most dramatic case is that of Asia, which basically did not grow until
1950 just to become then the fastest growing region in the world. Another extreme
case is that of Africa, which still today is unable to enjoy growth rates that would be
considered modest in other regions. Another salient feature of the growth process is
therefore its uneven geographical distribution: in each period there are some regions
that have been able to grow and prosper, while others have been left behind.
World economic growth has been accompanied by more than proportional
growth in world trade. Figure 3 shows the evolution of world trade as a share of
world production since 1870. The picture is quite clear: from 1870 to 1998 growth in
world trade has quadrupled growth in world income. There also appears to be a
strong positive correlation between growth in per capita income and growth in trade.
Figure 4 plots the growth rates of these two variables against each other using
pooled data from various regions and periods. The simple correlation between these
variables is 0.64, and the regression results indicate that regions and periods with X
percent higher than average trade growth tend to have per capita income growth
which is 0.3⋅X higher than average. It almost goes without saying that this statistical
association between income and trade does not imply causation in any direction. But
it strongly suggests that these variables are somehow related, and that there might
be substantial payoffs to working with theories that jointly determine them.2

1

To get a sense of the magnitudes involved, remember that an annual growth rate of G leads per
capita income to multiply itself by a factor F≈exp{G⋅T} in T years. For instance, in the last quarter of the
twentieth century Asia has been able to increase its per capita income by a factor of 2.5, while Latin
America has only managed to increase its per capita income by a factor of 1.2 and Africa has
stagnated. Even a cursory look at the data shows that this disparity in growth performances constitutes
the norm rather than the exception.
2
For empirical work on the (causal) effect of trade on income levels and income growth see Sachs and
Warner [1995], Frankel and Romer [1999], Ades and Glaeser [1999], Alesina, Spolaore, and Wacziarg
[2000 and their chapter in this handbook], Rodriguez and Rodrik [2000], Alcalá and Ciccone [2003 and
2004], and Dollar and Kraay [2003].

3

Despite this apparent relationship between income and trade, a substantial
part of growth theory is built on the assumption that countries live in autarky and that
there is no trade among them.3 This is obviously a dubious assumption. But is it also
a “crucial” one? And if so, what alternative assumptions would be reasonably
realistic? At an abstract level, these are the questions that I attempt to answer here.
A recurring theme throughout this chapter is that the growth experiences of the
different world regions are intimately linked and cannot be analyzed in isolation. We
therefore need a global view of economic growth that looks at the different regions of
the world as parts of a single whole. Formally, this means that we should develop
and systematically study world equilibrium models. These models and their
predictions constitute the specific focus of this chapter. 4
Rather than providing an all-encompassing survey of the field, my goal in
writing this chapter has been to develop a unified and yet tractable framework to
discuss key insights of the fields of international trade and economic growth. In
particular, I examine a sequence of world equilibrium models that share a common
description of technology and preferences but differ on their assumptions about
trade frictions. By comparing the predictions of these models against each other, it is
possible to identify a variety of channels through which trade affects the evolution of
world income and its geographical distribution. By comparing their predictions
against the data, it is also possible to construct coherent explanations of income
differences and long run trends in economic growth. When viewed as a group, these
models show that much is known about the relationship between income and trade.
Despite this, I still feel we are only exploring the tip of the iceberg. The research
program sketched here is ambitious, fun and it could eventually lead to a much
deeper understanding of the forces that drive modern capitalist economies.
3

A brief examination of the different chapters of this handbook should quickly convince anyone
doubting this statement.
4
Without doubt, the seminal book by Grossman and Helpman [1991] is the single most influential
contribution to the development and study of world equilibrium models of the growth process. It heavily
influenced a whole generation of PhD students, like myself, that were searching for dissertation topics
when the book first appeared. But there are, of course, many other important contributions. The
bibliography at the end of this chapter is an (admittedly imperfect) attempt to list all published papers
that use world equilibrium models to study the growth process. I apologize to the authors of any
relevant paper that has been overlooked.

4

The rest of this chapter contains four sections. The first one describes growth
in the integrated economy. This is an imaginary world where trade costs are
negligible and geography does not matter. Section two introduces two trade frictions:
the immobility of production factors and the absence of international financial
markets. Section three adds a third trade friction: costs of transporting goods. The
fourth and final section briefly concludes by taking stock what we have learned and
pointing out potential avenues for further research.

1. The integrated economy
Imagine a world without borders, a world in which all goods and factors can
be transported across different regions at negligible cost. Some industries spread
their production process across many regions searching for the ideal environment for
each specific phase of production. Other industries choose instead to concentrate
production in a single region to exploit increasing returns to scale. Regardless of an
industry’s particular circumstances, its location choice maximizes productivity and is
not affected by the local availability of production factors and/or final customers. If a
region does not have the necessary production factors, these can be imported from
abroad. If a region does not have enough customers, the goods produced can be
exported abroad. In this world, global market forces arbitrage away regional
differences in goods and factor prices and all the gains from trade are reaped. This
imaginary world is the integrated economy, and is the subject of this section.
The integrated economy provides a natural benchmark for the study of
economic growth in an interdependent world. Moreover, its simplicity and elegance
encapsulates the essence of what growth theory is all about: deriving strong results
using minimalist models. In the spirit of the so-called “new growth theory”, I shall use
a model that jointly determines the stock of capital and the level of technology.

5

Admittedly, the model is somewhat lopsided. On the one hand, it contains a fairly
sophisticated formulation of technology that includes various popular models as
special cases. On the other hand, it uses a brutal simplification of the standard
overlapping-generations model as a description of preferences. Despite this, I do not
apologize for the imbalance. A robust theme in growth theory is that the interesting
part of the story is nearly always on the technology side, and rarely on the side of
preferences.
This section develops the basic framework that I use throughout the chapter.
Sub-section 1.1 describes the integrated economy, while sub-section 1.2 derives its
main predictions for world growth. Sub-section 1.3 goes back to a period in which all
the regions of the world lived in autarky, and compares the growth process of this
world with the integrated economy. This is just the first of various attacks to the
question of globalization and its effects on the world economy.

1.1 A workhorse model
Consider a world economy inhabited by two overlapping generations: young
and old. The young work and, if productive, they earn a wage. The old retire and live
off their savings. All generations have size one. There are many final goods used for
consumption and investment, indexed by i∈I. When this does not lead to confusion, I
shall use I to refer both to the set of final goods and also to the number of final
goods. As we shall see later, the production of these final goods requires a
continuum of intermediate inputs. There are two factors of production: labor and
capital. For simplicity, I assume capital depreciates fully within one generation.5 The
world economy contains many regions. But geography has no economic
consequences since goods and factors can be transported from one region to
another at any time at negligible cost.
5

The main role of this assumption is to ensure that investment is always strictly positive. This simplifies
the presentation without substantially affecting the main results.

6

The citizens of this world differ in their preferences and access to education.
St members of the generation born in date t are patient and maximize the expected
utility of old age consumption, while the rest are impatient and maximize the
expected utility of consumption when young. The utility function has consumption as
its single argument, and it is homothetic, strictly concave and identical for all
individuals. Ht members of the generation born in date t can access education and
become productive, while the rest have no access to education and remain
unproductive.6 I refer to St and Ht as “savings” and “human capital”, and I allow them
to vary stochastically over time within the unit interval. Assuming that savings and
human capital are uncorrelated within each generation, we obtain:
(1)

K t +1 = S t ⋅ w t ⋅ Ht

(2)

Ct = (1 − S t ) ⋅ w t ⋅ Ht + rt ⋅ K t

where Kt and Ct are the average or aggregate capital stock and consumption; and wt
and rt are the wage and rental rate of capital. Equation (1) states that the capital
stock equals the savings of the young, which consist of the wage of those that are
patient and productive. The assumption that capital depreciates fully in one
generation implies that the capital stock is equal to investment. Equation (2) says
that consumption equals the wage of the impatient and productive young plus the
return to the savings of the old.7
Consumption and investment can be thought of as composites or aggregates
of the different final goods. A very convenient assumption is that both composites
6

The assumption that labor productivity is either one or zero is extreme, but inessential. We could also
think of Ht as the average labor productivity of the world economy. The assumption that human capital
is not industry specific is widespread, but not entirely innocent. See Basu and Weil [1998] and Brezis,
Krugman and Tsiddon [1993] for interesting implications of relaxing this assumption.
7
This representation of savings and consumption is nothing but a stripped-down version of Modigliani’s
life-cycle theory of savings. It abstracts from other motives for savings such as leaving bequests. These
could be easily re-introduced in the theory through suitable and well-known modifications of the
preferences of individuals. I shall not do this to keep the analysis as simple as possible. I conjecture
that the bulk of the basic intuitions and results presented here would not be meaningfully affected by
these extensions.

7

take the same Cobb-Douglas form with spending shares that vary across industries,
i.e. σi with

∑σ

i

= 1 . Since there is a common ideal price index for consumption and

i∈I

investment, it makes sense to use it as the numeraire and this implies that aggregate
spending is given by Et≡Ct+Kt+1. To sum up, we have that:
(3)

Eit = σi ⋅ E t

(4)

 Pit

σ
 i

1=

∏
i∈I

for all i∈I






σi

where Eit and Pit are the total spending on and the price of the final good of industry
i. Equation (3) states that spending shares are constant, while Equation (4) sets the
common price of consumption and investment equal to one.
Production of final goods uses labor, capital and a continuum of different
varieties of intermediate inputs, indexed by m ∈ [0, Mit ] for all i∈I. As usual, I interpret
the measure of input varieties, Mit for all i∈I, as the degree of specialization or the
technology of the industry. This measure will be determined endogenously as part of
the equilibrium. The technology of industry i can be summarized by these total cost
functions:

(5)

 1
B it = 
 Z it

(6)

b it (m) =

 wt 

⋅ 
 1 − αi 

1−αi

r 
⋅  t 
 αi 

1 + qit (m)  w t 

⋅ 
Z it
 1 − αi 

αi





1−αi

1−βi

βi

 1−εi
Mit
⋅ Qit
⋅  p it (m)1−εi ⋅ dm

0



∫

r 
⋅  t 
 αi 

for all i∈I

αi

for all m ∈ [0, Mit ] and i∈I

where 0≤βi≤1, εi>1 and 0≤αi≤1; Qit is total production of final good i; qit(m) and pit(m)
are the quantity and price of the mth input variety of industry i; and the variables Zit

8

are meant to capture the influence on industry productivity of geography, institutions
and other factors that are exogenous to the analysis.8 I loosely refer to the Zits as
“industry productivities” and assume they vary stochastically over time within a
support that is strictly positive and bounded above. Equation (5) states that the
technology to produce the final good of industry i is a Cobb-Douglas function on
human and physical capital, and intermediate inputs. The latter are aggregated with
a standard CES function. Equation (6) states that the production of intermediates is
also a Cobb-Douglas function on human and physical capital, and that there are
fixed and variable costs.9 I interpret the fixed costs as including both the costs of
building a specialized production plant and the costs of inventing or developing a
new variety of intermediate. An important simplifying assumption is that input
varieties become obsolete in one generation and, as a result, all generations must
incur these fixed costs.10
Since there are constant returns in the production of final goods, it is natural
to assume that final good producers operate under perfect competition. Therefore,
prices and intermediate input demands are given as follows:
∂B it

(7)

Pit =

(8)

qit (m) =

for all i∈I

∂Q it

∂B it
∂p it (m)

for all m ∈ [0, Mit ] and i∈I

Equation (7) states that price equals marginal cost, while Equation (8) uses
Shephard’s lemma to describe the demand for intermediate inputs. Equations (5)
and (8) imply that an increase in the price of a given input variety lowers its market
share. But Equation (3) shows that the lost market share goes entirely to other input
8

Although popular, this is a quite simplistic view of the effects of geography and institutions. See
Levchenko [2004] for an interesting discussion of alternative ways of modeling the effects of institutions.
9
As usual, the fixed cost is paid if and only if there is strictly positive production.
10
This assumption is crucial for tractability, since it eliminates a potentially large set of state variables,
i.e. Mit for all i∈I.

9

varieties of the same industry and does not affect the industry’s overall market
share.
Since the production of intermediate inputs exhibits increasing returns that
are internal to the firm, input producers cannot operate under perfect competition. I
assume instead they operate under monopolistic competition with free entry. This
has the following implications:
e it (m) ∂b it (m)
⋅
eit (m) − 1 ∂qit (m)

(9)

p it (m) =

(10)

p it (m) ⋅ qit (m) = bit (m)

for all m ∈ [0, Mit ] and i∈I
for all m ∈ [0, Mit ] and i∈I

where eit(m) is the price-elasticity of input demand: eit (m) = −

p it (m) ∂qit (m)
⋅
with the
qit (m) ∂p it (m)

derivative in this definition being applied to Equation (8). Equation (9) states that
monopolistic firms charge a markup over marginal cost that is decreasing on the
demand elasticity faced by the firm. As usual, the CES formulation implies that this
demand elasticity is equal to the elasticity of substitution among inputs, i.e. eit(m)=εi.
Equation (10) states that profits must be zero and this is, of course, a direct
implication of assuming free entry.
Finally, we must impose appropriate resource constraints or market-clearing
conditions:
(11)
(12)

(13)

Pit ⋅ Qit = Eit
Ht =

Kt =

for all i∈I

∑H

∂Bit
+
with Hit =
∂w t

∑

with K it =

i∈I

i∈I

it

K it

∂Bit
+
∂rt

10

Mit

∫
0

Mit

∂bit (m)
⋅ dm
∂w t

∂bit (m)
⋅ dm
∂
r
t
0

∫

where Hit and Kit are the labor and capital demanded by industry i. Since the
integrated economy is a closed economy, Equation (11) forces the aggregate supply
of each good to match its demand, while Equations (12)-(13) state that the
aggregate supply of labor and capital must equal their demands. The latter are the
sum of their industry demands, and these are calculated using Shephard’s lemma.
This completes the description of the model. For any admissible initial capital
stock and sequences for St, Ht, and Zit, an equilibrium of the integrated economy
consists of sequences of prices and quantities such that Equations (1)-(13) hold in
all dates and states of nature. The assumptions made ensure that this equilibrium
always exists and is unique. I shall show this by construction in the next section.
The reader might be wondering why I have not formally introduced financial
markets. I have allowed individuals to construct their own capital and use it as a
vehicle to carry on their savings into retirement (a world of family-owned firms?). But
I have not allowed them to trade securities in organized financial markets. The
reason is simply to save notation. The assumptions made ensure that asset trade
does not matter in this world economy. 11 To see this, assume there exist
sophisticated financial markets where all individuals can trade a wide array of statecontingent securities. Naturally, the old would not be able to trade these securities
since they will not be back to settle claims one period later. But the young would not
trade with each other either. Impatient young would not be willing to trade securities
since they do not have income in their old age and are happy to consume all their
income during their youth. Patient young are the only ones willing and able to trade
these securities. But they all have identical preferences and face the same
distribution of returns to capital, and therefore they find no motive to trade with each
other. Thus, we can safely assume the integrated economy contains sophisticated
11
This statement is not entirely correct. It applies to assets whose price reflects only fundamentals, but
without additional assumptions it does not apply to securities whose price contains a bubble. I shall
disregard the possibility of asset bubbles in this chapter, although this is far from an innocuous
assumption. See Ventura [2002] for an example where asset bubbles have an important effect on the
growth of the world economy and its geographical distribution.

11

financial markets that allow individuals to enter contracts that specify exchanges of
various quantities of the different goods to be delivered at various dates and/or
states of nature. It just happens that these financial markets do not make any
difference for consumption and welfare.

1.2 Diminishing returns, market size and economic growth
To study the forces that determine economic growth in the integrated
economy, it is useful to start with a familiar expression:

(14)

K t +1
Q
= st ⋅ t
Kt
Kt

where Qt is the integrated economy’s output or production, i.e. Q t ≡

∑P

it

⋅ Qit ; and

i∈I

st is the economy’s (gross) savings rate, i.e. st ≡

K t +1
. Equation (14) states that the
Qt

(gross) growth rate of the capital stock is equal to the savings rate times the outputcapital ratio or average product of capital. If this product stays above one
asymptotically, the world economy exhibits sustained or long run growth. Otherwise,
economic growth eventually ceases and the world economy stagnates. We shall
study then the determinants of savings and the average product of capital.
To compute the savings rate, remember that industry i receives a share σi of
aggregate spending of which a fraction 1-αi goes to labor. Adding across industries,
it follows that aggregate labor income is wt⋅Ht=(1-α)⋅Qt, where α is the aggregate or
average share of capital, i.e. α ≡

∑ σ ⋅ α . Since only the patient young save, the
i∈I

i

i

savings rate consists of the fraction of labor income in the hands of patient
consumers:

12

(15)

s t = (1 − α ) ⋅ S t

Since the savings rate is bounded above, sustained economic growth requires that
the average product of capital remain above one as the economy grows. But what
determines the aggregate output-capital ratio? I shall answer this question in a few
steps, so as to develop intuition.
The first step consists of finding the output-capital ratio of a given industry as
a function of its technology and factor proportions:12

(16)

Qit  εi 

=
K it  εi − 1

−β i

βi
ε i −1
⋅ Mit

K 
⋅ Zit ⋅  it 
 Hit 

α i −1

for all i∈I

Equation (16) shows the effects of changes in factor proportions on the
industry’s output-capital ratio, holding constant technology. Since there are
diminishing returns to physical and human capital in production, we find the standard
result that increases in the physical to human capital ratio reduce the output-capital
ratio. But technology is endogenously determined in this model, and it depends on
the size of the industry:13

(17)

Mit =

βi
⋅ Z it ⋅ H1it−αi ⋅ K itαi
εi

for all i∈I

Equation (17) shows that increases in factor usage or industry size raise the
incentives to specialize and therefore improve technology. The larger is the size of
the market, the easier it is to recoup the fixed costs of producing a new input variety
12

From Equations (7) and (11) find that Pit⋅Qit=Bit, and use this to eliminate Bit from Equation (5). Then,
solve Equation (9) with Equation (6), substitute into Equation (5) and eliminate factor prices by noting
that the industry factor shares, i.e. wt⋅Hit/Pit⋅Qit and rt⋅Kit/Pit⋅Qit are given by 1-αi and αi, respectively.
13
Symmetry of intermediates and perfect competition in the final goods industry implies that
Mit⋅pit⋅qit=βi⋅Pit⋅Qit; where pit and qit are the common price and quantity of all varieties of intermediates of
industry i. Then, use Equations (6), (9) and (10) to eliminate pit and qit from this expression. Finally,
eliminate factor prices once again by noting that the industry factor shares are 1-αi and αi.

13

and therefore the higher is the number of input varieties that can be sustained in
equilibrium. We can now put these two pieces together and write the output-capital
ratio as follows:

(18)

Qit
K it

= A it ⋅ Hitµi ⋅(1−αi ) ⋅ K itµi ⋅αi −1

for all i∈I

where µi is a measure of the importance of market size effects, i.e. µ i = 1 +
 ε 
and Ait is a measure of industry productivity, i.e. A it =  i 
 ε i − 1

−βi

β
⋅  i
 εi

βi
;
εi − 1

βi

 εi −1 µi

⋅ Z it . I shall



refer to both Zit and Ait as “industry productivities” when this is not a cause for
confusion. Equation (18) summarizes the aggregate industry technology and shows
direct and indirect effects of factor usage on the industry’s output-capital ratio.
Increases in human capital raise the output-capital ratio, as the direct positive effect
of making physical capital scarce is reinforced by the indirect effect of increasing
input variety. Increases in physical capital have an ambiguous effect on the outputcapital ratio, as the direct negative effect of making physical capital abundant and
the positive indirect effect of increasing input variety work in opposite directions. If
diminishing returns are strong and market size effects are weak (µi⋅αi<1) increases in
physical capital reduce the industry’s output-capital ratio. If instead diminishing
returns are weak and market size effects are strong (µi⋅αi≥1) increases in physical
capital raise the industry’s output-capital ratio.
The next step is to aggregate these effects across industries. To do this, note
first that factor allocations and aggregate output are determined as follows:14

14

Equations (19) and (20) are direct implications of the constant factor and spending shares. One way
to think about Equation (21) is as the definition of the Cobb-Douglas aggregate that defines
consumption and investment and therefore underlies Equations (3) and (4). Another way of thinking
about Equation (21) is as an implication of Equations (3), (4) and (11).

14

(19)

Hit = σ i ⋅

1 − αi
⋅ Ht
1− α

for all i∈I

(20)

K it = σ i ⋅

αi
⋅Kt
α

for all i∈I

(21)

Qt =

∏Q
i∈I

σi
it

Equations (19) and (20) show that the equilibrium allocations of human and
physical capital to industry i depend on the corresponding factor share and the size
of the industry. Equation (21) says that output is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of
industry outputs. This is, of course, the production function associated with the cost
function in Equation (4). It is now immediate to substitute Equations (18), (19) and
(20) into Equation (21) to find the aggregate output-capital ratio of the world
economy:

(22)

Qt
= A t ⋅ Hµt ⋅(1− α ) − υ ⋅ K µt ⋅α + υ −1
Kt

where µ is the average value of µi, i.e. µ ≡

∑ σ ⋅ µ ; υ is the covariance between µ
i∈I

and αi, i.e. υ ≡

i

i

i

∑ σ ⋅ (µ − µ) ⋅ (α − α) ; and A is an aggregate measure of
i∈I

i

productivity, i.e. A t ≡

i

∏
i∈I

t

i

σi

 µ  1 − α µ i ⋅(1− α i )  α µ i ⋅α i

i
⋅ i 
⋅ A it  . Equation (22) is the
σ i i ⋅ 

 1− α 
α



aggregate production function and will play an important role in what follows. It
shows that the industry intuitions on the effects of changes in factor usage carry on
to the aggregate effects of changes in factor supplies. While increases in human
capital unambiguously raise the output-capital ratio, increases in physical capital
have ambiguous effects.15 If the “representative” industry has strong diminishing
returns and weak market-size effects (µ⋅α+υ<1) physical capital accumulation
15

Note that µ⋅(1-α)-υ≥0.

15

reduces the aggregate output-capital ratio. If instead the “representative” industry
has weak diminishing returns and strong market-size effects (µ⋅α+υ≥1) physical
capital accumulation raises the output-capital ratio.
We are ready now to characterize the process of economic growth in the
integrated economy. Substituting Equation (22) into Equation (14), we obtain the
following law of motion for the capital stock:

(23)

K t +1 = s t ⋅ A t ⋅ Hµt ⋅(1− α ) − υ ⋅ K µt ⋅α + υ
Equation (23) shows that the integrated economy behaves as if it were a

Solow model with a Cobb-Douglas production function that exhibits increasing
returns to scale, i.e. the sum of the share coefficients is µ≥1. Figures 5 and 6
illustrate the dynamics of the stock of physical capital with the help of two simple
examples. The first example is the “deterministic” world where savings, human
capital and productivity are constant over time, i.e. {st,Ht,At}={s,H,A} for all t. The
second example is the “stochastic” world where savings, human capital and
productivity fluctuate between a “bad” state with {st,Ht,At}={sB,HB,AB} and a “good”
state with {st,Ht,At}={sG,HG,AG}; with s G ⋅ A G ⋅ HµG⋅(1−α )− υ > s B ⋅ A B ⋅ HµB⋅(1−α )− υ . The central
point of these examples is to show that economic growth solves a tension between
diminishing returns and market size effects.
Figure 5 shows the case in which diminishing returns are strong and marketsize effects are weak, i.e. µ⋅α+υ<1. The top panel depicts the evolution of the
“deterministic” world. There is a unique steady state and the stock of physical capital
converges monotonically towards it from any initial position. The steady state is
stable because increases (decreases) in the stock of physical capital lower (raise)
the output-capital ratio and lead to a lower (higher) growth rate. The bottom panel
shows that the “stochastic” world exhibits similar dynamics, with the stock of physical
capital monotonically converging to a steady state interval, rather than a steady state

16

value. Once the stock of physical capital is trapped within this interval, its growth rate
fluctuates between positive and negative values and averages zero in the long run.
These examples illustrate why sustained growth is not possible if diminishing returns
are strong and market size effects are weak.
Figure 6 shows the case in which diminishing returns are weak and marketsize effects are strong, i.e. µ⋅α+υ≥1. The top panel shows the “deterministic” world
again. There is unique steady state that is unstable. If the stock of physical capital
starts above the steady state, it grows without bound at an accelerating rate. If it
starts below, the stock of physical capital contracts over time also at an accelerating
rate. The steady state is now unstable because increases (decreases) in the stock of
physical capital raise (lower) the output-capital ratio and lead to a higher (lower)
growth rate. The bottom panel shows that the “stochastic” world also exhibits similar
dynamics. One difference however is that there is no steady state. Instead, there is a
threshold interval. If the stock of physical capital is above (below) this interval, it
grows (contracts) at an accelerating rate. If the stock of physical capital starts within
the threshold interval, it fluctuates within it until it eventually exits. This happens with
probability one, and only luck determines when this exit occurs and whether the
world economy exits above and enters an expansionary path or, alternatively, it exits
below and enters a contractionary path. Therefore, sustained growth is possible (but
not necessary) if diminishing returns are weak and market size effects are strong.
This model suggests a simple account of the history of the world economy
since the 1500s. It is based on the “stochastic” world of Figure 6 and it goes as
follows: for centuries, the size of the world economy was too small to generate
sustained growth. Located within the threshold interval, the world economy was
subject to periodic expansions and contractions with virtually zero average growth.
This is consistent with Maddison’s calculation that the world economy grew only
about eighteen percent from 1500 to 1820. But this was an unstable situation in the
very long run. The Industrial Revolution marks the moment in which, after a series of
favorable shocks, the world economy reached enough size to exit the threshold

17

interval and started traveling on the path of accelerating growth reported in Figure 1.
As a result of this successful exit, the world economy grew more than seven hundred
and fifty percent from 1820 to 1998.
Although suggestive, this account is far too sketchy and incomplete to be
taken seriously. Moreover, I find highly improbable that the last five hundred years of
the world economy can be understood in terms of a model that postulates negligible
costs of transporting goods and factors and constant world population. Surely the
demographic revolution and the process of globalization have both played central
roles in shaping the growth process during this period. This chapter is not the place
for a discussion of the growth effects of the demographic revolution.16 But it is
definitely the place to study the growth effects of globalization, and we turn to this
topic next.

1.3 The effects of economic integration
Assume the world economy initially consisted of many regions or locations
separated by geographical obstacles that made the costs of transporting goods and
factors among them prohibitive. As a result, these regions were forced to live in
autarky. I index these regions by c∈C, and let them differ on their savings, human
capital, industry productivities and initial capital stock, i.e. on Sc,t, Hc,t, Zc,it and Kc,0.
When this does not lead to confusion, I shall use C to refer to both the set of regions
and also to the number of regions. Throughout, I denote world aggregates by
omitting the region sub-index. Typically, world aggregates refer to the sum of all
corresponding regional variables. For instance, world aggregate savings, human and

16

In this model, a sustained increase in population would generate sustained growth even if α⋅µ+υ<1.
The reason is that, holding constant both factor endowments and productivity, population growth
increases the size of the market and this raises income. I have ruled out this possibility by simply
assuming that the world population is constant. Given the purpose of this chapter, I think this is not a
“crucial” assumption. But it might be so in other contexts. See Jones’ chapter in this volume for a
thorough and clear discussion of scale effects in growth models.

18

physical capital are S t =

∑S

c∈C

c ,t

, Ht =

∑H

c∈C

c ,t

and K t =

∑K

c∈C

c ,t

. But there will be

some exceptions. For instance, the relationship between Zc,it and the corresponding
world aggregate Zit is a bit more intricate and will be explained shortly.
Although it is not really necessary to take a stand on the geographical
distribution of population, I assume throughout that it is equally distributed across
regions. This simplifies somewhat the presentation since absolute and per capita
regional comparisons coincide. For instance, if Sc,t>Sc’,t then c also has higher
savings per person than c’. Note also that, as the number of regions becomes
arbitrarily large, the size of each of them becomes arbitrarily small and the effects of
shocks to their characteristics on world aggregates become arbitrarily small. This
limiting case is usually referred to as the small economy assumption.
The model of globalization considered here is embarrassingly simple: at date
t=0, all the geographical obstacles to trade suddenly disappear forever and the costs
of transporting goods and factors fall from prohibitive to negligible. What are the
effects of such a dramatic reduction in transport costs on world economic growth and
its geographical distribution? To answer this question, we must characterize the
growth process in the autarkic world economy and in the integrated world economy
and compare them. Although this way of modeling globalization and its effects is
almost a caricature, it turns out to be quite useful to develop intuitions that survive as
we move to more sophisticated and realistic models.
In the world of autarky, each region constituted a smaller version of the
integrated economy. Therefore, the world economy at t<0 can be described by:17

(24)

Yc,t = A c,t ⋅ Hcµ,⋅t(1− α ) − υ ⋅ K cµ,⋅tα + υ

for all c∈C

(25)

K c,t +1 = sc,t ⋅ A c,t ⋅ Hµc,⋅t(1− α ) − υ ⋅ K µc,⋅tα + υ

for all c∈C

17

Equation (25) is an analogue to Equation (23), while Equation (24) follows from the region
counterparts to Equation (22) and the fact that Yc,t=Qc,t=Cc,t+Kc,t in autarky.

19

where Yc,t is the income of the region and, in autarky, it coincides with its production
and spending, i.e. Yc,t=Qc,t=Ec,t; and Ac,t is the corresponding measure of regional
productivity, i.e. A c,t ≡

A c,it

 ε 
= i 
 ε − 1
 i


− βi

β
⋅ i
ε
 i

∏
i∈I

 µ  1 − α µ i ⋅(1− α i )  α µ i ⋅α i

i
⋅ i 
⋅ A c,it 
σi i ⋅ 

 1− α 
α



σi

with

βi

 εi −1 µi

⋅ Z c,it . Equations (24) and (25) have been discussed at



length already and need no further comment.
In the integrated economy it is not possible in general to determine the
production or spending located in a given region. Since goods and factors can move
at negligible cost, any geographical distribution of production and factors that
ensures all production takes place in the regions with the highest industry
productivity is a possible equilibrium. Despite this indeterminacy, prices and
aggregate quantities are uniquely determined as shown in section 1.2. This means
that it is possible to track the stock of physical capital owned by the original
inhabitants of region c and their descendants as well as their income:18

(26)


H
K 
Yc,t = (1 − α ) ⋅ c,t + α ⋅ c,t  ⋅ A t ⋅ Hµt ⋅(1− α ) − υ ⋅ K αt ⋅µ + υ
Ht
Kt 


(27)

K c , t +1 =

Sc,t ⋅ Hc,t
S t ⋅Ht

⋅ st ⋅ A t ⋅ Hµt ⋅(1− α ) − υ ⋅ K αt ⋅µ + υ

for all c∈C
for all c∈C

for all c∈C and t≥0; and At is a measure of world productivity. Remember that we
have now specified a set of industry productivities for each region, Zc,it. But we only
specified one set of industry productivities for the integrated economy in section 1.1.
18
Equation (26) follows from adding the income from human and physical capital of the inhabitants of
the region, and noting that aggregate or world shares of human and physical capital are constant and
equal to 1-α and α, respectively. Equation (27) follows from Equations (1) and (23), and the observation
that wages are the same for all productive workers of the world. Without loss of generality, I keep
assuming that there is no trade in securities.

20

The reason was that industries never locate in a region that offers less than the
highest possible productivity. As a result, in the integrated world economy the only
industry productivities that matter are the highest ones, i.e. Zit = max { Z c,it } . This
c∈C

implies that At≥Ac,t for all c∈C, and we can interpret aggregate productivity not as
average productivity, but instead as the highest possible productivity or the world
productivity frontier. With this in mind, Equation (27) traces the holdings of capital of
the original inhabitants of region c and their descendants, while Equation (26)
describes their income.
We are ready now to examine the growth effects of economic integration.
Consider first the static or impact effects on the incomes of regions. A bit of
straightforward algebra shows that:19

(28)

 YcI,0
ln A
Y
 c,0


Hc,0
K c,0 

µ −1
(
1
)
−
α
⋅
+
α
⋅


 H10−α ⋅ K 0α 
 A0 
K0 
H
0
 = ln
 ≥0

 + ln

1−α
α
 A  + ln

 H1−α ⋅ K α 

c
,
0


,0
c ,0 
H
K 
 244
3
 14
 c4
4
24
44
3
  c,0  ⋅  c,0   144
 K  
  H 
higher
increased
0


0 
market size
productivity 1444
4
4244444
3
improved factor
allocation

where YcI ,0 is the actual income of the inhabitants of region c at date t=0, and YcA,0 is

the income they would have had at date t=0 if globalization had not taken place.
Since each of the terms in Equation (28) is non-negative, the first result we obtain is
that the overall impact or static gains from economic integration are non-negative as
well.
These gains can be decomposed into three sources corresponding to each of
the terms of Equation (28). The first one shows the growth of income that results
19

To derive this expression I have assumed a zero cross-industry correlation between αi and µi, i.e.
υ=0. This parameter restriction is useful because it allows us to unambiguously disentangle the
“increased-market-size” and “improved-factor-allocation” effects.

21

from moving industries from low to high productivity locations. This term would
vanish if region c had the highest productivity in all industries. The second term
shows the growth of income that results from relocating factors away from those
regions and/or industries in which they were abundant in autarky into those in which
they were scarce. This term would vanish if region c had world average factor
proportions. The third term shows the growth in income that is due to an increase in
market size that allows industries to support a higher degree of specialization. This
term would vanish if the size of region c were arbitrarily large with respect to the rest
of the world. An implication of Equation (28) is that the static gains from economic
integration are greater for regions with low productivity, extreme factor proportions
and modest amounts of physical and human capital.
If coupled with an appropriate transfer scheme, globalization leads to a
Pareto improvement in the world economy. Equation (28) shows that, with the same
production factors, the integrated economy generates more output than the world of
autarky. It is therefore possible to implement a transfer scheme that keeps constant
the income of all current and future young and gives more income to all current and
future old. Under this transfer scheme, investment and the stock of physical capital
would be unaffected by economic integration. But the production and consumption of
all generations born at date t=0 or later would increase. Of course, there exist many
alternative transfer schemes that ensure that globalization benefits all. Moreover,
since each region gains from trade there exist Pareto-improving transfer schemes
that can be implemented without the need for inter-regional transfers. That is,
ensuring that globalization generates a Pareto improvement does not require
compensation from one region to another.
How “large” the transfer scheme must be to ensure that economic integration
leads to a Pareto improvement? The answer is “not much” if most of the gains from
economic integration come from higher productivity and increased market size. The
reason is that in this case all factors share in the gains from integration. The required
transfer scheme could be “substantial” if the gains from integration come mostly from

22

improved factor allocation. This is because within each region the owners of the
abundant factor obtain more than proportional gains from integration while the
owners of the region’s scarce factor might have losses. In this case, implementing a
Pareto improvement requires a transfer from the former to the latter.
Without a transfer scheme, it is relatively straightforward to trace the dynamic
effects of economic integration. Assume for simplicity that the world contains many
symmetric regions so that before integration all of them had the same law of motion.
The top panel of Figure 7 shows the effects of economic integration in the
“deterministic” world when diminishing returns are strong and market size effects are
weak. Economic integration raises the steady state stock of physical capital and sets
up a period of high growth that eventually ends. It is straightforward to see that the
effects would be similar in the “stochastic” world, with economic integration
permanently raising the steady state interval. Using the jargon of growth theory, if
µ⋅α+υ<1 economic integration has level effects on income. The bottom panel of

Figure 7 shows the opposite case in which diminishing returns are weak and market
size effects are strong. In this case, economic integration shifts down the steady
state value, increasing the growth rate permanently. Once again, it is straightforward
to see that the effects would be similar in the “stochastic” world, with trade shifting
the threshold interval to the left. Using again the jargon of growth theory, if µ⋅α+υ≥1
integration has growth effects on income.
It is tempting now to revisit our earlier account of the history of the world
economy since the 1500s, and propose an alternative version which is also based
on the “stochastic” world with µ⋅α+υ>1. It goes as follows: for centuries, the world
economy consisted of a collection of autarkic regions that were too small to sustain
economic growth. Located within the threshold interval, these regions were subject
to periodic expansions and contractions with virtually zero average growth. Once
again, this is consistent with Maddison’s calculation that the world economy grew
only about eighteen percent from 1500 to 1820. The Industrial Revolution occurs
when a series of reductions in trade costs between some British regions raised their

23

combined size above the threshold interval and set them on the path of accelerating
growth. As time went on, more and more regions joined the initial core and the
Industrial Revolution spread throughout Britain and moved into France, Germany
and beyond. It is therefore a reduction of trade costs and the progressive extension
of markets that made possible sustained growth and allowed the world economy to
grow more than seven hundred and fifty percent from 1820 to 1998. This might also
explain why this growth in world income was accompanied by an even higher growth
in world trade.20
This view of the development process is also broadly consistent with the
general observations about inequality between center and periphery discussed in the
introduction. Regions that join the integrated economy (the “center”) become rich
and take off into steady growth. Regions that do not join the integrated economy (the
“periphery”) are left behind, technologically backward and capital poor. As more and
more regions enter the integrated economy, those that are left behind become
relatively poorer and world inequality increases. Eventually all regions will enter the
integrated economy and world inequality will decline. Therefore, this model
generates an inverted U-shape or Kuznets curve, with world inequality rising in the
first stages of world development and declining later. Pritchett [1997], Bourguignon
and Morrison [2002] and others have shown that world inequality has increased from
1820 to now. It remains to be seen if this inequality will decline in the future.
This stylized model also illustrates some of the conflicts that globalization
might create. It follows from Equation (28) that the gains from trade are large for
regions whose factor proportions are far from the world average. Ceteris paribus,
this means that regions in the center would like that new entrants into the integrated
economy to move the world average factor proportions away from them. In fact,
unless productivity and market size effects are substantial, the entry of a large region
creates losses to other regions with similar factor proportions. This implies, for
instance, that the Chinese process of economic integration should be seen with
20

The word “might” reflects the earlier observation that regional production and therefore trade is
indeterminate in the integrated economy.

24

some concern in countries with similar factor proportions such as Mexico and
Indonesia, but with hope in the European Union or the United States.
This view of globalization and growth leads to a powerful prescription for
economic development: open up and integrate into the world economy. I believe this
is a fundamentally sound policy prescription, and history is largely consistent with it.
But there are a number of important qualifications that this stylized model cannot
capture. Integrating into the world economy is not an “all-or-nothing” type of affair in
which regions move overnight from autarky to complete integration. The process of
economic integration is slow and full of treacherous steps. Obtaining general
prescriptions for development in a world of imperfect integration has proved to be a
much more challenging task. I shall come back to this important point later, but we
must first introduce trade frictions into the story.

2. Specialization, trade and diminishing returns
Let us revise our model of globalization. As in section 1.3, assume that at
date t=0 the costs of transporting goods across regions suddenly fall from prohibitive
to negligible. Unlike section 1.3, assume now that the costs of transporting factors
across regions remain prohibitive after date t=0. An implication of this setup is that
globalization equalizes goods prices across regions, but it does not necessarily
equalize factor prices. This particular view of globalization has a longstanding
tradition in trade theory and the goal of this section is to analyze it.
Assuming that human capital is immobile internationally is somewhat dubious,
as there are some well-known examples of large contingents of people working
overseas. But most of the results discussed here would go through with only minor
changes under the weaker and reasonably realistic assumption that international

25

flows of people are quantity constrained, although not necessarily at zero.21
Assuming that physical capital is immobile is appropriate for buildings and structures
and, probably, not too unreasonable for the most important types of machinery and
equipment. Moreover, assuming that existing physical capital cannot be transported
does not preclude physical capital to effectively “move” across regions over time, as
it declines in some regions through depreciation and increases in others through
investment.22
If physical capital is immobile, pieces of capital located in different regions
might offer different return distributions. This opens up a role for financial markets.
Although the old and the impatient young still have no incentive to trade securities,
the patient young now have a motive. Those that are located in regions where
physical capital offers an attractive distribution of returns want to sell securities and
use the proceeds to finance additional purchases of domestic physical capital. Those
patient young that are located in regions where physical capital offers an unattractive
distribution of returns want to buy securities and reduce their holdings of domestic
physical capital. And, regardless of their location, the patient young want to buy and
sell securities in order to share regional risks. Thus, the immobility of physical capital
creates a potentially important role for international financial markets: the
geographical reallocation of investments and production risks.
Despite this, I will not let international financial markets play this role. This
failure of financial markets could be due to technological motives or informational
problems of various sorts. But I prefer instead to think of it as being caused by lack
of incentives to enforce international contracts. In the integrated economy,
21

Of course, this becomes a weak or empty excuse if quantity constraints respond to economic
incentives in a systematic way. See Lundborg and Segerstrom [2002] and Ortega [2004] for models in
which this happens.
22
Remember that we have assumed that physical capital depreciates in one generation. Therefore,
assuming physical capital is immobile only means that it is not possible at date t to move around the
stock of physical capital created and deployed at date t-1, and that is being used for production at date
t. But it is certainly possible to choose where to deploy the new stock of physical capital created at date
t that will be used for production at date t+1. The effects of physical capital immobility would be more
severe quantitatively with a slower rate of depreciation. Note also that immobility matters only because
physical capital is irreversible or putty-clay. In fact, it would be logically inconsistent to assume that
physical capital is immobile if it could be converted back into mobile goods.

26

individuals could enter into contracts that specify exchanges of various quantities of
the different goods to be delivered at various dates and/or states of nature. It is
standard convention to refer to the signing of contracts that involve only
contemporaneous deliveries as “goods” trade, while the signing of contracts that
involve future (and perhaps state contingent) deliveries is usually referred to as
“asset” trade. Both types of trade require sufficiently low costs of transporting goods.
But asset trade also requires that the signing parties credibly commit to fulfill their
future contractual obligations. The domestic court system punishes those that violate
contracts, thus creating the credibility or trust that serves as the foundation for
domestic financial markets. But there is no international court system that endows
sovereigns with the same sort of credibility, and this hampers international financial
markets. I assume next this problem is so severe that it precludes all asset trade.
Unlike the integrated economy, in the world analyzed in this section each
region’s total production, spending and capital stock are always determined. Since
trade balances and current accounts are zero, the income of each region equals the
value of both its production and spending, i.e. Yc,t=Qc,t=Ec,t. Since the only vehicle for
savings available to the young is physical capital, analogues to Equations (1)-(2)
apply to each region. We can therefore write regional incomes and the laws of
motion of regional capital stocks as follows:
(29)

Yc,t = w c,t ⋅ Hc,t + rc,t ⋅ K c,t

for all c∈C

(30)

K c,t +1 = S c,t ⋅ w c,t ⋅ Hc,t

for all c∈C

These Equations apply to all the models of this section, including the world of
autarky before globalization. Therefore, a complete analysis of the world income
distribution and its evolution requires us to determine the cross-section of factor
prices, i.e. wc,t and rc,t as a function of the state of the world economy. The latter
consists of the savings, factor endowments and industry productivities of all regions

27

of the world, i.e. Sc,t, Hc,t, Kc,t and Zc,it for all i∈I and all c∈C; plus the date, since trade
in goods is only possible if t≥0.
The rest of this section is organized as follows. Sub-section 2.1 studies
further the world of autarky, while the rest of the section studies the world after
globalization. In sub-section 2.2, we explore a world in which frictions to factor
mobility and asset trade are not binding after globalization. Sub-section 2.3 provides
a formal description of the model. Sub-sections 2.4 and 2.5 examine worlds where
frictions to factor mobility and asset trade remain binding after globalization.

2.1 Economic growth in autarky
The analysis of the effects of globalization starts in the world of autarky. As
explained in section 1.3, before globalization each region is a smaller and less
efficient version of the integrated economy and factor prices can be written as:23

(31)

w c,t = (1 − α ) ⋅ A c,t ⋅ Hµc,⋅(t1−α )− υ−1 ⋅ K cµ,⋅tα + υ

for all c∈C

(32)

rc,t = α ⋅ A c,t ⋅ Hcµ,⋅(t1−α )− υ ⋅ K cµ,⋅tα + υ−1

for all c∈C

Equations (31)-(32) describe the cross-section of factor prices. Holding
constant factor endowments, regions with higher than average industry productivities
have higher than average factor prices. Holding constant industry productivities, the
relationship between factor prices and factor endowments depends on two familiar
forces: diminishing returns and market size. For a given set of industry technologies,
an increase in one factor makes this factor relatively more abundant, lowering its
price and raising the price of the other factor. But an increase in one factor also
raises income and demand in all industries, improving industry technologies and

23

These Equations follow from Equation (24) and the observation that the shares of human capital and
physical capital are 1-α and α.

28

raising the prices of both factors. Equations (31)-(32) put these two effects together.
Hence, regions with higher-than-average human capital have higher-than-average
rental rates for all parameter values, and also higher-than-average wages if µ⋅(1-α)υ>1. Similarly, regions with higher-than-average physical capital have higher-thanaverage wages for all parameter values, and also higher-than-average rental rates if
µ⋅α+υ>1.
It follows from Equations (29)-(32) that, before globalization, we can write
regional incomes and capital stocks as follows:24

(33)

Yc,t = A c,t ⋅ Hcµ,⋅(t1−α )− υ ⋅ K cµ,⋅tα + υ

for all c∈C

(34)

K c,t +1 = sc,t ⋅ A c,t ⋅ Hµc,⋅t(1− α ) − υ ⋅ K µc,⋅tα + υ

for all c∈C

Equation (33) shows the income of regions, and it can be used to determine
the relative contribution of factor endowments and productivity to income differences.
For instance, assume income is λ times higher than average in a given region. It
could be that in this region human capital is λ1/(µ⋅(1-α)-υ) higher than average or that
physical capital is λ1/(µ⋅α+υ) higher than average. It could also be that the region’s
productivity in industry i is λ1/ σ i ⋅µ i times higher than average.25 Naturally, it could also
be any combination of these factors.
Equation (34) is the law of motion of the capital stocks and can be used to
analyze the dynamic response to a region-specific shock to savings, human capital
and/or industry productivity. Positive (and permanent) shocks to any of these
variables raise the region’s capital stock and income. As Equation (34) shows, these
shocks have growth effects if α⋅µ+υ≥1, but only have level effects if α⋅µ+υ<1.
Regardless of the case, the effects of these shocks never spill over to other regions.

24

These Equations are identical to Equations (24)-(25) and have been reproduced here only for
convenience.
25
Here industry productivity means Zc,it, and not Ac,it.

29

Assume the joint distribution of savings, human capital and industry
productivities is stationary. Then, Equations (33)-(34) imply a strong connection
between the cross-sectional and time-series properties of the growth process.. If
diminishing returns are strong and market size effects are weak, i.e. if µ⋅α+υ<1,
world average income (Yt) and its regional distribution (Yc,t/Yt) are both stationary. If
instead diminishing returns are weak and market size effects are strong, i.e.
µ⋅α+υ>1, world average income and its regional distribution are both non-stationary.
This result provides a tight link between the long run properties of the growth
process and the stability of the world income distribution. A weaker version of this
result assumes that the world productivity frontier (At) is non-stationary but regional
productivity gaps (Ac,t/At) are stationary. Under this assumption, world average
income is non-stationary even if diminishing returns are strong and market size
effects are weak.
It is commonplace among growth theorists to interpret cross-country data
from the vantage point of the autarky model.26 One influential example is the work of
Mankiw, Romer and Weil [1992]. They combined Equations (33)-(34) to obtain an
Equation relating income to savings, human capital, country productivity, and lagged
income; and estimated it using data for a large cross-section of countries. They
interpreted the residuals of this regression as measuring differences in country
productivities and measurement error, and concluded that differences in savings and
human capital explain (in a statistical sense) about 80 percent of the cross-country
variation in income. Their procedure imposed the restriction µ=1 (and therefore υ=0)
and yielded an estimate of α of about two thirds. Hall and Jones [1999] and Klenow
and Rodríguez-Clare [1997] interpreted this high estimate of α as a signal that the
regression was miss-specified. Their argument was that savings, human capital and
productivity were positively correlated and the omission of productivity from the
26

Unfortunately, the absence of direct and reliable measures of productivity precludes carrying out
formal tests of the theory. The most popular empirical response to this problem has been to simply
assume the theory is correct and use available data to make inferences about the determinants of the
world income distribution and its evolution.

30

regression biased upwards the estimate of α. These authors used Equations (33)(34) to calibrate country productivities keeping the assumption that µ=1, but instead
imposing a value of α of about one third.27 With these productivities at hand, they
found that about two thirds of the variation in incomes reflects variation in
productivity, and only one third can be attributed to cross-country variation in savings
and human capital.
Another influential example of the use of the autarky model to interpret
available data is Barro [1991] who found that, after controlling for human capital and
saving rates, poor countries tend to grow faster than rich ones. This finding has been
labeled “conditional convergence” since it implies that, if two countries have the
same country characteristics, they converge to the same level of income.28 If
Equations (33)-(34) provide a good description of the real world, observing
conditional convergence is akin to finding that µ⋅α+υ<1.29 Many have therefore
interpreted the conditional convergence finding as evidence that diminishing returns
are strong relative to market size effects.
These inferences about the nature of the growth process heavily rely on
Equations (33)-(34), and these Equations have been derived from a theoretical
model that assumes that all regions of the world live in autarky. This assumption is
obviously unrealistic. Is it also crucial? And if so, what alternative assumption would
be reasonably realistic? I next turn to these questions. But the script should not be
surprising. Globalization (as described at the beginning of this section) has profound
effects on the world income distribution and its evolution. The newfound ability of
regions to specialize and trade alters, sometimes quite dramatically, the effects of
27

This value corresponds to the share of capital in income in national accounts. This sort of calibration
exercise is known as development accounting. Caselli’s chapter in this volume is the definitive source
on this topic.
28
As Barro himself emphasized, this does not mean that per capita incomes tend to converge
unconditionally since countries with high initial incomes also tend to have good country characteristics.
There is a large number of papers that try to determine whether there is conditional convergence and
measure how fast it takes place. See, for instance, Knight, Loayza and Villanueva [1993] and Caselli,
Esquivel and Lefort [1996].
29
An additional maintained assumption of this line of research is that savings, human capital and
productivity are jointly stationary.

31

factor endowments and industry productivities on factor prices. This is most clearly
illustrated in subsection 2.2, which depicts a world in which goods trade allows the
world economy to replicate the prices and allocations of the integrated economy. Of
course, this is not a general feature of goods trade. Subsection 2.3 prepares the
ground for the analysis of worlds where economic integration is imperfect and factor
prices vary across regions. This analysis is then performed in subsections 2.4 and
2.5.

2.2 Factor price equalization
A good starting point for the analysis of the world economy after globalization
is to ask whether restricting factor mobility matters at all. Somewhat surprisingly, the
answer is “perhaps not”. As Paul Samuelson [1948, 1949] showed more than half a
century ago, goods trade might be all that is needed to ensure global efficiency.
When this happens, we say that the equalization of goods prices leads to the
equalization of factor prices. I shall describe Samuelson’s result and its implications
step by step, so as to develop intuition.30
Consider the set of all possible partitions of the world factor endowments at
date t, Ht and Kt, among the different regions of the world or, for short, the set of all
possible factor distributions. This set is formally defined as follows:

(35)


D t ≡  (Hc,t , K c,t ) for all c ∈ C Hc,t ≥ 0, K c,t ≥ 0 s. t.


∑H
c∈C

c ,t

= Ht and

∑K
c∈C

c ,t


= Kt 


Define FPEt as the subset of Dt for which the world economy replicates the
prices and allocations of the integrated economy. To construct FPEt, fix dt∈Dt and
consider the integrated economy prices and quantities. At these prices, consumers
30

The analysis here follows a long tradition in international trade. See Norman and Dixit [1989],
Helpman and Krugman [1985] and Davis [1995].

32

are willing to purchase the integrated economy quantities of the different goods and
also have enough income to do so. At these prices, producers located in regions
with the highest industry productivities are willing to produce the integrated economy
quantities of the different goods using the integrated economy quantities of factors. If
these producers can find these quantities of factors in their regions, the integrated
economy prices and quantities are in fact the equilibrium ones and we say that
dt∈FPEt. Otherwise, the integrated economy prices and quantities cannot be the

equilibrium ones and we say that dt∉FPEt. Therefore, the set FPEt can be formally
defined as follows:

x c,it (m) = 1,
FPE t ≡  d t ∈ D t ∃x c,it (m) ≥ 0 , x Fc,it ≥ 0 with

c∈C

∑

x c,it = (1 − βi ) ⋅
(36)

x Fc,it

β
+ i ⋅
Mit

∑x
c∈C

F
c ,it

= 1 and

Mit

∫x

c ,it (m) ⋅ dm;

such that :

0

(R1) x c,it = 0 if Z c,it < max {Z it };
(R2) Hc,t =

∑x
i∈I

c∈C

c ,it

⋅ Hit and K c,t =

∑x
i∈I

c ,it

⋅ K it ; and


(R3) x c,it (m) ∈ {0,1} for all m ∈ [0, Mit ] and i ∈ I 

where Mit, Hit and Kit are defined in Equations (17), (19) and (20). To understand this
definition, interpret xc,it as the share of the world production of industry i located in
region c at date t; and note that this share includes the production of intermediate
inputs, x c,it (m) , and final goods, x Fc,it . Definition (36) then says that dt∈FPEt if it is
possible to achieve full employment of human and physical capital in all regions
producing only in those regions with the highest productivity (requirement R1), using
the same factor proportions as in the integrated economy (requirement R2), and
without incurring the fixed cost of production more than once (requirement R3). The
set FPEt is never empty since the factor distribution that applies in the integrated
economy always belongs to it. In fact, the set FPEt consists of all the factor

33

distributions that are equilibria of the integrated economy. The larger is the size of
the indeterminacy in the geographical distribution of production and factors of the
integrated economy, the larger is the size of FPEt.

The patterns of production and trade that support factor price equalization
after globalization are easy to state and quite intuitive:

1. In regions where human (physical) capital is relatively abundant, production
shifts towards industries that, on average, use human (physical) capital
intensively. Excess production in these industries is converted into exports that
finance imports of industries that use physical (human) capital intensively.

Example 2.1.1: Consider a world economy with H- and K-industries, such that
IH∪IK=I and IH∩IK=∅. Assume αi=αH if i∈IH, and αi=αK if i∈IK; and αH<αK; and βi=0

for all i∈I. All regions have the same industry productivities, but A-regions have a
higher ratio of human to physical capital than B-regions. Factor price equalization is
possible if the differences in factor proportions between A- and B-regions are not too
large relative to the differences in factor proportions between H- and K-industries.
Figure 8 shows the geometry of this example. Since all regions have the same factor
costs, industries use the same factor proportions in all regions. A-regions contain a
more than proportional fraction of the integrated economy’s H-industry, and a less
than proportional fraction of the K-industry. The opposite happens in B-regions. This
is how specialization and trade ensure that in this world economy factor endowments
are used efficiently.

2. In industries where a region’s productivity is less than the world’s highest,
production falls to zero and domestic spending shifts towards imports. To finance

34

the latter, production expands in industries in which the region has the highest
possible productivity and the excess production is exported abroad.

Example 2.1.2: Consider a world economy with H- and K-industries, such that
IH∪IK=I and IH∩IK=∅. Assume αi=αH if i∈IH, and αi=αK if i∈IK; and αH<αK; and βi=0

for all i∈I. Within each type there are “advanced” and “backward” industries. Aregions have the highest possible productivity in all industries, regardless of whether
they are “advanced” or “backward”. B-regions have the highest possible productivity
only in “backward” industries. Factor price equalization is possible if the combined
factor endowments of A-regions are large enough and the subset of “advanced”
industries is not too large. Figure 9 shows the geometry of this example. Since all
regions have the same factor costs, only producers located in regions with the
highest productivity can survive international competition. A-regions produce the
integrated economy quantities of “advanced” goods and a fraction of the integrated
economy quantities of “backward” goods. B-regions produce the remaining
quantities of “backward” goods. This is how specialization and trade ensure that in
this world economy production takes place only where industry productivities are
higher.

3. Within each industry, only one region produces each input variety and exports it
to all other regions. If an industry is split among various regions, there is likely to
be two-way trade within the same industry.31

Example 2.1.3: Consider any of the world economies of the previous examples,
but assume now that βi=1 for all i∈I. Assume dt∈FPEt. Since the fixed costs of
31

I say “likely to be” because a region might produce the final good for domestic use, and import the
necessary input varieties. It is usual in trade models to set βi=1 and then drop the “likely to be” from the
statement.

35

producing inputs contain the cost of building a specialized production plant, all input
producers choose to concentrate their production in one region in order not to
duplicate these costs. Therefore, each region produces a disjoint set of input
varieties. This is how specialization and trade allow the world economy to exploit
increasing returns to scale and therefore benefit from a larger market size.

By adopting these patterns of specialization and trade, the world economy is
able to reap all the benefits of economic integration without any factor movements.
Using the jargon of trade theory, goods trade is a “perfect substitute” for factor
movements if dt∈FPEt. When this is the case, factor prices are given by:

(37)

w c,t = (1 − α ) ⋅ A t ⋅ Hµt ⋅(1−α )− υ−1 ⋅ K µt ⋅α + υ

for all c∈C

(38)

rc,t = α ⋅ A t ⋅ Hµt ⋅(1−α )− υ ⋅ K µt ⋅α + υ−1

for all c∈C

The world economy is able to operate at the same level of efficiency as the
integrated economy despite the immobility of factors. Equations (31)-(32) showed
that, before globalization, cross-regional differences in factor proportions and
industry productivities lead to differences in the way industries operate (i.e. their
factor proportions and productivity) and also in the size of their markets. Regions
with a high ratio of human to physical capital have high wage-rental ratios. Regions
with high industry productivities and abundant human and physical capital have high
factor prices. But Equations (37)-(38) show that, after globalization (and if dt∈FPEt),
cross-regional differences in factor proportions and industry productivities neither
change the way industries operate, nor do they affect the size of their markets.
Goods trade allows regions to absorb their differences in factor endowments and
industry productivities by specializing in those industries that use their abundant
factors and have the highest possible productivity, without the need for having
different factor prices. Goods trade also eliminates the effects of regional size on
factor prices by creating global markets.

36

These observations have important implications for the world income
distribution and, consequently, for any attempt to determine the relative contribution
of factor endowments and productivity to income differences. Substituting Equations
(37)-(38) into Equation (29), we find that:

(39)

Yt = A t ⋅ Hµt ⋅(1−α )− υ ⋅ K µt ⋅α + υ

(40)

Yc,t
H
K
= (1 − α ) ⋅ c,t + α ⋅ c,t
Yt
Ht
Kt

for all c∈C

A comparison between these Equations and Equation (33) shows that the
relative contribution of factor endowments and productivity to income differences is
fundamentally affected by globalization. Equation (33) differs from Equations (39)(40) in three important respects: the elasticity of substitution between domestic
human and physical capital is one in Equation (33) but infinite in Equations (39)-(40);
domestic productivity appears in Equation (34) but not in Equations (39)-(40); and
income is homogeneous of degree µ on domestic factor endowments in Equation
(34) but only of degree one in Equation (39)-(40). Each of these differences echoes
a different aspect of globalization, and I shall discuss them in turn.
Globalization raises the elasticity of substitution between human and physical
capital from one to infinity because structural transformation (a shift towards
industries that use the abundant factor) replaces factor deepening (forcing industries
to use more of the locally abundant factor) as a mechanism to absorb differences in
factor proportions. Assume a region has a ratio of human to physical capital λ times
higher than average. Before globalization, each of its industries is forced to operate
with a ratio of human to physical capital that is λ times average, and this requires a
wage-rental ratio that is λ-1 times average. After globalization, the region simply
shifts its production towards industries that are human-capital intensive, keeping the
ratio of human to physical capital of its industries constant. This does not require
changes in the wage-rental ratio.

37

Globalization eliminates differences in industry productivities as a source of
income differences because structural transformation (a shift towards industries that
have high productivity) also replaces productivity deepening (forcing low-productivity
industries to produce) as a mechanism to absorb differences in industry
productivities. Assume now that a region has average factor endowments but higher
than average industry productivities. For instance, the region’s productivity is λ times
higher than the rest of the world in a subset of industries of combined size σ, and
equal to the rest of the world in the remaining ones. Before globalization, this
productivity advantage allows the region to produce λσ⋅µ output than average with the
same factors, holding constant technology. After globalization, the region takes over
all world production of those industries in which its productivity is higher and scales
back the rest of its industries. This allows the rest of the world to take full advantage
of the region’s high productivity and catch up with it in terms of income (even though
not in productivity).
Globalization reduces the effects of factor endowments on relative incomes
because it converts regional markets into global ones. Assume now that a region
has average industry productivities, but its human and physical capitals are both λ
times above average. Before globalization, the region’s higher factor endowments
allow it to produce more output than the average region. This effect is further
reinforced because the region’s larger market size allows it to have a better
technology than average. Therefore, in autarky the region’s income is λµ times
higher than the world’s average. After globalization, this additional market size effect
disappears since the relevant market is the world market and this is the same for all
regions. Therefore, after globalization the region’s income is only λ times higher than
the world average income.
Globalization also influences the dynamics of the world economy. Assume
dt∈FPEt for all t, then it follows from Equation (30) and (37)-(38) that:

38

(41)
(42)

K t +1 = s t ⋅ A t ⋅ Hµt ⋅(1−α )− υ ⋅ K µt ⋅α + υ
K c,t +1
K t +1

=

S c,t ⋅ Hc,t
S t ⋅H t

for all c∈C

A comparison between these Equations and Equation (34) shows how
globalization affects the dynamic responses to region-specific shocks. After
globalization, positive (and permanent) shocks to savings and human capital still
raise a region’s capital stock and income. But now the effects of these shocks spill
over to other regions. Shocks to productivity can only affect a region’s income if they
push outward the world productivity frontier. And, in this case, all countries equally
benefit.32
Another important implication of Equations (39)-(42) is that globalization
breaks down the connection between the long run properties of the growth process
and the stability of the world income distribution.33 Assume again that the joint
distribution of savings, human capital and productivities is stationary. Then, Equation
(41) shows that it still is the relative strength of diminishing returns and market size
effects that determines whether world average income is stationary or not. But
Equation (42) shows that now the world distribution of capital stocks is stationary
regardless of parameter values. The same applies to the world income distribution
(see Equation (40)). Therefore, all regions share a common growth rate in the long
run. The reason is simple: physical capital accumulation in high-savings and highhuman capital regions is absorbed by increased production in industries that use
physical capital intensively, and this lowers the prices of these industries and
increases the prices of industries that use human capital intensively. This increases
wages and savings in low-savings and low-human capital regions. In a nutshell,

32

See Ventura [1997] and Atkeson and Kehoe [2000] for analyses of shocks to small open economies
in the factor-price-equalization world.
33
Ventura [1997] provides a dramatic example of this by constructing a world in which time-series
convergence to a steady state is associated with cross-sectional divergence and vice versa.

39

movements in goods prices positively transmit growth across regions and ensure the
stability of the world income distribution. 34
The main feature of the factor-price-equalization world is that diminishing
returns and market size effects are global and not local. This observation has
important implications for growth theory. Explanations for why the world grows faster
today than in the past should feature diminishing returns and market size effects in
the lead role, and relegate savings and human capital to a secondary one. But
explanations of why some countries grow faster than others should do exactly the
opposite, giving the lead role to savings and human capital and relegating
diminishing returns and market size effects to a secondary role. A distinctive feature
of the integrated economy is therefore a sharp disconnect between the determinants
of average or long run growth and the determinants the dispersion or the crosssection of growth rates.35
The factor-price-equalization world neatly illustrates the potential effects of
trade on the world income distribution and its dynamics, and it shows why and how
goods trade can be a perfect substitute for factor movements. But the real world has
not achieved yet the degree of economic integration that this model implies. One
does not need sophisticated econometrics to conclude that wages vary substantially
around the world. It is less obvious but probably true as well that rental rates also
vary substantially around the world. These differences in factor prices indicate that
regional differences in factor endowments and/or industry productivities are so large
that goods trade cannot make up for factor immobility.

34
As a general proposition, it is not necessary that trade leads to the stability of the world income
distribution. In fact, the study of the stability of world income distribution has received considerable
attention recently. While Acemoglu and Ventura [2002] rely on specialization to generate a stable world
income distribution, Deardorff [2001] presents a model in which mere differences in initial endowments
create persistent difference in world income and “club convergence”. Krugman [1987] and Howitt [2000]
rely on endogenous technology change to generate such effects. See Brezis, Krugman, and Tsiddon
[1993] for a model of human capital accumulation that explains leapfrogging in the international income
distribution.
35
One implication of this is that Barro’s conditional convergence finding cannot be used to determine
whether diminishing returns are weak or strong relative to market size effects. See Ventura [1997].

40

What trade always does is to create a global market in which only the most
competitive producers of the world can survive. Trade forces high-cost industries to
close down and offers low-cost industries the opportunity to grow. If dt∈FPEt, all
regions contain enough of these low-cost industries to employ all of their factors at
common or equalized factor prices. But this need not be always the case. If dt∉FPEt,
regions with low industry productivities and sizeable factor endowments are forced to
offer cheap factors to compete, while regions with high industry productivities and
small factor endowments are able to enjoy expensive factors. These price
differences indicate that factors are not deployed where they should and the world
economy does not operate efficiently. To study the origins and effects of these world
inefficiencies, it is necessary first to review some formal aspects of the model after
globalization.

2.3 Formal aspects of the model
As mentioned already, in the absence of asset trade analogues of Equations
(1) and (2) apply now to each region of the world economy. A regional analogue to
Equation (3) also applies since it is a direct implication of our Cobb-Douglas
assumption for the consumption and investment composites. Since all regions share
spending patterns and face the same goods prices, the price of consumption and
investment is the same for all. We keep this common price as the numeraire and, as
a result, Equation (4) also applies. Equations (5)-(6) describing technology apply to
all regions, with the corresponding factor prices and industry productivities.
After globalization, Equations (7)-(10) describing pricing policies, input
demands and the free-entry condition apply only to those regions that host the
lowest-cost producers of the world. The rest cannot compete in global markets. To
formalize this notion, define the following sets of industries:

41

(43)

I c,t


 1

≡  i ∈ I c ∈ arg min
c '∈C Z
 c ',it


 w 
⋅  c ',t 
 1− αi 

1− αi

r
⋅  c ',t
 αi





αi

 

 

for all c∈C

An industry belongs to Ic,t if and only if producers located in region c are capable of
competing internationally in this industry at date t.36 Note that a region can be
competitive in a given industry because it offers high productivity or a cheap
combination of factor prices. The main implication of goods trade is that industries do
not locate in regions where they are not competitive:
(44)

if i∉Ic,t

Qc,it = 0

for all i∈I and c∈C

Since goods markets are integrated, Equation (11) describing market clearing
in global goods markets still applies. But now Equations (12)-(13) describing market
clearing in global factor markets must be replaced by analogue conditions imposing
market clearing in each regional factor market:

(45)

(46)

Hc,t =

K c,t =

∑
i∈I

Hc,it

∑K
i∈I

c ,it

with Hc,it =

with K c,it

∂Bc,it
∂w c,t

Mit

+

∂Bc,it
=
+
∂rc,t

∫
0

Mit

∫
0

∂bc,it (m)

⋅ dm

for all c∈C

∂bc,it (m)
⋅ dm
∂rc,t

for all c∈C

∂w c,t

Equations (45)-(46) state that the regional supplies of labor and capital must
equal their regional demands. The latter are the sum of their industry demands, and
these are calculated by applying Shephard’s lemma to Equations (5) and (6).

36

This follows directly from the cost functions in Equations (5)-(6) and the observation that all producers
in the world face the same world demand.

42

This completes the formal description of the model. For any admissible set of
capital stocks, i.e. Kc,0 for all c∈C, and sequences for the vectors of savings, human
capital and industry productivities, i.e. Sc,t, Hc,t, and Ac,it for all c∈C and for all i∈I, an
equilibrium of the world economy after globalization consists of sequences of prices
and quantities such that the equations listed above hold at all dates and states of
nature. Although there might be multiple geographical patterns of production and
trade that are consistent with world equilibrium, the assumptions made ensure that
prices and world aggregates are uniquely determined.37
We are ready now to re-examine the effects of globalization on factor prices
and the world income distribution. We have already found that, if dt∈FPEt,
globalization eliminates all regional differences in factor prices and permits the world
economy to operate at the same level of efficiency as the integrated economy. In this
case, global market forces are strong enough to ensure that diminishing returns and
market size effects have a global rather than a regional scope. This is no longer the
case if dt∉FPEt since globalization cannot eliminate all regional differences in factor
prices. These factor price differences reflect inefficiencies of various sorts in the
world economy.
Efficiency requires that factor usage within an industry be the same across
regions. This is a direct implication of assuming diminishing returns to each factor in
production. The problem, of course, is that regional factor proportions vary.
Structural transformation allows regions to accommodate all or part of their
differences in factor proportions without factor deepening. If there are enough
industries that use different factor proportions, factor prices are equalized across
regions. If there are not enough industries that use different factor proportions,
regions must lower the price of their abundant factor and raise the price of their
37

Despite the indeterminacy in trade patterns, the trade theorist will immediately recognize that, if βi=1
for all i∈I, the volume of trade is determined and the popular gravity equation applies to this world
economy.

43

scarce one to attract enough firms to employ their factor endowments. In this case,
industries in different regions use different factor proportions and the world economy
is inefficient. Subsection 2.4 studies the properties of the growth process in this
situation.
Efficiency also requires that industries locate in those regions that offer them
the highest possible productivity. Structural transformation allows regions to
accommodate all or part of their differences in industry productivities without
productivity deepening. If all regions have enough industries with the highest
productivity, factor prices are equalized across regions. If some regions do not have
enough industries with the highest productivity, they are forced to produce in low
productivity industries and must lower their factor prices to be able to compete
internationally. Subsection 2.5 shows how this affects the properties of the growth
process.
In the presence of these two types of inefficiency, diminishing returns retain a
regional scope even after globalization. Regional differences in factor prices still
reflect regional differences in factor abundance and industry productivities, although
the mapping between these variables is much more subtle than in the world of
autarky. However, even in the presence of these inefficiencies regional differences in
factor prices cannot reflect regional differences in market size. For market size
effects to retain a regional scope after globalization we need to introduce
impediments to goods trade. And this task is left for section 3.

2.4 Limits to structural transformation (I): factor proportions
It follows from Definition (36) that factor prices are equalized if and only if it is
possible to achieve full employment of human and physical capital in all regions
producing only with the highest productivity (requirement R1), with the factor
proportions used in the integrated economy (requirement R2), and without incurring

44

a fixed cost more than once (requirement R3). Moving away from the factor-priceequalization world means that we must consider the violation of one or more of these
requirements. Since the market for each input is “small”, I assume that regions are
large enough to ensure that requirement R3 is always satisfied.38 Therefore, in the
remainder of this section I will focus on violations of requirements R1 and R2. In this
subsection, we study the effects on the growth process of violations to requirement
R2, keeping the assumption that requirement R1 is not binding. This assumption will
be removed in sub-section 2.5.
To formalize the notion that requirement R1 is not binding, define I *c,t as the
set of industries in which region c has the highest possible productivity:
I *c,t ≡  i ∈ I c ∈ arg max{Zc ',it }  for all c∈C. To ensure that requirement R1 is not
c '∈C



binding in the models of this section, for each of them I first construct the set of
“unrestricted” world equilibria by assuming that I *c,t = I for all c∈C. As mentioned, all
these equilibria share the same prices and world aggregates, but might exhibit
different geographical patterns of production. In these “unrestricted” world equilibria,
some industries might not operate in all regions. Naturally, prices and world
aggregates would not be affected if regions did not have the best possible
technologies in some or all of the industries in which they do not produce. Therefore,
we can trivially relax the assumption that I *c,t contains all industries, and instead
assume only that there exists an “unrestricted” equilibrium such that, for all c∈C, the
industries not included in I *c,t do not operate in the region. This defines the extent to
which regional differences in industry productivities are allowed in this section. It
follows that requirement R1 is never binding and comparative advantage is
determined solely by regional differences in factor proportions.

38

I shall explore the effects of violations to requirement R3 in sections 3.2 and 3.3.

45

In the worlds we consider in this sub-section it is not possible in general to
employ all factors in all regions using the techniques of the integrated economy.
Even if they concentrate all of their production in industries that use human capital
intensively, regions with abundant human capital might lack enough physical capital
to produce with the factor proportions that these industries would use in the
integrated economy. These regions are therefore forced to use a higher proportion of
human capital in their industries and this requires them to have a lower wage-rental
ratio than in the integrated economy. Naturally, the exact opposite occurs in regions
with abundant physical capital. This situation can be aptly described as a
geographical mismatch between different factor endowments.
To study the causes and effects of this mismatch, I present two examples that
help build intuitions that apply more generally. The first example is the two-industry
case that is so popular in trade theory:

Example 2.4.1: Consider a world economy with H- and K-industries, IH∪IK=I
and IH∩IK=∅. Assume αi=αH, σi=σH and max{Z c,it } = Z Ht if i∈IH, αi=αK, σi=σK and
c∈C

max{Z c,it } = Z Kt if i∈IK, with αH≤αK. (Note that IH⋅σH+IK⋅σK=1) For simplicity, assume
c∈C

also that εi=ε and βi=β for all i∈I. The first step is to relate prices and world income to
production:39

(47)

Pit



 Q c,i't 


 c∈C

Q c,it

∏∑
=σ ⋅
∑
i

i'∈I

σi

for all i∈I

c∈C

(48)

39

Yt =



 Q c,it 


 c∈C


∏∑
i∈I

σi

These Equations follow from Equations (3) and (4).

46

Equation (47) can be thought of as the “demand” side of the model, since it
shows how prices depend negatively on quantities, while Equation (48) simply
describes world income. The “supply” side of the model is given by the following set
of Equations:40

(49)

(1 − α H ) ⋅ PHt
(1 − α k ) ⋅ PKt
⋅
Q c,it = Hc,t
Q c,it +
⋅
w c,t
w c,t
i∈I K
i∈I H

(50)

α k ⋅ PKt
α ⋅P
Q c,it = K c,t
⋅
Q c,it + H Ht ⋅
rc,t
rc,t
i∈I K
i∈I H

∑

∑

∑

1− α H

 w 
(51)  c,t 
 1 − αH 
 w
(52)  c,t
 1 − αK

1− α K





∑

r 
⋅  c,t 
 αH 

αH

r
⋅  c,t
 αK

αK





for all c∈C
for all c∈C

≥

1
µ −1
ε −1
⋅ ZHt ⋅ pHt = (A Ht ⋅ PHt )µ ⋅ (σH ⋅ Yt ) µ = φH ⋅ fHt
ε

≥

1
µ −1
ε −1
⋅ ZKt ⋅ pKt = (A Kt ⋅ PKt )µ ⋅ (σK ⋅ Yt ) µ = φK ⋅ fKt
ε

for all c∈C

for all c∈C

where φi = (1 − α i ) αi −1 ⋅ α i− αi for all i∈I; and fHt and fKt are measures of the lowest
factor costs in the world for the H- and K-industries since in equilibrium

{

}

fit = min w 1c−,tαi ⋅ rcα,ti for all i∈I. Equations (49)-(50) are factor market clearing
c∈C

conditions, while Equations (51)-(52) are just a transformation of the pricing
equations of each industry (for both final goods and intermediate inputs). Naturally,
these pricing equations hold with strict equality if there is positive production in the
corresponding industry. Equations (49)-(52) determine the production of each type of
industry and the factor prices of region c, as a function of world prices and income.41
40

Equations (49)-(50) follow from Equations (45) and (46), while Equations (51)-(52) follow from
Equations (7) and (9) after using Equation (17) to eliminate the number of input varieties.
41
If one is willing to take goods prices and factor endowments parametrically and further assume that
the pricing equations hold with strict equality, it is possible to derive two popular results of trade theory
from Equations (49)-(52). The Stolper-Samuelson effect says that an increase in the relative price of an
industry leads to a more than proportional increase in the price of the factor that is used intensively in
this industry and a decline in the price of the other factor. The Rybcynski effect says that an increase in
a factor endowment leads to a more than proportional increase in the production of the industry that
uses this factor intensively and a decline in the production of the other industry.

47

Equations (47)-(52) determine prices and quantities as a function of the
distribution of factor endowments. Together with the regional analogues to Equation
(1), the initial condition and the dynamics of the exogenous state variables, these
Equations provide a complete characterization of the world equilibrium. Next, I
describe some its most salient features.
Regions with extreme factor proportions have specialized production
structures, while regions with intermediate factor proportions have diversified
production structures. Let CKt (CHt) be the set of regions where there is production
only in K-industries (H-industries), and let CMt be the set of regions where there is
production in both types of industries. In fact, it follows from Equations (49)-(52) that
these sets of regions are defined as follows:

(53)

(54)

(55)

C Kt


Hc,t 1 − αK

= c ∈ C
≤
αK
K c ,t



1

 fKt  α K − α H 
⋅  

 fHt 



C Ht


Hc,t 1 − αH

= c ∈ C
≥
K c,t
αH



1

 fKt  α K − α H 
⋅  

 fHt 



C Mt


1 − αK

= c ∈ C
αK



1

 f  α K − α H Hc,t 1 − αH
<
<
⋅  Kt 
αH
K c ,t
 fHt 

1

 fKt  α K − α H 
⋅  

 fHt 



It follows from Equations (51)-(52) that factor prices are the same for all c∈CM.
If the dispersion in regional factor proportions is not too large, and the dispersion in
factor intensities is not too low, CKt=CHt=∅ and there is factor price equalization.
Otherwise, this world economy exhibits a limited version of the factor price
equalization result since factor prices are still equalized for all c∈CMt. It is common in

48

trade theory to refer to a group of regions that share the same factor prices as a
“cone of diversification”. In fact, we can write the wage and the rental as a function of
fHt and fKt as follows:

(56)

(57)

wc,t

−αK

H 
(1− αK ) ⋅ φK ⋅ fKt ⋅  c,t 
K 

 c,t 
 −αH
αK

= fKtαK −αH ⋅ fHtαK −αH

−αH

 Hc,t 


(1− αH ) ⋅ φH ⋅ fHt ⋅ 


 Kc,t 


1−αK

 Hc,t 
αK ⋅ φK ⋅ fKt ⋅ 

K 

 c,t 
 1−αH
αK −1
 αK −αH αK −αH
rc,t = fKt
⋅ fHt

1−αH
 Hc,t 


αH ⋅ φH ⋅ fHt ⋅ 

 Kc,t 



if c ∈ C Kt
if c ∈ C Mt
if c ∈ C Ht

if c ∈ C Kt
if c ∈ C Mt
if c ∈ C Ht

The wage is continuous and weakly declining on the human to physical
capital ratio, while the rental is also continuous but increasing on this same ratio.
The most noteworthy feature of these relationships is that they exhibit a “flat” for the
set of human to physical capital ratios that define the cone of diversification. The top
panel of Figure 10 shows how the wage-rental varies with a region’s ratio of human
to physical capital. Regional differences in this ratio reflect factor abundance in the
usual way. In regions with a high (low) ratio of human to physical capital the price of
human capital is low (high) relative to physical capital. Factor prices do not reflect
however regional differences in industry productivities and/or market size.
It is now straightforward to compute the world income distribution as a
function of fHt and fKt:

49

(58)

φK ⋅ fKt ⋅ H1c−,tαK ⋅ Kcα,Kt
 −αH
1−αH
αK
αK −1
 αK −αH αK −αH
αK −αH
αK −αH
⋅ fHt
⋅ Hc,t + fKt
⋅ fHt
⋅ Kc,t
Yc,t = fKt

φH ⋅ fHt ⋅ H1c−,tαH ⋅ Kcα,Ht


if c ∈ C Kt
if c ∈ C Mt
if c ∈ C Ht

We can use Equation (58) to re-evaluate earlier results about the relative
contribution of factor endowments and industry productivities to income differences
across regions. The first result is that the elasticity of substitution between human
and physical capital is one outside the cone of diversification, but infinity within the
cone. This elasticity reflects the relative importance of structural transformation and
factor deepening as means to absorb regional differences in factor proportions. The
second result is that regional differences in industry productivities continue not
playing a role in determining regional income differences. This, of course, is not
surprising given the assumption we have made about requirement R1 not being
binding. The third and final result is that relative incomes are homogenous of degree
one on factor endowments. This not surprising either since it simply confirms the
absence of market size effects at the regional level.
We can also write the dynamics of the capital stock as a function of fHt and fKt:

(59)

Sc,t ⋅ (1− αK ) ⋅ φK ⋅ fKt ⋅ H1c−,tαK ⋅ Kcα,Kt

−αH
αK

αK −αH
αK −αH
⋅ fHt
⋅ Hc,t
Kc,t+1 = Sc,t ⋅ fKt

S ⋅ (1− α ) ⋅ φ ⋅ f ⋅ H1−αH ⋅ KαH
H
H Ht
c,t
c,t
 c,t

if c ∈ C Kt
if c ∈ C Mt
if c ∈ C Ht

The specific dynamics of this example are hard to determine, since fHt and fKt
change from generation to generation. It is easy to construct examples in which the
world economy moves towards factor-price equalization; examples in which the
world economy moves away from factor-price equalization; or examples in which the
world economy alternates between periods in which factor prices are equalized and
periods in which they are not. These dynamics depend on all the parameters the

50

model (including initial condition) and the evolution of the exogenous state variables,
i.e. savings, human capital and industry productivities. Regardless of the specific
dynamics, the world income distribution is stable if the joint distribution of these
variables is stationary. Economic growth is positively transmitted across regions
through changes in goods prices. This stabilizing role of trade is further reinforced by
the fact that regions outside the cones cannot absorb capital accumulation through
structural transformation and, consequently, experience diminishing returns in
production.

Identifying cones of diversification is important because regional differences
in factor proportions lead to structural transformation inside them, but to factor
deepening outside them. In example 2.4.1, there is one of such cones and contains
regions with intermediate factor proportions. Regions with extreme factor proportions
do not belong to any cone. This need not be always the case, as the next example
shows.

Example 2.4.2: Consider a world economy with H-, M- and K-industries,

I ∪I ∪IK=I, IH∩IM=∅, IH∩IK=∅ and IM∩IK=∅. Assume αi=0 and max {Zc,it } = ZHt if
H

M

c∈C

i∈IH; αi=αM and max {Zc,it } = ZMt if i∈IM; and αi=1 and max {Zc,it } = ZKt if i∈IK. For
c∈C

c∈C

simplicity, assume also that εi=ε and βi=β for all i∈I. The “demand” side of this model
is still described by Equations (47)-(48), but the “supply side is now given by:

(60)

(1 − α M ) ⋅ PMt
P
⋅
Q c,it + Ht ⋅
Q c,it = Hc,t
w c,t
w c,t i∈I H
i∈I M

for all c∈C

(61)

PKt
α ⋅P
⋅
Q c,it + M Mt ⋅
Q c,it = K c,t
rc,t i∈I K
rc,t
i∈I M

for all c∈C

∑

∑

∑

∑

51

1
µ −1
ε −1
⋅ ZHt ⋅ pHt = (A Ht ⋅ PHt )µ ⋅ (σH ⋅ Yt ) µ = fHt for all c∈C
ε

(62)

w c,t ≥

(63)

 w c,t 


 1 − αM 

(64)

rc,t ≥

1− α M

r 
⋅  c,t 
 αM 

αM

≥

1
µ −1
ε −1
⋅ ZMt ⋅ pMt = (A Mt ⋅ PMt )µ ⋅ (σM ⋅ Yt ) µ = φM ⋅ fMt for all c∈C
ε

µ −1
1
ε −1
⋅ ZKt ⋅ pKt = (A Kt ⋅ PKt )µ ⋅ (σK ⋅ Yt ) µ = fKt
ε

for all c∈C

Unlike the previous example, we find now that regions with extreme factor
proportions have diversified production structures, while regions with intermediate
factor proportions have specialized production structures. These sets of regions are
now given by: 42

(65)

(66)

(67)

C Kt


H
1 − αM

= c ∈ C c,t ≤
K c,t
αM



f
⋅  Kt
 fMt

1 
 1−αM 






C Ht


H
1 − αM

= c ∈ C c,t ≥
K c,t
αM



f
⋅  Mt
 fHt

1 
 αM 
 
 


C Mt


1 − αM

= c ∈ C
αM



f
⋅  Kt
 fMt

1

 1−αM Hc,t 1 − α M

<
<
K c,t
αM


f
⋅  Mt
 fHt

1 
 αM 
 
 


Regions in CKt (CHt) produce in the M-industries and the K-industries (H-industries),
while regions in CMt produce only in M-industries. Factor prices are determined as
follows:

42

Note that the sets CKt and CHt never intersect in world equilibrium. Assume the opposite, then it
1-α
follows that equilibrium input prices must satisfy fMt<(fHt) ⋅(fKt)α . But if this inequality held nobody
would produce in M-industries and markets for the products of these industries would not clear.
M

52

M

(68)

(69)

w c,t

rc,t

− αM
 1
1− αM
1− αM
fMt
⋅ fHt
− αM

 Hc,t 


= (1 − αM ) ⋅ φM ⋅ fMt ⋅ 

 K c,t 

fHt




fKt
1− αM

 Hc,t 


= αM ⋅ φM ⋅ fMt ⋅ 

K
c
,
t



 1 αM −1
fMtαM ⋅ fHtαM

if c ∈ C Kt
if c ∈ C Mt
if c ∈ C Ht

if c ∈ C Kt
if c ∈ C Mt
if c ∈ C Ht

Once again, the wage is continuous and weakly declining on the human to
physical capital ratio, while the rental is also continuous but increasing on this same
ratio. But now these relationships exhibit at most two “flats”, one for each set of
human to physical capital ratios that defines a cone of diversification. Regional
differences in factor prices reflect again factor abundance in the usual way. This
world economy contains at most two cones of diversification.43 Regions with extreme
factor proportions belong to one of them, while regions with intermediate factor
proportions do not. The middle panel of Figure 10 shows how the wage-rental varies
with a region’s ratio of human to physical capital.
It is straightforward to compute the analogues of Equation (58)-(59) for this
example and check that the mapping from factor endowments to incomes and
capital accumulation is also linear within the cones and takes the Cobb-Douglas
form outside of them. The picture of the growth process that comes out of this
example is therefore very similar to the on in Example 2.4.1.

43

I say “at most” because it is also possible that RMt = RMt , in which the case there would be a single
cone. Cuñat and Mafezzoli [2004a] analyze a similar model under the assumption that none of the
regions of the world have specialized production structures, i.e. CMt=∅.

53

Examples 2.4.1 and 2.4.2 can be generalized by introducing further industries
with different factor intensities. As we do so, the potential number of cones
increases. But the overall picture remains the same. The world economy sorts itself
out in a series of cones of diversification. The bottom panel of Figure 10 depicts a
case with multiple cones of diversification.44 Small regional differences in factor
proportions lead to structural transformation within cones, but to factor deepening
outside them. Large regional differences in factor proportions might span one or
more cones and therefore lead to a mix of structural transformation and factor
deepening. Therefore, the world of diversification cones can be seen as being
somewhere in between the world of factor-price-equalization and the world of
autarky.45
In the light of these results, we must slightly revise our earlier discussion of
the effects of globalization on the source of income differences. As in the world of
factor-price equalization, differences in domestic productivities cannot be a source of
income differences and relative incomes are homogeneous of degree one with
respect to factor endowments. But unlike the world of factor-price-equalization, the
elasticity of substitution between domestic factors is no longer infinity but instead lies
somewhere between one (outside cones) and infinity (within cones). As mentioned,
this elasticity measures the relative importance of structural transformation and
factor deepening as a means to accommodate regional differences in factor
proportions. And this relative importance in turn depends on various factors, most
notably how dispersed are factor intensities across industries. Two extreme
examples make this point forcefully. If the dispersion in industry factor intensities is
extreme, i.e. αi∈{0,1} for all i∈I, then regional differences in factor proportions
always lead to structural transformation and the world income distribution is given by

44

Dornbusch, Fischer and Samuelson [1980] develop a similar model with a continuum of goods that
vary in their factor intensity, although they do not specifically study the formation of cones.
45
In pure Heckscher-Ohlin models, Deardorff [2001] and Cuñat and Maffezzoli [2004a] generate “club
convergence”. Stiglitz [1970] and Devereux and Shi [1991] are examples where cones of diversification
establish due to inherently different time-preferences and incomes diverge. Oniki and Uzawa [1965]
analyze conditions for diversification cones in two-sector model.

54

Equations (39)-(40).46 If the dispersion in industry factor intensities is instead
negligible, i.e. αi=α for all i∈I, then regional differences in factor proportions always
lead to factor deepening and the world income distribution is given by:47

(70)

Yc,t = A t ⋅ H1c−,tα ⋅ K cα,t

As in the world of autarky, the elasticity of substitution across factors is one (see
Equation (33)). But unlike the world of autarky, regional differences in industry
productivities and market size play no role in explaining regional income differences.
We do not need to revise however our earlier discussion of how globalization
affects the dynamic responses to region-specific shocks. In this respect, the world
with diversification cones offers the same insights as the world of factor-priceequalization. Region-specific shocks to savings and human capital have positive
effects that spill over to other regions, while shocks to industry productivities only
have effects if they push outwards the world productivity frontier. Economic growth is
positively transmitted across regions through changes in goods prices and this
keeps the world income distribution stable. In fact, this force towards stability is
further reinforced in regions that are outside a cone by the existence of diminishing
returns in production.
We conclude therefore that violations to requirement R2 do not alter much the
picture came out of the factor-price-equalization world. Surely the geographical
mismatch between different factor endowments implied by these violations might
generate large inefficiencies that, in turn, might lead to sizeable regional differences
in factor prices. Therefore, there might be important quantitative differences between
a world with many diversification cones and the world of factor-price-equalization.
But the qualitative properties of the growth process of these two worlds remain
relatively close to each other, and far away from those of the world of autarky.
46
47

This is the model used by Ventura [1997].
One of many ways to find this result is as the appropriate limiting case of Examples 2.4.1 or 2.4.2.

55

2.5 Limits to structural transformation (II): industry productivities
Consider next worlds where requirement R1 is either binding or fails. Regions
with few high-productivity industries might find that even if they concentrate all of
their production in those industries, they cannot employ all of their factors and
produce the same quantities as the integrated economy. These regions are therefore
forced to exceed the production of the integrated economy in those industries and/or
move into low-productivity industries. Whatever the case, this requires these regions
to offer low factor prices to employ all of their factors. This situation can be aptly
described as a geographical mismatch between industry productivities and factor
endowments.
To make further progress, it is necessary to be more explicit about why and
how industry productivities differ across regions. The first example considers the
case in which regional differences in productivities take the popular factoraugmenting form:

Example 2.5.1: Consider a world where Z c,it = π1c−,Htαi ⋅ π cα,iKt for all i∈I and all
c∈C; with

∑π
c∈C

c ,Ht

⋅

Hc,t
= 1 and
Ht

∑π
c∈C

c ,Kt

⋅

K c,t
= 1. As usual, πc,Ht and πc,Kt are
Kt

interpreted as labor- and capital-augmenting productivity differences, The world
productivity frontier is given by Z it = max {π1c−,Htαi ⋅ π cα,iKt } . In the integrated economy,
c

industries would be located exclusively in the regions that are in this frontier. The set
FPEt is “small” and, except for a few very special or knife-edge cases, factor-price
equalization is not possible and requirement R1 fails. 48
48

Take, for instance, the case of two regions and two industries. If one region has the highest
productivity in both industries the only factor distribution that leads to factor-price equalization is the one

56

To understand the logic of this world, it is useful to follow the usual procedure
of re-normalizing the model in terms of “efficiency” or “productivity-equivalent” factor
units. That is, we can pretend that regional factor endowments are given by

Ĥc,t = π c,Ht ⋅ Hc,t and Kˆ c,t = π c,Kt ⋅ K c,t for all c∈C; and that industry productivities are
identical across regions, i.e. Ẑ c,it = 1 for all i∈I and all c∈C. Then, productivityadjusted factor prices are given by ŵ c,t =

w c,t
π c,Ht

and r̂c,t =

rc,t
π c,Kt

. The key observation

is that the re-normalized model is formally equivalent to the model of the previous
section.49 Therefore, all the results we obtained in the previous sections regarding
the cross-section of factor prices also apply here to productivity-adjusted factor
prices, i.e. ŵ c,t and rˆc,t ; but not to factor prices as usually measured, i.e. wc,t and
rc,t.50
As the worlds of the previous section, this world economy sorts itself out in a
series of cones of diversification. All regions within a cone have the same
productivity-adjusted factor prices, although possibly different factor prices as usually
measured. Regional differences in productivity-adjusted factor proportions lead to
structural transformation within cones, and to factor deepening across them. When
all regions are located within a single cone, we have the conditional factor-priceequalization result emphasized by Trefler [1993]. That is, regional differences in
factor prices reflect only differences in factor-augmenting productivities and are not
related to differences in productivity-adjusted factor proportions.
in which all factors are located in this region. If instead each region has the highest productivity in a
different industry, the only factor distribution that leads to factor-price equalization is the one in which
each region receives the exact quantity of factors that its high-productivity industry uses in the
integrated economy.
49
The re-normalized model is a bit less general than the model of the previous section since it does not
display regional differences in industry productivities. We could (trivially) generalize this example to
allow for regional differences in industry productivities, but keeping the assumption that requirement R1
is not binding in the re-normalized model.
50
For instance, Equations (56)-(57) describe the productivity-adjusted factor if we further assume that
the world economy contains two types of industries as in Example 2.4.1. Similarly, Equations (68)-(69)
describe productivity-adjusted factor prices if we instead assume that the world economy contains three
types of industries as in Example 2.4.2.

57

Although the presence of factor-augmenting productivity differences does not
alter much the formal or mathematical structure of the model, it has important
implications for the question of why some regions are richer than others. Unlike the
worlds of section 2.4, we now have that productivity differences become a source of
income differences across countries. For instance, if all regions belong to a single
cone of diversification we have the following counterpart to Equation (40):

(71)

Yc,t
Yt

= (1 − α ) ⋅

π c,Ht ⋅ Hc,t
Ht

+α⋅

π c,Kt ⋅ K c,t
Kt

for all c∈C

Alternatively, if all the industries in the world have the same factor intensity we have
the following counterpart of Equation (70):

(72)

Yc,t = A c,t ⋅ H1c−,tα ⋅ K cα,t

where A c,t = Â t ⋅ π1c−,Htα ⋅ π cα,Kt .51 The inability of the world economy to match best
technologies with appropriate factors moves us a step closer to the world of autarky,
since regional productivities now affect regional incomes. Moreover, since now the
world operates below its productivity frontier shocks to regional factor productivities
have effects even if they do not push this frontier. Note however that, as in the
worlds of section 2.4, the elasticity of substitution between domestic factors still lies
somewhere between one (outside cones) and infinity (within cones); and relative
incomes are homogeneous of degree one with factor endowments.
The rest of the picture of the growth process that comes out of this world
remains close to the world of factor-price-equalization. Region-specific shocks to
savings and human capital have positive effects that spill over to other regions.
Economic growth is positively transmitted across regions through goods prices and
51

This model therefore provides an alternative theoretical foundation for the work of Mankiw, Romer
and Weil [1992], Hall and Jones [1999] and Klenow and Rodríguez-Clare [1997].

58

this keeps the world income distribution stable. If the conditional version of the
factor-price-equalization theorem does not hold, regions outside the cones
experience diminishing returns and this reinforces the effects of changes in product
prices on the stability of the world income distribution.

Assuming that regional productivity differences take the factor-augmenting
form discussed in example 2.5.1 is popular because it yields tractable models. But
the factor-augmenting view of productivity differences hides some interesting effects
of trade on the world income distribution and its stability. One reason is that, in the
world of factor-augmenting productivity differences, comparative advantage is still
determined solely by regional differences in factor proportions, albeit productivityadjusted ones. The next example provides a dramatic illustration of how regional
differences in industry productivities could determine comparative advantage, and
how this brings about a new effect of trade on the world income distribution:

Example 2.5.2: Consider a world with many industries and regions. Assume
that Z c,it = 1 if i ∈ I *c,t , and Z c,it = 0 if i ∉ I *c,t ; where I *c,t for all c∈C constitutes a
partition of I:

UI

c∈C

*
c,t

= I and I *c,t ∩ I *c ',t = ∅ for all c∈C and c’∈C. Assume also that

I *c,t ≠ ∅ for all c∈C. That is, each region knows how to produce a disjoint subset of

goods. Since only one region knows how to produce each good, the corresponding
industry is located in that region. That is, I c,t=I *c,t for all c∈C, regardless of the factor
distribution. In this world, comparative advantage is driven solely by regional
differences in industry productivities, and differences in factor proportions play no
role. In this example, requirement R1 does not fail but it is binding, except for a few
very special and knife-edge cases.

59

A bit of straightforward algebra shows that production and factor allocations
are given as follows:

(73)

Yc,t =

∑φ ⋅ f
i

it

⋅ H1c−,itαi ⋅ K cα,iit

i∈I *c,t

(74)

Hc,it =

σi
⋅
σi '

∑

i '∈I *c,t

(75)

K c,it =

for all c∈C

∑

1 − αi
⋅ Hc,t if i ∈ I *c,t ; and Hc,it = 0 if i ∉ I *c,t
σi' ⋅ (1 − αi' )

∑

αi
⋅ K c,t if i ∈ I *c,t ; and K c,it = 0 if i ∉ I *c,t
σi ' ⋅ αi '

i '∈I *c,t

σi
⋅
σi'

∑

i '∈I *c,t

i '∈I *c,t

{

}

where, as usual by now, φi = (1 − α i ) αi −1 ⋅ α i− αi and fit = min w 1c−,tαi ⋅ rcα,ti for all i∈I.
c∈C

Equation (73) describes the world income distribution as a function of factor
allocations and goods prices, while Equations (74)-(75) provide the equilibrium factor
allocations as a function of aggregate factor endowments. By substituting Equations
(74)-(75) into Equation (73), we obtain the world income distribution as a function of
factor endowments and input prices.52 It is immediate to show that the elasticity of
substitution between human and physical capital is between one and infinity; that
regional differences in industry productivities affect regional differences in income;
and that the world income distribution is homogeneous of degree one with respect to
factor endowments.
These results are obtained from a relationship between incomes, factor
endowments and industry productivities that holds constant input prices. Once we
substitute input prices into this relationship, we find that the world income distribution
is given by:

(76)

52

Yc,t
Yt

=

∑σ

i∈I *c,t

i

for all c∈C

This relationship is formally analogous, for instance, to Equation (58) in Example 2.4.1.

60

Equation (76) states that the share of world income of each region equals that
share of world spending on the industries located in the region, and it does not
depend on domestic factor endowments. What is going on? Assume a region has a
ratio of human to physical capital λ times higher than average. Since the region is
producing a fixed set of goods, it is forced to operate with a ratio that is λ times
higher than average, and this requires a wage-rental ratio that is λ-1 higher than
average. Therefore the elasticity of substitution between human and physical capital
in production is one. What is different here is that relative incomes are now
homogeneous of degree zero with respect to factor endowments. Assume a region’s
human and physical capitals are both λ times average. Since production is
homogenous of degree one with factor endowments, its production of all industries is
λ times average. But since the country faces a demand for its products with priceelasticity equal to one, the prices of its products are λ-1 times average. As a result,
the income of the region is just average, despite its factor endowments being λ times
average.
So what should we conclude about the degree of homogeneity of relative
incomes with respect to factor endowments? As Equations (73)-(75) and (76) show,
in empirical applications it will depend on whether we are holding goods prices
constant or not. If we are holding these prices constant, then relative incomes are
homogeneous of degree one in factor endowments. If we are not holding goods
prices constant, then the degree of homogeneity of relative incomes with respect of
factor endowments lies between zero and one. In this example, this degree of
homogeneity is zero because regional differences in factor endowments are
absorbed by regional variation in the quantities produced of each input. In Examples
2.4.1, 2.4.2 and 2.5.1, this degree of homogeneity was one because regional
differences in factor endowments were absorbed by regional variation in the number
of input varieties produced. The next example, inspired by Dornbusch, Fischer and
Samuelson [1977], neatly clarifies this point by showing an intermediate world where
both margins are at work.

61

Example 2.5.3: Consider a world with two regions, C={N,S}; and a continuum
of industries, I=[0,1]. Assume all industries have the same factor intensity, αi=α for
all i∈I. For simplicity, let also εi=ε and βi=β for all i∈I. It follows immediately that: 53

(77)

Yc,t = φ ⋅ fc,t ⋅ H1c−,tα ⋅ K cα,t

for all c∈C

where φ = (1 − α )α −1 ⋅ α − α ; and fc,t is a measure of factor costs of region c, i.e.
fc,t = w 1c−,tα ⋅ rcα,t for all c∈C. To characterize the world income distribution in this world,
we need to determine factor costs. Equation (77) is akin to Equation (58) or
Equations (73)-(75) in the sense that it shows the world income distribution as a
function of factor endowments and input prices. Not surprisingly, these relative
incomes are homogeneous of degree one with respect to factor endowments. The
next step is to determine input prices and substitute them into Equation (77).

Define Ti ≡

Z N,it
Z S,it

for all i∈I as the industry productivity of North relative to

South. Then, assign indices or order goods so that Ti is non-increasing in i. Note that
Ti might be neither continuous nor invertible.54 It follows from this ordering that


f
f


I N,t ≡  i ∈ I N,t ≤ Ti  and I S,t ≡  i ∈ I N,t ≥ Ti  . That is, North (or N) specializes
fS,t
fS,t




on low-index industries while South (or S) specializes in high-index industries. The
cutoff industry, i*, is determined as follows:55

53
This follows directly from the observation that the share of human and physical capital in income are
1-α and α, respectively.
54
This ranking can vary over time, but this does not play any role here. Without loss of generality, the
reader can focus on the case in which the ranking is time-invariant.
55
If Ti is not invertible in the region of interest, this condition determines a set of candidate values for i*.

62

(78)

fN,t
fS,t

= Ti*

Let Xi be world share of spending on all industries with indices equal or lower
i

∫

than i, that is, X i ≡ σ j ⋅ dj . Note that Xi is non-decreasing in i, and takes values zero
0

and one for i=0 and i=1. It follows from this definition that YN,t=Xi*⋅(YN,t+YS,t) and,
using Equation (78), this can be rewritten as follows:

(79)

fN,t
fS,t

X i*
=
1 − X i*

H
⋅  S,t
 HN,t






1−α

K
⋅  S,t
 K N,t






α

Equations (78)-(79) jointly determine the pattern of production and trade (i*)
and relative factor costs (fN,t/fS,t) as a function of spending patterns, industry
productivities and factor endowments. Finally, we can use the numeraire rule in
Equation (4) to find that:

(80)

Yt =

1
 i*

φ ⋅ fc,t ⋅ H1c−,tα ⋅ K cα,t = (ε − 1) ⋅ exp Z N,it ⋅ σ i ⋅ di + Z S,it ⋅ σ i ⋅ di
 0

c∈{N,S }
i*

∑

∫

∫

Having already found the pattern of production and trade (i*) and relative factor costs
(fN,t/fS,t), Equation (80) can then be used to determine absolute factor costs.
This world is somewhat different form the ones we have seen so far in that we
have only two regions. To think about the effects of factor endowments on relative
incomes, I consider next a situation in which both regions have symmetric
technologies and differ in that North’s factor endowments are λ (>1) times larger
than South’s.56 Figure 11 depicts this world. The AA and BB lines represent
56

By symmetric technologies, I mean that if there exists an industry i such that Ti=τ then there also
exists another industry i’ such that Ti’=1/τ and αi=αi’, βi=βi’, εi=εi’ and σi=σi’.

63

Equations (78) and (79), respectively. The AA line is non-increasing because Ti is
non-increasing in i, while the BB line is non-decreasing because Xi is non-decreasing
in i. The existence of a unique crossing point follows since the BB line takes value
zero at i=0 and slopes upward towards infinity at i=1.
The top panel of Figure 11 shows the case in which Ti is flat. This case
corresponds to a world in which differences in industry productivities are minimal or
irrelevant at the margin as in Examples 2.4.1, 2.4.2 and 2.5.1. This allows North to
employ its larger factor endowments by producing a larger number of varieties than
South. Factor costs are the same in both regions and, as a result, North’s income is
λ times South’s. Relative incomes (after substituting in goods prices) are
homogenous of degree one on factor endowments.
The middle panel of Figure 11 shows the opposite case in which Ti is vertical.
This case corresponds to a world in which differences in industry productivities are
extreme as in Examples 2.5.2. North is forced to employ its larger factor
endowments by producing a higher quantity of each of its varieties. Factor costs in
North are λ-1 times those of South and, as a result, North’s income equals that of
South. Relative incomes (after substituting in goods prices) are homogenous of
degree zero on factor endowments.
The bottom panel shows the intermediate case in which Ti is neither flat nor
vertical. Since the slope reflects how strong are differences in industry productivities,
we are somewhere in between the two extreme examples considered up to now.
North employs its larger factor endowments by producing a larger number of
varieties and also a larger quantity of each of them. Factor costs in North are
somewhere between λ-1 and one times those of South. The degree of homogeneity
of relative incomes (after substituting in goods prices) on factor endowments is
therefore somewhere between zero and one.

64

It is possible to generalize Example 2.5.3 in a variety of directions. For
instance, one could allow for industry variation in factor intensities and many
regions.57 This is important in empirical applications, of course. But the central
message remains. The effects of factor endowments on relative incomes depend on
regional differences in industry productivities. If these differences are small, regions
with larger factor endowments absorb them mostly through structural transformation:
not changing much their production in existing industries and moving into new
industries where the region’s productivity relative to the rest of the world is similar to
existing ones. If differences in industry productivities are large, regions with larger
factor endowments absorb them by productivity deepening: substantially increasing
their production in existing industries and/or moving into industries where the
region’s productivity relative to the rest of the world is substantially lower than in
existing ones.
One can conclude from this discussion that differences in industry
productivities create another force for diminishing returns to physical capital
accumulation. As physical capital is accumulated, quantities produced increase and
the terms of trade worsen. The result is a reduction in factor prices that lowers
wages, savings and capital accumulation. This is a central aspect of the growth
process in a world of interdependent regions generates a force towards the stability
of the world income distribution.58

I argued at the end of section 1 that, if globalization leads to the integrated
economy, there is a powerful prescription for economic development: open up and
integrate into the world economy. This allows regions to benefit from higher
productivity, improved factor allocation and increased market size. Not much has
changed here. Naturally, if factor prices are equalized the effects are literally the
same as in section 1 since the globalization leads to the integrated economy. If
57

See Wilson [1980], Eaton and Kortum [1999, 2000], Matsuyama [2000] and Alvarez and Lucas
[2004].
58
See Acemoglu and Ventura [2002] on this point.

65

factor prices are not equalized, the world economy operates with a lower productivity
and a worse factor allocation than the integrated economy. This also means that the
size of the world economy will be smaller than that of the integrated economy. As a
result, all the benefits from globalization are smaller in the worlds of sub-sections 2.4
and 2.5 than in the world of factor-price equalization. But it is still relatively
straightforward to see that coupled with an appropriate transfer scheme globalization
constitutes a Pareto improvement for the world economy. Moreover, since all regions
gain from trade there exist Pareto-improving transfer schemes that do not require
inter-regional transfers.59 Therefore, the prescription for development remains the
same: open up and integrate into the world economy.
We have traveled much already, and the global view of economic growth is
starting to take shape. This view is more realistic and rich in details than the views
that came out from either the world of autarky or the integrated economy. Despite
this progress, we should not rest here yet. We have assumed so far that
globalization eliminates all impediments to goods trade. This is obviously an
unrealistic assumption. Is it also a crucial one?

3. Transport costs and market size
Despite the already large and growing importance of international trade, there
are some important areas of economic activity where the degree of market
integration is still relatively low. Surely the clearest case in point is the service
sector.60 As the textbook example of a haircut suggests, many services are
59

How do we know that all regions have non-negative gains from globalization? Since regions have the
choice of not trading, it is therefore possible to achieve the level of income and welfare of the world of
autarky after globalization. Realizing these gains might require implementing an appropriate tax-subsidy
scheme, though.
60
In industrial economies, the service sector accounts for more than two thirds of production but only
for about one fifth of exports and imports. Moreover, most trade in services is concentrated in activities
related to transportation and travel even though these activities only constitute a small component of
overall services production.

66

inherently more difficult to transport than agricultural and manufacturing products.
Services also tend to be more vulnerable to various governmental barriers to trade,
such as professional licensing requirements that discriminate against foreigners,
domestic content requirements in public procurement, or poor protection of
intellectual property rights.61 In addition, there are important examples of weak
market integration that go beyond the service sector. Trade in some agricultural and
manufacturing products is also severely restricted as a result of protectionist
practices in industrial countries.
The goal of this section is to study the effects on the growth process of partial
segmentation in goods markets. The new model of globalization that I shall adopt
here is as follows: at date t=0 the costs of transporting some (but not all) goods
across regions suddenly fall from prohibitive to negligible. In particular, I partition the
set of all industries into the sets of tradable and nontradable industries, i.e. Tt and Nt
such that Tt∪Nt =I and Tt∩Nt =∅. The costs of transporting intermediate inputs and
final goods fall from prohibitive to negligible at t=0 if i∈Tt. But even after t=0, the
costs of transporting either the intermediate inputs, or the final goods, or both remain
prohibitive if i∈Nt.62 We keep assuming that the costs of transporting factors across
regions remain prohibitive after t=0, and that international trade in assets is not
possible. Naturally, the model analyzed in section 2 (and formally described in
section 2.3) obtains as the special case of this model in which Tt=I and Nt=∅ for
t≥0.

61

There are also signs that this is changing rapidly. Advances in telecommunications technology, the
appearance of e-commerce and the development of new and standardized software have all opened up
the possibility of trading a wider range of services. Recent multilateral trade negotiations and the
process of European integration have also led to the dismantling of various non-tariff barriers to service
trade.
62
The most popular alternative to this model is the “iceberg” cost model whereby all goods are subject
to the same proportional transport cost. In particular, a quantity τ (>1) of a good must be shipped from
source to ensure that one unit of it arrives to destination. The rest “melts” away in transit. See
Matsuyama [2004] for yet another model of transport costs.

67

A central aspect of the analysis turns out to be whether transport costs apply
only to final goods, to intermediate inputs, or to both. Section 3.1 presents the case
in which transport costs apply only to final goods. This model neatly generalizes the
results obtained in the previous section. Section 3.2 studies the case in which
transport costs apply only to intermediate inputs. This gives rise to agglomeration
effects that can have a large and somewhat unexpected impact on the world income
distribution. Section 3.3 analyzes the case in which transport costs apply to both final
goods and intermediate inputs. The interaction between the two types of frictions
brings about a new perspective on the role of local markets.

3.1 Nontraded goods and the cost of living
Consider next a world where some final goods are not tradable, although the
intermediate inputs required to produce them are always tradable. In particular, the
costs of trading intermediate inputs are negligible for all i∈I; and the costs of
transporting final goods are negligible if i∈Tt but prohibitive if i∈Nt. Since prices of
final goods can differ across regions, a novel feature of this model is that regions will
have different price levels.
I must now revise the formal description of the model. While regional
analogues of Equations (1) and (2) continue to apply, one must now recognize that
final goods prices in nontradable industries might differ across regions. As a result,
the price of consumption and investment will vary across them even if Equation (3)
describing spending patterns still applies to all regions. Therefore, we must write the
analogues of Equations (1) and (2) as follows:

(81)

K c,t +1 = S c,t ⋅

w c,t
Pc,t

⋅ Hc,t

68

(82)

C c,t = (1 − S c,t ) ⋅

w c,t
Pc,t

⋅ Hc,t +

rc,t
Pc,t

⋅ K c,t

where Pc,t is the price level (or cost of living) of region c, i.e. Pc,t =

∏
i∈I

 Pc,it

 σi







σi

for all

c∈C. A natural choice of numeraire now is the ideal price index for tradable
industries:

(83)

1=

∏
i∈T t

 Pit

σ
 i






σi

Equation (83) replaces Equation (4). The latter obtains as the special case of the
former in which all goods are tradable, i.e. Tt=I and Nt=∅. An implication of this
choice of numeraire is that the price level of region c is equal to the ideal price index
of its nontradable industries:

(84)

Pc,t

 Pc,it

=

i∈N t  σ i

∏






σi

for all c∈C

Since now price levels differ across regions it is necessary to distinguish between
two concepts of income and factor prices: (1) market-based incomes and factor
prices, i.e. Yc,t, wc,t and rc,t; and (2) real or PPP-adjusted incomes and factor prices,
i.e. Yc,t/Pc,t, wc,t/Pc,t and rc,t/Pc,t. Whenever there is no risk of confusion, I shall refer to
the former simply as income and factor prices, and to the latter as real income and
real factor prices. As before, Equations (5)-(6) describing technology apply to all
regions, with the corresponding factor prices and industry productivities.
After globalization, producers of intermediate inputs in all industries and
producers of final goods in tradable industries face a global market and Equations

69

(7)-(10) describing pricing policies, input demands and the free-entry condition
therefore apply only to those regions where the lowest-cost producers are located.
But even after globalization, producers of final goods in nontradable industries
remain sheltered from foreign competition, and Equations (7)-(8) apply to all regions
and not only to the lowest-cost ones. Thus, Equation (44) no longer applies to the
producers of final goods in nontradable industries (Equation (43) still stands as a
definition, though).
Market clearing conditions are also affected by the presence of transport
costs. While Equations (45)-(46) describing market clearing in regional factor
markets still apply, Equation (11) describing market clearing in global markets for
final goods applies only to tradable industries. In nontradable industries, Equation
(11) must be replaced by analogue conditions imposing market clearing in each
regional market:
(85)

Pc,it ⋅ Qc,it = Ec,it

for all i∈N t and c∈C

This completes the formal description of the model. For any admissible set of
capital stocks, i.e. Kc,0 for all c∈C; sequences for the vectors of savings, human
capital and industry productivities, i.e. Sc,t, Hc,t, and Ac,it for all c∈C and for all i∈I; and
a sequence for the set Nt (or Tt); an equilibrium of the world economy after
globalization consists of a sequence of prices and quantities such that the equations
listed above hold at all dates and states of nature. Although there might be multiple
geographical patterns of production that are consistent with world equilibrium, the
assumptions made ensure that prices and world aggregates are uniquely
determined.
The best way to start the analysis is by asking again whether the assumed
trade restrictions matter at all. That is, to ask whether restricting factor mobility and

70

now goods trade impede the world to achieve the level of efficiency of the integrated
economy. Re-define the set FPEt now as follows:


FPE t ≡  d t ∈ D t ∃x c,it (m) ≥ 0 , x Fc,it ≥ 0 with x c,it (m) = 1,
x Fc,it = 1 and

c∈C
c∈C

∑

∑

M

x c,it = (1 − β i ) ⋅ x Fc,it +

(86)

β i it
⋅ x c,it (m) ⋅ dm; such that :
Mit 0

∫

(R1) x c,it = 0 if Z c,it < max {Z it };
(R2) Hc,t =

∑x
i∈I

c∈C

c ,it

⋅ Hit and K c,t =

∑x
i∈I

c ,it

⋅ K it ;

(R3) x c,it (m) ∈ {0,1} for all m ∈ [0, Mit ] and i ∈ I ; and
(R4) x Fc,it ≥ (1 − β i ) ⋅

YcIE,t
YtIE


if i ∈ N t 


Comparing Definitions (36) and (86), we observe that the latter contains an
additional requirement: each region should be able to produce all the final goods
used for its own consumption and investment in nontradable industries. This
additional restriction is a direct consequence of transport costs. The presence of this
additional restriction reduces the size of FPEt. In fact, it is now even possible that

FPEt=∅. For instance, assume regional differences in industry productivities are
such that there exists no region that has the highest possible productivity in all
nontradable industries simultaneously. Then, it is not possible to replicate the
integrated economy.63
If dt∈FPEt, factor prices are equalized across regions and the world economy
operates with the same efficiency as the integrated economy despite factor
immobility and goods market segmentation. In this case, the world economy

63

That one or more regions with the highest possible productivity in all nontradable industries exist is a
necessary but not sufficient condition for FPEt≠∅. Since factor-price equalization requires that all factors
be located in these regions, it is also necessary that at least one of these regions have the highest
possible productivity for each tradable industry.

71

behaves exactly as the world of factor-price equalization of section 2.2.64 If dt∉FPEt,
the world economy cannot operate at the same level efficiency as the integrated
economy. As a result, either market-based factor prices, or real factor prices, or both
differ across regions. But even in this case the behavior of the world economy does
not depart much from what we observed in the worlds of section 2. To see this,
define HcT,t and K cT,t as the factor endowments devoted to the production of tradable
goods, i.e. all intermediate inputs and the final goods of tradable industries.
Straightforward algebra shows that:65

(87)

HcT,t

−1




 wc,t 






(
1
)
(
1
)
⋅
−
β
⋅
−
α
⋅
σ
= max0,Hc,t ⋅ 1− (1− βi ) ⋅ (1− αi ) ⋅ σi − K c,t ⋅ 
i
i
i  for all c∈C


 i∈N


 rc,t  i∈N t
t




(88) K cT,t = max0, K c,t


∑

∑




w
⋅ 1 − (1 − βi ) ⋅ αi ⋅ σi  − Hc,t ⋅ c,t ⋅ (1 − βi ) ⋅ αi ⋅ σi  for all c∈C

 i∈N
rc,t i∈N t

t



∑

∑

Equations (87)-(88) show the factor supplies that are left after subtracting from
aggregate factor supplies the factors used in the production of final goods in
nontradable industries. In the special case in which N t =∅, these factor supplies
equal the aggregate factor supplies and are independent of factor prices. But in the
general case, these factor supplies depend on factor prices in the usual way. The
higher is the wage-rental, the lower is the human to physical capital ratio used for the
production of final goods in nontradable industries and, as a result, the higher is the
relative supply of human to physical capital that is left after production of final goods
in nontradable industries.

64

Even the price levels would be equalized across regions, i.e. Pc,t=1 for all c∈C. Note however that
there is less indeterminacy regarding the patterns of production and trade, since nontradable final
goods must now be produced in the same region where they are used for consumption or investment.
65
To see this, note that the shares of human and physical capital devoted to producing the final good of
the ith nontradable industry are (1-βi)⋅(1-αi) and (1-βi)⋅αi. Add over industries and note that the share of
spending in the ith industry is σi⋅Yc,t.

72

With Equations (87)-(88) at hand, it is straightforward to see that all the
results in sections 2.4 and 2.5 regarding incomes and factor prices still go through in
the presence of nontradable final goods. Take, for instance, Example 2.4.1.
Equations (47)-(48) must be rewritten as follows:
σi

(89)


 ∑ σi '
 Q c,i't  i'∈T t


i'∈T  c∈C

Pit = σ i ⋅ t
Q c,it

∏∑
∑

for all i∈T t

c∈C

σi

(90)

Yt =


 ∑ σi '
 Q c,it  i'∈T t


 c∈C


∏∑
i∈T t

while Equations (49)-(52) still apply provided that we write HcT,t and K cT,t instead of Hc,t
and Kc,t, in Equations (49)-(50). Factor prices and the pattern of trade are determined
by these modified versions of Equations (47)-(52) together with Equations (87)-(88).
Since factor supplies are well behaved, a brief analysis of this system reveals that all
the discussion of the properties of the world income distribution and its dynamics
after Equations (58)-(59) still goes through. In fact, all the results and intuitions
developed in the examples of sections 2.4 and 2.5 still apply after we remove the
assumption that N t =∅.

The major difference between the world of this sub-section and the one in
section 2 is that there is a discrepancy between market-based and real incomes and
factor prices. To see this, we need to compute regional price levels. Equations (5)(7) and (83) imply that:

(91)

Pc,t


 1
=

i∈N t  σ i


∏

 1
⋅
 Z c,it

 w 
⋅  c,t 
 1 − αi 

1−αi

r
⋅  c,t
 αi

73





αi





1−βi

Mit

∫

βi
 1−εi

⋅  p it (m)1−εi ⋅ dm
0










σi

Since all regions face the same input prices, Equation (91) shows that, ceteris
paribus, the price level is high in regions that have high factor prices and low
productivity in nontradable industries. This relationship is the first piece of a theory of
the price level. The second piece is a relationship between factor prices, factor
endowments and industry productivities. The following examples show how to obtain
this additional relationship.

Example 3.1.1: Consider a world economy with H- and K-industries, IH∪IK=I
and IH∩IK=∅. Assume αi=αH and max{Zc,it } = ZHt if i∈IH, αi=αK and max{Zc,it } = ZKt
c∈C

c∈C

if i∈IK, with αH≤αK. For simplicity, assume also that εi=ε and βi=β for all i∈I. As in
section 2.4, we assume that requirement R1 is not binding.66 The only difference
between this world and the one in Example 2.4.1 is the presence of nontradable
industries, i.e. N t ≠∅.

Let PHt and PKt be the prices of final goods in tradable H- and K-industries. If a
region is internationally competitive in tradable H-industries, then the price of final
goods of its nontradable H-industries is also PHt.67 If a region is not competitive
internationally, then the price of final goods in its nontradable H-industries exceeds
PHt. In fact, it follows from Equations (5) and (51)-(52) that the price of the final goods
in nontradable H-industries is

w 1c−,tαH ⋅ rcα,tH
fHt

⋅ PHt ≥ 1 . A parallel argument shows that the

price of the final goods in nontradable K-industries is

w 1c−,tαK ⋅ rcα,tK
fKt

⋅ PKt ≥ 1 . It then

follows from Equations (83)-(84) that the price level of region c is given by:
66

Note that this implies that all regions have the same productivity in nontradable industries. That is,
Zc,it=ZHt if i∈N t∩ IH and Zc,it=ZKt if i∈N t∩IK for all c∈C.
67
This follows because the technology to produce final goods is the same for all H-industries, and also
because the number of input varieties of H-industries does not depend on whether the industry is
tradable or nontradable.

74

(92)

Pc,t

∑ σi
∑ σi
 w 1c−,tαH ⋅ rcα,tH PHt  i∈N t ∩ I H  w 1c−,tαK ⋅ rcα,tK PKt  i∈N t ∩ I K
=
⋅
⋅
⋅


fHt
fKt
σH 
σK 



for all c∈C

As in Example 2.4.1, regions with intermediate factor proportions have
diversified production structures while regions with extreme factor proportions have
specialized production structures. The sets CMt , CKt and CHt are still defined by
Equations (53)-(55) provided we write HcT,t and K cT,t instead of Hc,t and Kc,t. It follows
from Equations (51), (52) and (92) that Pc,t

Pc,t

P
≥  Ht
 σH

σi
 i∈N∑
H
t ∩I



P
⋅  Kt
 σK

P
=  Ht
 σH

σi
 i∈N∑
H
t ∩I



P
⋅  Kt
 σK

σi
 i∈N∑
K
t ∩I

if c∈CMt and


σi
 i∈N∑
K
t ∩I

if c∈CKt∪CHt. All regions within the cone share the same


price level, and this is the lowest in the world. The reason, of course, is that these
regions are competitive both in H- and K-industries. Regions outside the cone have
different price levels. Moreover, it is possible to show that these price levels increase
the farther away the regions are from the cone. The reason is that the farther away
from the cone, the less competitive a region is in one of the industry types and the
more expensive it is to produce the final goods of the nontradable industries of this
type.

Example 3.1.1 provides us with a simple theory of why and how the price
level varies across regions. But it is difficult to reconcile this theory with the data. The
later show that price levels are positively correlated with income, so that regional
differences in real incomes are substantially smaller than regional differences in
market-based incomes. To obtain this pattern in the world of Example 3.1.1 would
require that poor regions be located inside the cone and rich regions outside of it.
Although this is not impossible from a theoretical standpoint, it does not seem a

75

promising starting point for the construction of an empirically successful theory of the
price level.
A positive association between incomes and price levels could arise
somewhat more naturally in the world of Example 2.4.2 once we remove the
assumption that Nt =∅. For instance, if nontradable industries tend to be more
human-capital intensive than tradable industries the price level would be high in
regions that belong to CKt; intermediate in regions that belong to CMt; and low in
regions that belong to CHt. Assume then that most of the variation in income levels is
due to differences in savings rates, so that rich regions are those that have low
human to physical capital ratios. This does not seem implausible, since most
nontradable industries tend to be in the service sector and this sector tends to use a
higher human to physical capital ratio than other sectors.
More generally, in the worlds of sub-section 2.4 the correlation between
income and price levels is positive or negative depending on how factor proportions
vary with income and the factor intensities of nontradable industries relative to
tradable ones. The central observation is that price levels should be high in regions
that have factor proportions that are inadequate to produce nontradable goods.
Building an empirically successful theory of the price level around this notion seems
promising, although it remains to be done. Most of the existing research on the price
level has focused instead on the role of regional differences in industry
productivities. The next example presents a world where these differences generate
a positive association between income and the price level.

Example 3.1.2: Consider a world where Z c,it = π1c−,Htαi ⋅ π cα,iKt for all i∈Tt and c∈C,
and Zc,it=1 for all i∈Nt, with

∑π
c∈C

c ,Ht

⋅

Hc,t
= 1 and
Ht

76

∑π
c∈C

c ,Kt

⋅

K c,t
= 1. The crucial feature
Kt

of this example is that productivity differences exist only in tradable industries.68 This
world economy is akin to that in Example 2.5.1. For instance, assume that there are
H- and K-industries as in Examples 2.4.1 and 3.1.1. Then, we have that:

(93)

∑σi
∑σi
(πc,Ht ⋅ ŵc,t )1−αH ⋅ (πc,Kt ⋅ r̂c,t )αH PHt i∈Nt ∩I H (πc,Ht ⋅ ŵc,t )1−αK ⋅ (πc,Kt ⋅ r̂c,t )αK PHt i∈Nt ∩I K
for all c∈C
Pc,t = 
⋅
⋅ 
⋅ 
σH 
σH 
f̂Ht
f̂Kt



{

}

where f̂it = min ŵ1c−,tα i ⋅ r̂cα,ti for all i∈I. Since productivity differences in tradable
c∈C

industries are factor augmenting, regions with higher productivities have higher
factor prices. Since there are no productivity differences in nontradable industries,
regions with higher factor prices have a higher price level. Note that now a region
inside the cone with high productivity in the tradable industries could have a higher
price level than a region outside the cone with low productivity in the tradable
industries.
In the world of this example, the price level is determined by a combination of
two elements: how adequate are the region’s factor proportions to produce in the
nontradable industries; and how high is the region’s productivity in the tradable
industries relative to the nontradable ones. In the world of Example 3.1.1, this
second force was not present and Equation (93) was reduced to Equation (92). We
could also eliminate the first force by assuming that all regions belong to the cone,
i.e. by assuming that there is conditional factor-price equalization. In this case, the
price level is given by:

(94)

Pc,t

∑ σi
 1−αH αH PHt  i∈N t ∩ I H
= π c,Ht ⋅ π c,Kt ⋅

σH 


∑ σi
 1−αK αK PKt  i∈N t ∩ I K
⋅ π c,Ht ⋅ π c,Kt ⋅

σK 


68

for all c∈C

This assumption makes sense because nontradable industries consist mostly of services, and in the
real world productivity differences in services seem small relative to productivity differences in
agriculture or manufacturing.

77

In Equation (94) the only determinant of the price level is the level of productivity in
the tradable industries. This special case is known as the Balassa-Samuelson
hypothesis of why the price level is positively correlated with income. Higher
productivity in the tradable industries is what makes regions both rich and expensive.

In addition to providing a theory of the price level, the world of this section is
also useful because it allows us to study a smoother and more realistic version of the
globalization process, i.e. a gradual reduction in the size of Nt. This is not only
important for quantitative applications of the theory, but it also leads to new insights
regarding the effects of globalization on welfare. The next example shows this.

Example 3.1.3: Consider a world economy with H- and K-industries, such that
H

K

I ∪I =I and IH∩IK=∅. Assume αi=0 if i∈IH, and αi=1 if i∈IK; and βi=0 for all i∈I.
Within each type there are “advanced” and “backward” industries. A-regions have
the highest possible productivity in all industries, regardless of whether they are
“advanced” or “backward”. B-regions have the highest possible productivity only in
“backward” industries. Up this point all the assumptions are as in Example 2.1.2,
except that industry factor intensities are more extreme. Assume next that initially
some industries are nontradable, i.e. N t≠∅; and consider a small step in the
globalization process: some “advanced” H-industries become tradable, i.e. some
elements of the set Nt∩IH move into the set Tt∩IH. What is the effect of this partial
reduction in transport costs on regional incomes?
The reduction of transport costs leads to structural transformation: A-regions
reduce their production in “backward” H-industries and increase their production in
“advanced” H-industries, while B-regions do the opposite.69 This increases efficiency
69

Given the extreme assumptions on industry factor intensities, we know that the distribution of
production in K-industries will not be affected.

78

and raises the combined world production of H-industries, lowering the price of their
products and therefore wages all over the world. Therefore, a partial reduction of
transport costs has two effects: an increase in efficiency that lowers prices and
benefits all regions, and a change in relative prices that benefits some regions but
hurts others. A-regions with a large enough ratio of human to physical capital are
worse off as a result of this partial reduction in transport costs. 70 If coupled with an
appropriate transfer scheme, partial globalization still constitutes a Pareto
improvement for the world economy. But now this transfer scheme might require
inter-regional transfers towards A-regions with large enough human to physical
capital ratios.

The world of this sub-section is a simple and yet very useful generalization of
the world of section 2. It allows us to study the sources of regional differences in
price levels and also permits us to consider smoother versions of the globalization
process. Despite this progress, the world of this sub-section fails to capture a central
aspect of transport costs because these only affect final goods. When transport
costs affect intermediate inputs, they create incentives to agglomerate production in
a single location. We study how this works next.

3.2 Agglomeration effects
Consider a world where transport costs apply only to intermediates, and not
to final goods. In particular, assume that the costs of transporting inputs are
negligible if i∈Tt but prohibitive if i∈N t; while the costs of trading final goods are
negligible for all i∈I. An implication of this last assumption is that the price level is the
same in all regions and market-based and PPP-adjusted incomes coincide. But this
70

How is it possible that a region have negative gains from globalization? Since relative prices have
changed, the region’s trade opportunities have changed also and it might no longer be possible to
achieve the level of income and welfare that the region enjoyed before the reduction of transport costs
in the H-industries.

79

does not mean that we are back to the worlds of section 2. The inability of trading
intermediate inputs creates an incentive to concentrate all the production of an
industry in a single region. Only in this way, production of final goods can fully take
advantage from the benefits of specialization. This force towards the agglomeration
of economic activity has profound effects on the world income distribution and its
dynamics.
The formal description of the model is quite similar to that of section 2.3.
Regional analogues to Equations (1)-(3) apply. Since all regions share spending
patterns and face the same final goods prices, the price of consumption and
investment is the same for all, and we keep Equation (4) as the numeraire rule.
Equations (5)-(6) describing technology apply to all regions, with the corresponding
factor prices and industry productivities. The only difference with the model of
section 2.2 is that, even after globalization, producers of intermediate inputs in
nontradable industries remain sheltered from foreign competition. As a result, in
these industries Equations (9)-(10) apply to producers of intermediates in all regions
and not only to the lowest-cost ones. Also Equation (8) applies to each region
separately since only the demand from local producers of final goods matters for the
producers of intermediate inputs. Thus, Equation (44) no longer applies to the
producers of intermediate inputs in nontradable industries, and Equation (43) must
be modified as follows:

(95) I c,t




 1

≡  i ∈ I c ∈ argmin
c '∈C  Z

 c,it



1−αi

 w 
⋅  c,t 
 1 − αi 

80

r 
⋅  c,t 
 αi 

αi





1−βi

βi

Mc,it
 1−εi  

⋅  pc,it (m)1−εi ⋅ dm   for all c∈C
0
 

 
 

∫

Equation (95) simply recognizes that the number of intermediate inputs available and
their prices can vary across regions.71 Finally, the market clearing conditions in
Equations (11), (45) and (46) apply.
This completes the formal description of the model. For any admissible set of
capital stocks, i.e. Kc,0 for all c∈C, and sequences for the vectors of savings, human
capital and industry productivities, i.e. Sc,t, Hc,t, and Ac,it for all c∈C and for all i∈I; and
a sequence for the set Nt (or Tt); an equilibrium of the world economy after
globalization consists of a sequence of prices and quantities such that the equations
listed above hold at all dates and states of nature. Like the other worlds we have
studied up to this point, there might be multiple geographical patterns of production
that are consistent with world equilibrium. Unlike the worlds we have studied up to
this point however, there might also be multiple prices and world aggregates that are
consistent with world equilibrium. This is, in fact, the most prominent feature of this
world.
As usual, we start the analysis by defining the set of factor distributions that
allow the world economy to replicate the integrated economy. This set is now as
follows:

FPE t ≡  d t ∈ D t ∃x c,it (m) ≥ 0 , x Fc,it ≥ 0 with x c,it (m) = 1,
x Fc,it = 1 and

c∈C
c∈C

∑

∑

M

x c,it = (1 − β i ) ⋅ x Fc,it +

(96)

β i it
⋅ x c,it (m) ⋅ dm; such that :
Mit 0

∫

(R1) x c,it = 0 if Z c,it < max {Z it };
(R2) Hc,t =

∑x
i∈I

c∈C

c ,it

⋅ Hit and K c,t =

∑x
i∈I

c ,it

⋅ K it ; and


(R3) x c,it ∈ {0,1} i ∈ I 


71

Equation (95) assumes that regions always produce intermediates with the lowest indices. This
simplifies notation a bit and carries no loss of generality.

81

When comparing this set to those in Definitions (36) and (86), we observe
that requirement (R3) is much stronger now. While Definitions (36) and (86) only
required that the entire production of each intermediate were located in a single
region, Definition (96) requires that the entire production of each industry (i.e. all
intermediates plus final goods) be located in a single region. This is a direct
implication of the assumption that intermediate inputs are nontradable. Naturally, this
strengthening of requirement R3 reduces the size of FPEt.72 Therefore, this set is
always smaller than the set in Definition (36). But it need not be smaller than the set
in Definition (86), since requirement R4 no longer applies when final goods are
tradable.
Assume that industries are “small” and regions are “large” so that requirement
R3 is not binding. Then, it is straightforward to see that the equilibria studied in
section 2 still apply. If dt∈FPEt, there exists an equilibrium in which factor prices are
equalized across regions and the world economy operates at the same level of
efficiency as the integrated economy despite factor immobility and goods market
segmentation. If dt∉FPEt, the world economy cannot operate at the same level
efficiency as the integrated economy and factor prices differ across regions. All the
equilibria analyzed in sub-sections 2.4 and 2.5 are also equilibria for the world of this
section, and all the results and intuitions we learned in these sub-sections remain
valid without qualification.
There is however a major difference between this world and the ones we
studied in section 2. While the equilibria described in section 2 were unique in the
worlds analyzed there, they are only one among many in the world of this section.
The next example makes this point very clear:

72

The set FPEt is never empty, but it is smaller than the set of all the factor distributions that are
equilibria of the integrated economy. The reason is that some of these equilibria split industries across
regions.

82

Example 3.2.1: Consider a world where all industries are nontradable, i.e.

Nt=I. Then, any collection of sets I c,t (with I c,t ≠ ∅ for all c∈C) that constitutes a
partition of I is part of an equilibrium of the world economy. 73 This follows
immediately from Equations (5) and (8), which now apply to each region, and
Equation (95). Equation (5) shows that the cost of production of final good producers
in a given region depends on the number of available inputs. But Equation (8) shows
the number of inputs produced in a given region depends on the demand by local
producers of final goods.
This world economy exhibits a very strong form of agglomeration effects, as a
result of backward linkages in production.74 If there are no input producers in a
region, the cost of producing final goods is infinity and no final goods producer will
choose to locate in the region. But if there are no final goods producers in a region,
there is no demand for inputs and no input producer will choose to locate in the
region. In this world economy, these forces for agglomeration are so strong that they
dwarf comparative advantage. It is possible that a given industry locates in a region
offering cheap factors and high productivity, but it is also possible that it ends up
locating in region offering expensive factors and low productivity.
The world income distribution can be written as follows:

(97)

Yc,t
Yt

=

∑σ

i∈I c,t

i

for all c∈C

73

This world economy also has equilibria in which industries are split across regions. In these equilibria,
all the regions that host a given industry have the same costs of producing the final goods but possibly
different numbers and prices of inputs.
74
Helpman and Krugman [1985] define a backward linkage as a situation in which a final good
producer demands many inputs; and a forward linkage as a situation in which many final good
producers demand the same input.

83

Equation (97) is formally very similar to Equation (76). Remember that the latter
described the world income distribution in Example 2.5.2 where differences in
industry productivities were so strong so as to single-handedly determine
comparative advantage. The formal similarity between these two worlds follows
because both exhibit an extreme form of specialization. The difference, of course, is
the underlying force that determines this specialization. While in Example 2.5.2
regions specialize in a given industry because of their high productivity, in Example
3.2.1 regions specialize in a given industry only because of luck. While in Example
2.5.2 the shape and evolution of the world income distribution reflects only the
distribution of industry productivities, in Example 3.2.1 it reflects only randomness.75

Example 3.2.1 is extreme because it assumes all industries are nontradable.
Nt
Assume instead that Tt≠∅, and let I c,t
= N t ∩ I c,t . As a result of agglomeration
Nt
Nt
effects, any collection of sets I c,t
(with I c,t
≠ ∅ for all c∈C) that constitutes a partition

of Nt is an equilibrium of the world economy. Let again HcT,t and K cT,t be the factor
endowments used in the production of tradable goods, i.e. all final goods and the
intermediate inputs of tradable industries. It follows that: 76

(98)


Y 
HcT,t = max 0 , Hc,t −
(1 − α i ) ⋅ σ i ⋅ t  for all c∈C
w c,t 
Nt

i∈I c,t


(99)


Y 
α i ⋅ σi ⋅ t 
K cT,t = max 0 , K c,t −
rc,t 
Nt

i∈I c,t


∑

∑

for all c∈C

75
Given our assumption of full depreciation of inputs, nothing prevents the pattern of production to shift
randomly from generation to generation. This model therefore is consistent with any dynamics for the
world income distribution. If inputs depreciated slowly, initial randomness would persist for some time.
76
Here, I am assuming that industries do not split across regions. As mentioned in an earlier footnote,
this is possible too.

84

Equations (98)-(99) show the factor supplies that are left after subtracting from
aggregate factor supplies the factors used in nontradable industries. These
Equations are analogous to Equations (87)-(88) of sub-section 3.1. One can use
N
to generalize the theory of
Equations (98)-(99) and a given collection of sets I c,t

sections 2.4 and 2.5. For instance, in Example 2.4.1 Equations (47)-(52) still apply
provided that we write HcT,t and K cT,t instead of Hc,t and Kc,t.
The effects of this generalization of the theory are hard to assess given the
multiplicity of equilibria and the inherent difficulty of finding a “respectable” selection
criteria.77 It is always possible to find perverse equilibria in which regions specialize
in the “wrong” industries, i.e. industries in which they do not have comparative
advantage. Naturally, all the equilibria of section 2 in which regions specialize in the
industries in which they have comparative advantage still apply if requirement R3 is
not binding (as we have assumed so far). But there is no compelling reason to
choose them over some of the alternatives. Moreover, if requirement R3 is violated
or is binding, the equilibria studied in section 2 no longer apply to this world
economy. The following example, inspired by Krugman and Venables [1995], relaxes
the assumption that industries are “small” and clearly illustrates this point:

Example 3.2.2: Consider a world with two industries I={A,M} and two regions

C={N,S}. Assume that both industries have the same factor intensities, i.e. αi=α for
all i∈I; but different sizes σA<0.5<σM (remember that σA+σM=1). Also assume that
both regions are identical, i.e. they have the same savings, human capital, industry
productivities and initial condition. Assume next that the world starts in autarky and
globalization proceeds in two stages: in the first one industry A becomes tradable,
i.e. Nt={M} for 0≤t<T; and in the second stage also industry M becomes tradable, i.e.

77

Matsuyama [1991], Krugman [1991] and Fukao and Benabou [1993] study some interesting ways of
resolving this indeterminacy.

85

Nt=∅ for t≥T. In the world of autarky, both regions have the same income and the
question that I shall address here is: How does globalization affect the world income
distribution?
At date t=0, all transport costs disappear except for those that affect the
intermediate inputs of industry M. There are two possible patterns of production and
trade that can emerge as a result of this. The first one consists of both regions
producing the same they did in autarky and not trading between them. Since both
regions would have the same goods and factor prices, there would be no incentive
for any producer to deviate from this equilibrium. The second possible pattern of
production and trade that can emerge consists of each region specializing in a
different industry. For instance, assume N specializes in industry M. The absence of
other local producers in industry M means that producers in S have no incentive to
produce in industry M. Since spending on industry M is more than half of world
spending, factor prices are higher in N and therefore producers in N cannot compete
in industry A.78
It follows from this discussion that the first stage of globalization generates
world inequality and world instability. In the world of autarky, both regions had the
same income level and income volatility was driven by volatility in fundamentals, i.e.
savings, human capital and industry productivities. Globalization generates
divergence in incomes because in the equilibrium with specialization the region that
“captures” industry M has higher income than the region that is “stuck” producing in
industry A. The world income distribution is determined by Equation (97). One effect
of this inequality is faster physical capital accumulation in N than in S. Globalization
also generates instability, since the pattern of specialization can now change
capriciously just as a result of a change in expectations. At any time the
specialization pattern can change to the detriment of N and to the advantage of S.

78

The assumption that industry M is large is crucial in reducing the number of equilibria to three. If there
were many “small” M-industries there would also be additional equilibria that split these industries
between regions in many different ways.

86

This constitutes an additional source of income volatility that goes beyond
fundamentals.
At date t=T, transport costs for the intermediate inputs of industry M vanish.
Although the pattern of production and trade is not uniquely determined, we know
that factor prices and incomes are uniquely determined.79 Moreover, since we have
assumed that both industries have the same factor intensities, the world income
distribution is now given by Equation (70). It follows that the second stage of
globalization starts a slow process of convergence in incomes that eventually
restores equality across regions. Throughout this process, expectations no longer
play any role and the only sources of income volatility are fluctuations in
fundamentals.

This example features a combination of agglomeration effects and “large”
industries that underlies most of the work known as economic geography.80 This
research has focused on explaining how income differences can arise among
regions that initially have the same fundamentals. The view of globalization and
development that arises from this literature is colorful and suggestive, although it has
not been subjected yet to serious empirical analysis.

Not surprisingly, globalization might lead to a Pareto-inferior outcome in the
world of this section. The following example, which is related to Examples 2.1.2 and
3.1.3, shows this:

79

When Nt=∅, we are back to the world of section 2. The reason why the pattern of production is
indeterminate is because I have assumed that industry A and M have the same factor intensities.
Otherwise we would be in the case of Example 2.1.1.
80
See Fujita, Krugman and Venables [1999] and Baldwin, Forslid, Martin, Ottaviano and Robert-Nicaud
[2003].

87

Example 3.2.3: Consider a world economy with H- and K-industries, such that

IH∪IK=I and IH∩IK=∅. Assume αi=0 if i∈IH, and αi=1 if i∈IK; and βi is small (but not
zero) for all i∈I. Within each type there are “advanced” and “backward” industries.
A-regions have the highest possible productivity in all industries, regardless of
whether they are “advanced” or “backward”. B-regions have the highest possible
productivity only in “backward” industries. Assume next that after globalization all
industries are non-tradable. This world is just a special case of Example 3.2.1. We
know therefore that there is an equilibrium in which A-regions specialize in
“backwards” industries while B-regions specialize in “advanced” industries. This
equilibrium can be easily shown to deliver equal or less income and welfare than
autarky. Since βi is small for all i∈I, the benefits from an increase in market size are
negligible. Since the allocation of production worsens relative to autarky, production
and income go down as a result of globalization. Therefore, it is not possible to find a
transfer scheme that ensures that globalization benefits all.

Although this is real a theoretical possibility, it is not clear yet how seriously
should we take the possibility that globalization worsens the world allocation of
production and reduces welfare. How important empirically are these agglomeration
effects? What is the relative importance of randomness and comparative advantage
in determining the pattern of production and trade? The answers to these questions
are critical in determining whether the basic policy prescription that simply opening
up to trade leads to development really applies or not. In the worlds of this section,
opening up to trade can lead to miracles and disasters alike. A miracle is nothing but
a lucky region that attracts a large number of industries exhibiting agglomeration
effects. A disaster is an unlucky region that cannot do so. Opening up to trade is
therefore a gamble. It opens the door for industries to come into the region and
enrich it, but it also opens the door for industries to leave the region and impoverish
it. Naturally, the temptation to change the odds of this gamble using industrial
policies and protectionism might be overwhelming. The prescriptions for

88

development are therefore easy to spot but not pleasant. This is a world
characterized by negative international spillovers and strong temptations to use
“beggar-thy-neighbor” policies.
Despite the presence of transport costs, differences in regional market size
still play no role in determining the world income distribution in the worlds of this subsection and the previous one. If intermediate inputs are tradable, all regions use the
same set of specialized inputs and enjoy the same level of industry specialization or
technology to produce final goods. If final goods are tradable, industries concentrate
their production in one or few regions and all regions buy their final goods at the
same prices. The ability to trade intermediates and/or final goods therefore implies
that regional differences in market size cannot be a source of regional differences in
incomes. We next turn to a world that features some industries in which neither
intermediates nor final goods can be traded. This brings back market size effects as
a determinant of the world income distribution.

3.3 The role of local markets
We turn next to a world in which the costs of trading intermediate inputs and
final goods are prohibitive if i∈Nt, but negligible if i∈Tt. As in all the worlds considered
in this chapter, the benefits of developing specialized inputs depend on the size of
the industry’s market. For tradable industries, this market is the world economy. For
nontradable industries, this market is the region. As a result, regional differences in
market size will be translated into regional differences in the degree of specialization
or technology of nontradable industries. 81
81
There is little empirical evidence that regional differences in market size are an important determinant
of income differences. When one interprets the data from the vantage point of the world of autarky, this
observation implies that market size effects are weak and sustained growth is not possible. This has led
many researchers to spend a substantial effort in developing autarky models where sustained growth is
possible without market size effects. Somewhat ironically, once one takes a world equilibrium view of
the growth process what requires a substantial effort is to develop models where regional differences in
market size do affect the world income distribution.

89

Formally, this model is very similar to the one in sub-section 3.1. Equations
(81)-(82) describe investment and consumption, while Equations (83)-(84) still
provide the numeraire rule and the price level. Naturally, Equation (3) describing
spending patterns still applies to all regions, and Equations (5)-(6) describing
technology apply to all regions, with the corresponding factor prices and industry
productivities. The only difference with the model of section 3.1 is when Equations
Equations (7)-(10) describing pricing policies, input demands and the free-entry
condition apply. For tradable industries, these Equations apply only to those regions
where the lowest-cost producers are located. For nontradable industries, these
Equations apply to all regions and not only to the lowest-cost ones. Thus, Equation
(44) no longer applies to producers in nontradable industries, and Equation (93)
must be replaced by Equation (95). Market clearing conditions are also the same as
in the model of section 3.1, and consist of Equations (45)-(46) describing market
clearing in regional factor markets, Equation (11) describing market clearing in global
markets for tradable industries, and Equation (85) describing market clearing in
regional markets for nontradable industries.
This completes the formal description of the model. For any admissible set of
capital stocks, i.e. Kc,0 for all c∈C; sequences for the vectors of savings, human
capital and industry productivities, i.e. Sc,t, Hc,t, and Ac,it for all c∈C and for all i∈I; and
a sequence for the set Nt (or Tt); an equilibrium of the world economy after
globalization consists of a sequence of prices and quantities such that the equations
listed above hold in all dates and states of nature. Like other worlds we have studied
up to now, there might be multiple geographical patterns of production that are
consistent with world equilibrium. But unlike the world of the previous sub-section
(and like the worlds of section 2 and sub-section 3.1), prices and world aggregates
are uniquely determined.

90

In this world economy, the set FPEt is empty. Since intermediate inputs that
are produced in a region cannot be used in another region, the world economy
cannot reach the level of efficiency of the integrated economy.82 Despite this, it is
relatively straightforward to analyze this world. Define again HcT,t and K cT,t as the
factor endowments devoted to the production of tradable goods, i.e. all intermediate
inputs and final goods of tradable industries. Straightforward algebra shows that: 83

(100)

HcT,t

−1




 wc,t 

 ⋅ (1− αi ) ⋅ σi 
= max0, Hc,t ⋅ 1− (1− αi ) ⋅ σi  − K c,t ⋅ 

 i∈N



 rc,t  i∈N t
t



∑

∑





w
(101) K cT,t = max0, K c,t ⋅ 1− α i ⋅ σi  − Hc,t ⋅ c,t ⋅ ⋅ α i ⋅ σi 
 i∈N

rc,t i∈N t


t



∑

∑

for all c∈C

for all c∈C

Since factor supplies are well behaved, all the results in sections 2.4 and 2.5
regarding market-based incomes and factor prices still go through in the presence of
nontradable industries. As in sub-section 3.1, the only important difference between
the world of this sub-section and the one in section 2 is that there is a discrepancy
between market-based and real incomes and factor prices. In particular, we can
write the price level of region c as follows:

(102) Pc,t


 1
=

i∈N t  σ i


∏

 1
⋅
 Z c,it

 w 
⋅  c,t 
 1 − αi 

1−αi

r
⋅  c,t
 αi

82





αi





1−βi

Mc ,it

βi
 1−εi

⋅  p c,it (m)1−εi ⋅ dm


 0


∫







σi

for all c∈C

The set FPEt might be non-empty in the limiting case where βi→0 (or εi→∞) for all i∈I. But that limiting
case brings us to the world of sub-section 3.1.
83
To see this, note that the shares of human and physical capital devoted to producing the final good of
the ith nontradable industry are now (1-αi) and αi. Add over industries and note that the share of
spending in the ith industry is σi⋅Yc,t.

91

The only difference between this Equation and Equation (91) is that the
number and price of intermediate inputs varies across regions. Using Equations (6)
and (10), we can transform Equation (103) into the following:

(103) Pc,t


1
=
 µi
σ ⋅ A c,it
i∈N t 
 i

∏

 w 
⋅  c,t 
 1 − αi 

(1−αi )⋅µi

r
⋅  c,t
 αi





αi ⋅µi

⋅

Yc1,−t µi





σi

Basically, this model brings another element to the theory of the price level.
To the extent that nontradable industries exhibit increasing returns, regions with
larger markets have lower price levels and higher real incomes.
It is straightforward to re-do some of the previous examples in the context of
this world. But I shall not do this. The picture that this world generates is clear and
unappealing form an empirical standpoint: regional differences in market size are
reflected in regional differences in price levels. Ceteris paribus, larger local markets
do not lead to higher market-based incomes and factor prices. But they do lead to
lower price levels and, as a result, to higher real incomes and factor prices. This is
clearly counterfactual.

4. Final remarks
This chapter has developed a unified and yet tractable framework that
integrates many key insights of the fields of international trade and economic growth.
Its distinguishing feature is that it provides a global view of the growth process, that
is, a view that treats different regions of the world as parts of a single whole. This
framework incorporates the standard idea that economic growth in the world
economy is determined by a tension between diminishing returns and market size
effects to capital accumulation. A substantial effort has been made to show how

92

trade frictions of various sorts determine the shape of the world income distribution
and its dynamics.
Despite the length of this chapter, some important topics have been left out.
The first and most glaring omission is asset trade. This type of trade allows the world
economy to redirect its investment towards regions that offer the highest riskadjusted return.84 To the extent that patterns of trade are determined by comparative
advantage, these are the regions where capital is scarce and productive and this
raises efficiency in the world economy. To the extent that patterns of trade are
determined by luck, asset trade magnifies the effect of this randomness and this
could either raise or lower the efficiency of the world economy. If this were all there
is to asset trade, it would not be too difficult to add to this chapter a section on asset
trade in which we endow the world economy with a complete set of asset markets.
But asset trade does not seem to work as the standard theory of complete markets
would suggest. Empirically asset trade seems both much smaller and much more
volatile than it would be warranted by its fundamentals, i.e. savings, human capital
and industry productivities. To understand these aspects of asset trade it seems
necessary to incorporate to the theory features such as sovereign risk, asymmetric
information and asset bubbles. Although this is a very important task, it would
require another chapter of this magnitude and must therefore be left for future
work.85
A second important omission of this chapter is government policy. A central
aspect of globalization so far has been its imbalanced nature. While economic
integration has proceeded at a relatively fast pace, political integration is advancing
at a slower pace or not advancing at all. The world economy today features global
(or semi-global) markets but local governments. In this context, globalization can
lead to a decline in growth and income through a reduction in the quality of policies.
84
Naturally, asset trade also allows for a better risk sharing and this raises welfare. Better risk sharing
might also increase investment and growth. See Obstfeld [1994].
85
Among the many papers that study the behavior of financial markets in world equilibrium models, see
Gertler and Rogoff [1990], Acemoglu and Zilibotti [1997], Ventura [2002], Matsuyama [2004], Martin and
Rey [2002, 2004], Kraay, Loayza, Servén and Ventura [2005] and Broner and Ventura [2005].

93

International spillovers eliminate the incentives to adopt good but costly policies.
Trade also “bails out” regions with bad policies since they can spare some of their
costs by specializing in industries where bad policies have little effects. As a result of
these forces, globalization could create a “race to the bottom” in policies that lowers
savings, human capital, and industry productivities. And this could potentially
mitigate or even reverse the benefits from economic integration.86 Understanding the
circumstances under which this “race to the bottom” can happen and the appropriate
policy corrections that are required to allow the world economy to take full advantage
of globalization is another important task. But this task would also require another
chapter of this magnitude and cannot be undertaken here.
At first sight, factor movements might seem a third important omission. But I
think it is less so. As mentioned in section 2, the notion that physical and human
capital is geographically immobile seems a fair description of reality. Moreover, the
benefits of factor mobility might be reaped without factors having to move at all.
What is really important about factor movements is that they permit factors located in
different regions to work together and produce. Advances in telecommunications
technology and the standardization of software allow producers around the world to
combine physical and human capital located in different regions in a single
production process. We can always think of this situation as one in which the
production process has been broken down into intermediate inputs. An increased
ability to combine factors located in different regions could therefore be modeled as
an increase in the tradability of intermediate inputs, or as an increase in the share of
intermediate inputs, or as the development of additional inputs with more extreme
factor intensities. All of these possibilities could be (and some have already been)
analyzed within the framework developed in this chapter.87
86
See Levchenko [2004] for a situation in which globalization leads to a “race to the top” in government
policies, though.
87
An increase in the tradability of inputs corresponds to a gradual increase in Tt in the models of section
3.2 and 3.3. An increase in the share of intermediate inputs corresponds to a gradual increase in βi,
while the development of inputs with more extreme factor intensities corresponds to a gradual change
in αi. I have assumed throughout that industry characteristics are time-invariant only for simplicity. All
the formulas in this chapter remain valid if we instead assume that industry characteristics vary,
perhaps stochastically, over time.

94

The goal of this chapter has been to convey a global way of thinking about
the growth process. To claim success, you should be persuaded by now that
developing and systematically studying world equilibrium models is a necessary
condition to gain a true understanding of the growth process. By “true”, I mean the
sort of understanding that allows us to frame clear and unambiguous hypotheses
about why some countries are richer than others or what are the main forces that
drive economic growth in the world economy. To claim success, you should also be
convinced by now that much is already known about the structure of world
equilibrium models. But you should also be aware that the global view of economic
growth that these models reveal is still somewhat fuzzy and blurred. Sharpening this
view is a major challenge for growth and trade theorists alike.

5. References
Acemoglu, D. [2003]: “Patterns of Skill Premia”, Review of Economic Studies, Vol.
70, pp. 199-230
Acemoglu, D. and Ventura, J. [2002]; “The world Income Distribution,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics CXVII, pp. 659-694
Acemoglu, D. and Zilibotti, F. [2001]: “Productivity Differences,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics CXVI, pp. 563-605.
Acemoglu, D. and Zilibotti, F. [1997]: “Was Prometheus Unbound by Chance? Risk,
Diversification and Growth”, Journal of Political Economy CV, pp.709-751
Ades, A. and Glaeser, E. L. [1999]: “Evidence on Growth, Increasing Returns, and
the Extent of the Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (3), pp.1025-45.
Alcalá, F. and Ciccone, A. [2003]: “Trade, Extent of the Market, and Economic
Growth 1960-96,” mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Alcalá, F. and Ciccone, A. [2004]: “Trade and Productivity,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 119 (2), pp. 613-46.

95

Alesina, A., Spolaore, E., and Wacziarg, R. [2000]: “Economic Integration and
Political Disintegration,” American Economic Review, 90 (5), pp. 1276-96
Alvarez, F. and Lucas, R. [2004]: “General Equilibirum Analysis of the EatonKourtum model of International Trade,” manuscript, University of Chicago.
Aoki, M. [1986]: “Dynamic Adjustment Behaviour to Anticipated Supply Shocks in a
Two-Country Model”, Economic Journal, XCVI, pp. 80-100
Arnold, L. G. [2002]: “On the Growth Effect of North-South Trade: the Role of Labor
Market Flexibility,” Journal of International Economics LVIII, pp. 451-466
Atkeson, A. and Kehoe, P. [1998]: "Paths of Development for Early and Late
Bloomers in a Dynamic Hecksher-Ohlin Model", Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis Staff Report 256
Backus, D., Kehoe, P., and Kydland, F. [1992]:, “International Real Business Cycle”,
Journal of Political Economy, C, pp.745-775
Baldwin, R. [1992]: “Measurable Dynamic Gains from Trade” Journal of Political
Economy C, pp. 162-174
Baldwin, R. and Forslid R. [2000]: “Trade Liberalization and Endogenous Growth. A
q-theory Approach,” Journal of International Economics L, pp. 497-517
Baldwin, R., Martin, P., and Ottaviano G. I. P. [2001]: “Global Income Divergence,
Trade, and Industrialization: The Geography of Growth Take-Offs”, Journal of
Economic Growth, V pp. 5–37
Baldwin, R., R. Forslid, P. Martin, G. Ottaviano, and F. Robert-Nicaud: "Economic
Geography and Public Policy ", Princeton University Press 2003 ISBN 0-691-10275-9
Bardham, P. [1965]: “Optimal Accumulation and International Trade,” Review of
Economics Studies XXXII, pp. 241-244
Bardham, P. [1965a]: “Equilibrium Growth in the International Economy,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics LXXIX, pp. 455-464.
Bardham, P. [1966]: “On Factor Accumulation and the Pattern of International
Specialization,” Review of Economics Studies XXXIII, pp. 39-44.
Barro, R. J. [1991]: “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 106, No. 2, pp. 407-443
Basu, S. and Weil P. [1998]: “Appropriate Technology and Growth,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics CXIII, pp. 1025-1053.

96

Baxter, M. [1992]: “Fiscal Policy, Specialization in the Two-Sector Model: the Return
of Ricardo?” Journal of Political Economy C, pp. 713-744
Bourguignon, F and Morrison, C. [2002]: “Inequality Among World Citizens: 18201992” American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 4, pp. 727-744
Brems, H. [1956]: “The Foreign Trade Accelerator and the International
Transmission of Growth,” Econometrica XXIV, pp. 223-238.
Brems, H. [1970]: “ A Growth Model of International Direct Investment,” American
Economic Review LX, pp. 320-331.
Brezis, S.L., Krugman, P., and Tsiddon D. [1993]: “Leapfrogging in International
Competition: A theory of Cycles in National Technological Leadership,” American
Economic Review LXXXIII, pp. 1211-1219
Broner, F, and Ventura J. [2005]: “Managing Financial Integration,” manuscript,
CREI.
Buiter, W.H. [1981]: “ Time Preference and International Lending and Borrowing in an
Overlapping-Generations Model” Journal of Political Economy LXXIX, pp. 769-797
Caselli, F., Esquivel, G. and Lefort, F. [1996]: “Reopening the Convergence Debate:
A New Look at Cross-Country Growth Empirics” Journal of Economic Growth
Chang, R. [1990]: “International Coordination of Fiscal Deficits”, Journal of Monetary
Economics, XXV, pp.347-366
Chui, M., Levine, P., and Pearlman, J. [2001]: “Winners and Losers in a North-South
Model of Growth, Innovation and Product Cycles,” Journal of Development
Economics LXV, pp. 333-365.
Cuñat, A. and Mafezzoli, M. [2004]: “Heckscher-Ohlin Business Cycles”, Review of
Economic Dynamics 7(3), pp. 555-85.
Cuñat, A. and Mafezzoli, M. [2004a]: “Neoclassical Growth and Commodity Trade”,
Review of Economic Dynamics 7(3), pp. 707-36.
Davis, D. [1995]: “Intra-industry Trade: A Heckscher-Ohlin-Ricardo Approach,”
Journal of International Economics, XXXIX, pp. 201-226.
Deardorff, A.V. [2001]: “Rich and poor countries in neoclassical trade and growth”,
Economic Journal, CXI, pp.277-294.
Devereux, M. and Lapham, B. J. [1994]: “ The Stability of Economic Integration and
Endogenous Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CIX, pp. 299-305.

97

Devereux, M. B. and Saito, M. [1997]: “Growth and Risk-Sharing with Incomplete
International Assets Markets,” Journal of International Economics XLII, pp. 453-481.
Devereux, M. B. and Shi, S. [1991]: “Capital Accumulation and the Current Account
in a Two-Country Model,” Journal of International Economics L, pp. 1-25.
Dinopoulos, E. and Segerstrom, P. [1999]: “A Schumpeterian Model of Protection
and Relative Wages” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 3, pp. 450-472
.
Dinopoulos, E. and Syropoulos, C. [1997]: “Tariffs and Schumpeterian Growth,”
Journal of International Economics XLII, pp. 425-452.
Dixit, A.K., and V. Norman: Theory of International Trade, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, New York, Port Chester, Melbourne, Sydney 1989, ISBN
0521234816
Dollar, D. [1986]: “Technological Innovation, Capital Mobility, and the Product Cycle
in North-South Trade,” American Economic Review LXXVI, pp. 177-190
Dollar, D. and Kraay, A. [2003]: “Institutions, Trade, and Growth,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 50 (1), pp. 133-162
Dornbusch, R., Fischer, S., and Samuelson, P. A. [1977]: “Comparative Advantage,
Trade, and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods”, American
Economic Review, Vol. 67 No.5, pp. 823-839
Dornbusch, R., Fischer, S., and Samuelson, P. A. [1980]: “Heckscher-Ohlin Trade
Theory with a Continuum of Goods”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 95, No. 2,
pp. 203-224
Eaton, J. and Kortum, S. [2002]: "Technology, Geography, and Trade”,
Econometrica 70: pp. 1741-1779
Elkan, R. van [1996]: “Catching Up and Slowing Down: Learning and Growth
Patterns in an Open Economy,” Journal of International Economics XLI, pp. 95-111.
Feenstra, R. C. [1996]: “Trade and Uneven Growth,” Journal of Development
Economics IL, pp. 229-256
Findlay, R. [1978]: “An ‘Austrian’ Model of International Trade and Interest Rate
Equalization”, Journal of Political Economy, LXXXVI, pp. 989-1007
Findlay, R. [1980]: “The Terms of Trade and Equilibrium Growth in the World
Economy,” American Economic Review LXX, pp. 291-299
Findlay, R and Kierzkowski, H. [1983]: “International Trade and Capital: A Simple
General Equilibrium Model” Journal of Political Economy XCI, pp. 957-978

98

Fisher, O’N. [1995]: “Growth, Trade, and International Transfers,” Journal of
International Economics IXL, pp. 143-158
Flam, H. and Helpman, E. [1987]: “Vertical Product Differentiation and North-South
Trade,” American Economic Review LXXVII, pp. 810-822
Frankel, J. A. and Romer, D. [1999]: ''Does Trade Cause Growth?'' American
Economic Review, Vol. 89 No.3, pp. 379-399
Francois, J. F. [1996]: “Trade, Labour Force Growth and Wages”, Economic Journal,
439, pp. 1586-1609
Frenkel, J. and Razin, A. [1985]: “Government Spending, Debt, and International
Economic Interdependence”, Economics Journal, XCV, pp.619-636
Frenkel, J. and Razin, A. [1986]: “Fiscal Policies in the World Economy”, Journal of
Political Economy, XCIV, pp. 564-594
Fujita, M. P., Krugman, P. R., and Venables, A. J.: "The Spatial Economy", MIT
Press 1999 ISBN 0-262-06204-6
Fukao, K., and R. Benabou [1993]: “History vs. Expectations: A Comment,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, CVIII, pp. 535-542.
Gale, D. [1971]: “General Equilibrium with Imbalance of Trade,” Journal of
International Economics I, pp. 141-158.
Galor, O. and Polemarchakis, H.M. [1987]: “Intertemporal Equilibrium and the
Transfer Paradox”, Review of Economic Studies, LIV, pp.147-156
Gancia, G. [2003]: "Globalization, Divergence and Stagnation" IIES Working Paper
#720
Gertler, M. and Rogoff, K. [1990]: “North-South Lending and Endogenous Domestic
Capital Market Inefficiencies”, Journal of Monetary Economics, XXVI, pp. 245-266
Glass, A.J. and Saggi, K. [1998]: “International Technology Transfer and the
Technology Gap,” Journal of Development Economics LV, pp. 369-398
Glass, A.J. and Saggi, K. [2002]: “Intellectual Property Rights and Foreign Direct
Investment,” Journal of International Economics LVI, pp. 387-410
Greenwood, J., Williamson, S.D. [1989]: “International Financial Intermediation and
Aggregate Fluctuations under Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, XXIII, pp. 401-431

99

Grossman, G. and Helpman, E. [1989]: “Product Development and International
Trade”, Journal of Political Economy XCVII, pp. 1261-1283
Grossman, G.M. and Helpman E. [1990]: “Comparative Advantage and Long-Run
Growth,” American Economic Review LXXX, pp. 796-815
Grossman, G.M. and Helpman E. [1991]: “Quality Ladders and Product Cycles,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics CVI, pp. 557-586
Grossman, G. and Helpman, E. [1991a]: “Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth”,
Review of Economic Studies LVIII, pp. 43-61
Grossman, G. M. and Helpman, E.: “Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy”,
MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 1991 ISBN 0-262-07136-3
Hall, R. E. and Jones, C. I. [1999]: “Why Do Some Countries Produces More Output
per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics
Heathcote, J. and Perri, F. [2002]: “Financial Autarky and International Business
Cycles”, Journal of Monetary Economics, XLIX, pp. 601-627
Helpman, E. [1993]: “Innovation, Imitation, and Intellectual Property Rights,”
Econometrica LXI, pp. 1247-1280
Helpman, E. and Krugman, P. R.: Market Structure and Foreign Trade, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts; London, England 1985 ISBN 0-262-08150-4
Howitt, P. [2000]: “Endogenous Growth and Cross-Country Income Differences,”
American Economic Review CXC, pp. 829-846
Jensen, R. and Thursby, M. [1987]: “A Decision Theoretic Model of Innovation,
Technology Transfer and Trade”, Review of Economic Studies, LIV, pp.631-647
Klenow, P. J. and Rodriguez-Clare A. [1997]: "The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?" NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp. 73-102
Klundert, T. van de and Smulders, S. [1996]: “North-South Knowledge Spillovers and
Competition: Convergence versus Divergence,” Journal of Development Economics
L, pp. 213-232
Klundert, T. van de and Smulders, S. [2001]: “Loss of Technological Leadership of
Rentier Economies: a Two-Country Endogenous Growth Model,” Journal of
International Economics LIV, pp. 211-231
Kraay, A., Loayza, N., Servén L. and Ventura J. [2005]: “Country Portfolios”, Journal
of the European Economic Association, III, forthcoming

100

Krugman, P. [1979]: “A Model of Innovation, Technological Transfer and the World
Distribution of Income”, Journal of Political Economy, LXXXVII, pp. 253-266
Krugman, P. [1981]: “Trade, Accumulation, and Uneven Growth,” Journal of
International Economics VIII, pp. 149-161
Krugman, P. [1987]; “The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the
Competitive Consequences of Mrs. Thatcher,” Journal of Development Economics
XXVII, pp. 41-55
Krugman, P. [1991] “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography”, Journal of
Political Economy, IC, pp. 483-499
Krugman, P. [1991]: “History vs. Expectations”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVI,
pp. 651-667.
Krugman, P., and A. Venables [1995]: “Globalization and the Inequality of Nations,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CIX, pp. 857-880.
Lai, E.L.-C. [1995]: “The Product cycle and the World Distribution of Income. A
Reformulation,” Journal of International Economics IXL, pp. 369-382
Lai, E. L.-C. [1998]; “International Intellectual Property Rights Protection and the
Rate of Product Innovation” Journal of Development Economics LV, pp. 133-153
Levchenko, A. [2004]: “Institutional Quality and International Trade”, manuscript MIT
Loayza N. V., Knight M., and Villanueva D. [1993]: “Testing the Neoclassical Theory
of Economics Growth: A Panel Data Approach” IMF Staff Papers
Lundborg, P. and Segerstrom, P.S. [2002]: “The Growth and Welfare Effects of
International Mass Migration,” Journal of International Economics LVI, pp. 177-204
Mankiw, N. G., Romer, D., and Weil, D. N. [1992]: “A Contribution to the Empirics of
Economic Growth” Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 107, No. 2, pp. 407-437
Martin, P. and Rey H. [2002]: “Globalization and Emerging Markets: With or Without
Crash”, CEPR working paper DP3378
Martin, P. and Rey H. [2004]: “Financial Super-Markets: Size Matters for Asset
Trade,” Journal of International Economics, LXIV, pp. 335-661.
Matsuyama, K. [1991]: “Increasing Returns, Industrialization and Indeterminacy of
Equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVI, pp. 617-650.

101

Matsuyama, K. [2000]: “A Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods under
Nonhomothetic Preferences: Demand Complementarities, Income Distribution, and
North-South Trade”, Journal of Political Economy, CVIII, pp. 1093-1120
Matsuyama, K. [2004]: “Financial Market Globalization, Symmetry-Breaking and
Endogenous Inequality of Nations”, Econometrica, LXXII, No. 3, pp.853-884
Matsuyama, K. [2004a]: “Beyond Icebergs: Modeling Globalization as Biased
Technical Change” Working Paper Northwestern University
Modigliani, F. and Ando, A. [1963]: "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving", American
Economic Review Vol. 53, No. 1, pp. 55-84
Molana, H., Vines, D. [1989]: “North-South Growth and the Terms of Trade: A Model
on Kaldorian Lines”, Economic Journal, IC pp. 443-453
Mountford, A. [1998]: “Trade, Convergence and Overtaking,” Journal of International
Economics XLVI, pp. 167-182.
Myers, M. G. [1970]: ”Equilibrium Growth and Capital Movements Between Open
Economies,” American Economic Review LX, pp. 393-397.
Dixit, A.K., and V. Norman: Theory of International Trade, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, New York, Port Chester, Melbourne, Sydney 1989, ISBN
0521234816
Obstfeld, M. [1989]: “Fiscal Deficits and Relative Prices in a Growing World
Economy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, XXIII, pp. 461-484
Obstfeld, M. [1994]: “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth,” American
Economic Review LXXXIV, pp. 1310-1329.
Oniki, H. and Uzawa H. [1965]: “Patterns of Trade and Investment in a Dynamic
Model of International Trade” Review of Economics Studies XXXII, pp. 15-38.
Ono, Y. and Shibata, A. [1991]: “Spill-Over Effects of Supply-Side Changes in a
Two-Country Economy with Capital Accumulation,” Journal of International
Economics XXXIII, pp. 127-146.
Ortega, F. [2004]: “Immigration policy and the Welfare State”, manuscript UPF
Pritchett, L. [1997]: “Divergence, Big Time”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol.
11, No. 3, pp. 3-17
Puga, D., Venables, A. J. [1999]: “Agglomeration and Economic Development:
Import Substitution vs. Trade Liberalisation”, Economic Journal, CIX, pp. 292-311

102

Rauch, J. E. [1991]: “Reconciling the Pattern of trade with the Pattern of Migration,”
American Economic Review LXXXI, pp. 775-796
Rivera-Batiz, L. and Romer P. A. [1991]: “Economic Integration and endogenous
Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CVI, pp. 531-555.
Rodriguez, F. and Rodrik, D. [2000]: “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A
Skeptic’s Guide to the Cross-National Evidence” NBER Macroeconomic Annual
Ruffin, R.J. [1979]: “Growth and the Long-Run Theory of International Capital
Movements,” American Economic Review LXIX, pp. 832-842
Sachs; J. and Warner, A. [1995]: ''Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration'' Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No.1
Samuelson, P. A. [1948]: “International Trade and The Equalization of Factor
Prices”, Economic Journal, LVIII, pp. 163-84
Samuelson, P. A. [1949]: “International Trade and The Equalization of Factor Prices,
Again”, Economic Journal, Vol. 59, No. 234, pp. 181-197
Sauré, P. [2004]: “Revisiting the Infant Industry Argument”, manuscript UPF
Sauré, P. [2004]: “How to Use Industrial Policy to Sustain Trade Agreements”,
manuscript UPF
Segerstrom, P. S., Anant, T.C.A., and E. Dinopoulos [1990]: “A Schumpeterian
Model of the Product Life Cycle,” American Economic Review LXXX, pp. 1077-1091.
Şener, F. [2001]: “Schumpeterian Unemployment, Trade and Wages,” Journal of
International Economics LIV, pp. 119-148.
Sibert, A. [1985]: “Capital Accumulation and Foreign Investment Taxation”, Review
of Economic Studies, LII, pp. 331-345
Solow, R. M. [1956]: “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 70, No. 1, pp. 65-94
Stiglitz, J. E. [1970]: “Factor Price Equalization in a Dynamic Economy,” Journal of
Political Economy LXXVIII, pp. 456-488
Stokey, N. L. [1991]: “The Volume and Composition of Trade Between Rich and
Poor Countries”, Review of Economic Studies, LVIII, pp. 63-80
Taylor, M. S. [1993]: “Quality Ladders and Ricardian Trade,” Journal of International
Economics XXXIV, pp. 225-243.

103

Taylor, M. S. [1994]: “”Once-Off and Continuing Gains from Trade”, Review of
Economic Studies, LXI, pp. 589-601
Trefler, D. [1993]: "International Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right!"
Journal of Political Economy Vol. 101, No. 6, pp. 961-987
Vanek, J. [1971]: “Economic Growth and International Trade in Pure Theory,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics LXXXV, pp. 377-390.
Ventura, J. [1997], “Growth and Interdependence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
CXII, 1, pp. 57-84.
Ventura, J. [2002], “Bubbles and Capital Flows” NBER Working Paper No. 9304
Wang, J.-Y. [1990]: “Growth, Technology transfer, and the Long-Run Theory of
International Capital Movements,” Journal of International Economics XXIX, pp. 255271.
Wilson, C. [1980]: “On the General Structure of Ricardian Models with a
Continuum of Goods: Applications to Growth, Tariff Theory, and Technical
Change” Econometrica. 48: pp. 1675-1702
Yanagawa, N. [1996]: “Economic Development in a World with Many Countries,”
Journal of Development Economics IL, pp. 271-288.
Yang, G. and Maskus K.E. [2001]: “Intellectual Property Rights, Licensing, and
Innovation in an Endogenous Product-Cycle Model,” Journal of International
Economics LIII, pp. 169-387.
Young, A. [1991]: “Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International
Trade” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 106, No. 2, pp. 369-405
Young, A. [1995]: “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of
the East Asian Growth Experience” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 110, No. 3,
pp. 641-680

104

Figure 1

World per capita GDP
10
9
8
7
6
1500

1600

1700

1800

1900

2000

Notes: This figure shows the dynamics of world per capita GDP for the
selected years 1500, 1820, 1870, 1913, 1950, 1973, and 1998 (in log of
1990 US$). Data are from Angus Maddison, “The World Economy – A
Millennial Perspective” Table 3-1b page126.

105

Figure 2
Per capita GDP Growth
Western Europe

Western Offshoots

5%

5%

4%

4%

3%

3%

2%

2%

1%

1%

0%

0%
1500-1820

1820-1870

1870-1913

1913-1950

1950-1973

1500-1820 1820-1870 1870-1913 1913-1950 1950-1973 1973-1998

1973-1998

Asia

Latin America

5%

5%

4%

4%

3%

3%

2%

2%

1%

1%
0%

0%

1500-1820 1820-1870 1870-1913 1913-1950 1950-1973 1973-1998

1500-1820 1820-1870 1870-1913 1913-1950 1950-1973 1973-1998

Africa

Eastern Europe
5%

5%

4%

4%

3%

3%

2%
2%
1%
1%

0%
-1%

1500-1820 1820-1870 1870-1913 1913-1950 1950-1973 1973-1998

0%
1500-1820 1820-1870 1870-1913 1913-1950 1950-1973 1973-1998

-2%

Notes: This figure shows average annual growth rates by major world regions for selected
periods. Data are derived from Angus Maddison, “The World Economy – A Millennial
Perspective” Table 3-1b page126. (Western Europe contains Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, Portugal,
Spain, Greece and 13 small countries; Western Offshoots are United States, Canada, Australia
and New Zealand; Asia is China, India, Japan, Korea, Indonesia, Indochina, Iran, Turkey and
Other East and West Asian countries; Latin America includes Brazil, Mexico, Peru, and Others;
Eastern Europe contains Albania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Romania and territories of former
Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia; Africa is Egypt and Others.)

106

Figure 3

World Exports as Share of World GDP
20%
1998
15%
1990
1973

10%
1913
5%

0%
1860

1950

1870

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000
years

Notes: The figure shows Volume of World Exports over World GDP (in
constant US$) for selected dates. Data are from Tables 3-1b, A1-b, A2b, A3-b, A4-b, pages126, 184, 194, 214, and 223 in Angus Maddison,
“The World Economy – A Millennial Perspective”.

107

Figure 4

Growth of Income and Trade

Growth in GDP per capita

4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
-1%
-1%

0%

1%

2%

3%

4%

5%

6%

7%

8%

9% 10%

Regression
slope:
constant:
R sq. adj.:

-2%
Growth in Export Volume

0.3 (3.84)
0.04 (1.18)
0.41

Notes: This figure plots annualized rate of trade growth against annualized rate of
per capita GDP growth for major world regions and selected periods. The Regions
are Western Europe, Western Offshoots, Eastern Europe and former USSR, Latin
America, Asia, and Africa. Periods are 1870-1913, 1913-1950, 1950-1973 and
1973-1998. Each data point stands for one region during one period. The solid line
represents the prediction of a linear regression. The estimated regression are
reported in the box, t-statistics are in brackets. Data are from Angus Maddison,
“The World Economy – A Millennial Perspective”. Data for GDP growth are
obtained from Table 3-1b page126 and Table B-10 page 241 (to include Japan).
Data for export growth are derived from Table F-3 page362 and Tables A1-b, A2-b,
A3-b, and A4-b, pages 184, 194, 214 and 223, respectively.

108

Figure 5
αµ + υ < 1
The “deterministic” case

K t +1
45º

K SS

Ko

Kt

The “stochastic” case

K t +1
45º

Good

Bad

Ko

K

K

Kt

Notes: This figure shows the case of strong deminishing returns and weak market
size effects. In the top panel, the stock of physical capital converges
monotonically to its unique steady state. The bottom panel shows the stochastic
case, where the stock of physical capital converges to the steady state interval
K, K within which it fluctuates according to the states of the world.

[

]

109

Figure 6
αµ + υ > 1
The “deterministic” case

K t +1
45º

K

Kt

Ko

The “stochastic” case

K t +1
Good

K

45º

Bad

Ko

K

Kt

Notes: This figure shows the case of weak diminishing returns and strong market
size effects. In the top panel, the stock of physical capital grows at increasing
rates since Ko > K. In the bottom panel the stock of physical capital fluctuates
between K and K according to the states of the world, until it eventually leaves
this range.

110

Figure 7
Effects of Economic Integration

αµ + υ < 1
K t +1
45º

integration

autarky

K SSA

Kt

K SSI

αµ + υ >1
K t +1
45º
integration

autarky

Kt
Notes: This figure illustrates the effects of economic integration. The top panel
shows that, if α⋅µ+υ<1, economic integration has level effects on income. The
bottom panel shows that, if α⋅µ+υ>1, economic integration has growth effects on
incomes.

111

Figure 8
OB

H

VKt

● d

*

● c

*

VHt

H A ,t =

OA

Y A ,t
wt

−

rt
K A ,t
wt

K

Notes: The box in this figure is a geometrical representation of the set Dt , as each element of
this set is a point in the box and vice versa. For instance, d * is a factor distribution such that Aregions have more human and physical capital than B-regions; but human capital is relatively
more abundant in A-regions than in B-regions. The box also contains a set of vectors that
represent the factor usage per industry that would apply in the integrated economy. For
instance, the vector Vit has height Hit and width Kit. The set FPEt is the gray area. Since all
regions have the same industry productivities, production trivially takes place only in regions
with the highest possible productivity (requirement R1). Each of the points in the gray area can
be generated as a convex combination of the integrated economy’s vectors of factor usage per
industry (requirement R2). Since βi=0, trivially there are no fixed costs of production that are
incurred twice (requirement R3). Points outside of the shaded area do not have this property
and therefore do not belong to FPEt .
The factor content of production is given by the regions’ factor endowments, i.e. d * . Since all
regions have the same spending shares and use the same techniques to produce all goods, the
factor content of consumption lies in the diagonal, i.e. c * .
In A-regions, the H-industry is a net exporter while the K-industry is a net importer. The opposite
occurs in B-regions.

112

Figure 9
OB

H

VKtO
● d

VHtO

*

● c

*

VKtA

VHtA

H A,t =

Y A,t
wt

−

rt
K A ,t
wt
K

OA

Notes: The box in this Figure is a geometrical representation of the set Dt , as each element of
this set is a point in the box and vice versa. For instance, d * is a factor distribution such that Aregions have more human and physical capital than B-regions; but human capital is relatively
more abundant in A-regions than in B-regions. There are four different industries, “advanced”
physical (human) capital intensive and “backward” physical (human) capital intensive. The Acountries have a highest productivity in the “advanced” industries; technologies in the
X
X
“backward” industries are equal in all countries. The vectors Vit have height H it and width

K itX and represent the factor content of the X-industries, where X=A,B stands for “advanced” or
“backward” industries. The set FPEt is the shaded area. In this set, all “advanced” industries
must be located in the A-countries (requirement R1). Once this requirement is satisfied, each of
the points in the shaded area can be generated as a convex combination of the integrated
economy’s vectors of factor usage of the “backward” industries (requirement R2). Since βi=0,
trivially there are no fixed costs of production that are incurred twice (requirement R3). Points
outside of the shaded area do not have both properties and therefore do not belong to FPEt .
The factor content of production is given by the regions’ factor endowments, i.e. d * . Since all
regions have the same spending shares and use the same techniques to produce all goods, the
factor content of consumption lies in the diagonal, i.e. c * . In H-regions, the H-industry is a net
exporter while the K-industry is a net importer. The opposite occurs in K-regions.

113

Figure 10
w c,t /rc,t

RK

RH

Hc,t/Kc,t

w c,t /rc,t

RM

RM

Hc,t/Kc,t

w c,t /rc,t

Hc,t/Kc,t
Notes: This figure shows how the wage-rental ratio varies with the factor
proportions. The top panel represents a two-goods, one-cone world where
countries with extreme factor proportions are outside the cone (Example
2.4.1). The middle panel represents a three-good, two-cone world where
countries with intermediate factor proportions lie outside the cone (Example
2.4.2). The bottom panel shows a world with multiple goods and cones.

114

Figure 11
fc,t/fc,t

BB
AA
1

0.5

λ

1

i

1

i

1

i

fc,t/fc,t

BB

AA
1
1/λ

0.5

λ

fc,t/fc,t

BB
AA
1
1/λ

0.5

λ

Notes: This figure shows how pattern of production and trade (i*) and relative
factor costs (fN,t/fS,t) are determined in Example 2.5.3. The top panel shows
the case of arbitrarily small differences in industry productivities. The middle
panel shows the case of arbitrarily large differences in industry productivities.
The bottom panel shows the intermediate case.

115

