                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         CURRENT ACCOUNT DYNAMICS AND THE TERMS OF TRADE:
         HARBERGER-LAURSEN—METZLER TWO GENERATIONS LATER




                         Torsten Persson
                       Lars   E.O. Svensson



                      Working Paper No. 1129




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                              May 1983




The research reported here is rart of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper # 1129
                                                               May 1983




      CURRENT ACCOUNT DYNAMICS AND THE TERMS OF TRADE:
      HARBERGER-LAURSEN-METZLER TWO GENERATIONS LATER


                           Abs t rae   t
     The current account dynamics is examined for a small open economy

which is subject to exogenous changes in its static terms of trade and

in world interest rates. The model used is one with overlapping finite—

lived generations, which we argue gives rise to a more reasonable saving

behaviour than previously used models with infinite lived consumers.

In particular no restrictions on the rate of time preference is required.

     Anticipated and unanticipated, as well as temporary and permanent,

terms of trade changes have very different effects. There is, however,

a general tendency towards cycles in both savings and investment,

which gives rise to cycles in the current account.

     The classic Harberger—Laursen—Metzler effect on saving of a terms

of trade deterioration can have any sign for plausible parameter values,

both for temporary and permanent disturbances.




                                           Torsten Persson
                                           Lars E.O. Svensson

                                           Institute for International
                                             Economic Studies
                                           University of Stockholm
                                           S—106 91 Stockholm, Sweden

                                           Telephone: 46—8—16 30 66,
                                                      —16 30 70, —16 30 75
          CURRENT ACCOUNT DYNAMICS AND THE TERNS OF TRADE:

          HAP.BERGER—LAURSEN—METZLER TWO GENERATIONS LATER*


                              by
            Torsten   Persson and Lars E.O. Svensson




1.   Introduction

     This paper deals with the current account adjustment over

time of an economy which is subject to changes in its terms of

trade and world interest rates. One obvious reason to analyze

the current account is that governments and policymakers care

about it, and intervene to affect it. The goal is often said to

be a balanced current account, although from the point of view

of economic theory that has no particular virtue. What is at

stake is of course what might be, in some sense, the optimal

current account, and whether observed actual current accounts

deviate from the optimal ones. In order to specify what might

be optimal, we must first understand how the equilibrium current

account of a relatively frictionless economy is determined, and

what the equilibrium response to various disturbances look like.

     Another obvious reason is that international economists like

to explain international capital movements, which immediately

leads to the current account since it is identically equal to a

country's net accumulation of foreign assets. During the 70's

we have seen dramatic changes in world capital flows, related to
                                2



oil price increases, OPEC's huge surpluses and the recycling of

the oil revenues. These events have spurred an interest in the

relation between terms of trade changes and capital flows, and

resulted in a considerable literature. Recently the world has

experienced considerable exchange rate volatility and interest

rate changes, with corresponding terms of trade changes, both

static and intertemporal, which makes a good understanding of

the current account behavior no less desirable.

     The current account can be written equivalently as the sum

of the trade account and the service account, as income minus

absorption, or as saving minus investment. It seems that dif-

ferent theories have sometimes favored one identity as more

fundamental than another. With good general equilibrium theory

the different components in the various identities are of course

simultaneously determined, and no identity has a special signi-

ficance, except for convenience. In this paper, we apply an

intertemporal framework in discussing the current account develop—

mentover tune,   and   it will then be convenient to exploit the

saving—minus—investment identity.

     So, if we choose to look at the current account as the dif-

ference between saving and jnvestment, a first question, is how

saving responds to a terms of trade change. Earlier, the con-

ventional answer to this question was summarized in the classical

Harberger—Laursen—Netzler effect: In different contexts, Harberger

(1950) and Laursen—Metzler (1950) came to be concerned with the

effect on saving of terms of trade changes. They postulated that
                                 3




saving out of any given income, both measured in exportables, falls

with a terms of trade deterioration. They argued that the real

income corresponding to a given income in exportables falls with a

terms of trade deterioration, and relied on empirical evidence that

the savings ratio to income tends to fall from a fall in real income.

       This argument relies on a static theory of savings, however,

and   that has recently led some writers to reconsider the
question of how terms of trade changes affect savings in an
explicitly    intertemporal framework, with forward—looking

savings behavior.

       For instance, the Harberger—Laursen—Metzler effect was

recently challenged by Obstfeld (1982a). He applies intertem—

poral maximization, more precisely a model of a small economy

consisting of an infinitely lived representative censunier    with
an   Uzawa (1968) type utility function with the rate of time prefer-

ence being an increasing function of utility, and hence indirectly

of wealth. Such an economy has a target level of real wealth,

where the rate of time preference is equal to the (given)

world rate of intrest. If the economy suffers a terms of trade

deterioration, it's real wealth is lowered. To converge to the

target level, it must accumulate foreign assets and hence save.

Hence, saving increases with a terms of trade deterioration, in

contrast to what Harberger and Laursen and Netzler postulated.

       Subsequent work by Sachs (1981) and Svensson and Razin

(1983) emphasized the distinction between temporary and per-

manent terms of trade deteriorations. A temporary terms of trade
                                 4



 deterioration implies a temporary fall in income and, by inter—

 temporal consumption smoothening, consumption falls by less,

which altogether deteriorates the current account. A permanent

 terms of trade deterioration decreases both income and consump-

 tion to about the same extent and hence has an ambigious effect

 on saving. These effects are income effects of terms of trade

changes. Svensson and Razin (1983) also include consumption

 substitution effects and show, by assuming suitable separability

of the preferences, how the static and interteinporal substitu-

tion effects can be organizedin terms of changes in consumer

price indices and real interest rates. They in addition clarify

the role of assumptions about the rate of time preferences. For a

permanent terms   of   trade deterioration, saving tends to fall with a

decreasing, and rise with an increasing, rat of time preference (when

the latter is regarded as a function of wealth or intertemporal

welfare).

     As noted by Obstfeld (1982b), the two-period analysis in

Sachs (1981) and Svensson and Razin (1983) does not give much room

for dynamics of the current account, since a deficit in period 1

corresponds to a surplus in period 2, and vice versa. On the other

hand, the infinite—horizon analysis in continuous time in Obstfeld

(1982a) and in discrete time in Svensson and Razin (1983) requires an

increasing rate of time preference in wealth for stability of the

steady state. This restriction of intertemporal preferences is arbi-

trary and even counter—intuitive. Also, the assumption of infinitely

lived consumers gives rise to a very high degree of consumption smooth—

ening and intertemporal substitution.
                               5




     One could thus argue that a model with finite planning

horizons seems to give rise to a more intuitively reasonable and

even more realistic saving behavior. This is the case for the

well known overlapping generations model (without private inter-

generational gifts). Furthermore, it has nice stability properties,

without arbitrary restrictions on the rate of time preference. In

this paper we shall therefore use an overlapping generations model

to represent saving behavior. Previous authors that have studied

open economies by using overlapping generations models include Kareken

and Wallace (1977), Fried (1980), Buiter (1981), Dornbusch (1982) and

Persson (1983). Our overlapping generations model is standard,

except that we include two consumer goods, and, as in Svensson

and Razin (1983), assume conveniently separable preferences so as

to be able to use consumer price indexes and real interest rates.

     So much for saving. What about investment? The role of

investment for current account behavior has been emphasized in,

for instance, Razin (1980), Sachs (1981), Helpman and Razin (1981),

Bruno (1982), Marion and Svensson (1981), and Svensson (1982).

Here we use the usual straightforward representation of invest-

ment in the overlapping generations model due to Diamond (1965).

     Our general findings below are that in order to understand

the current account behavior over time, it is convenient to look at

the induced changes in the intertemporal prices, as represented by

the various real interest rates, rather than directly at the

static terms of trade changes, since saving and investment may
                             6



be more unambigiously related to changes in the intertemporal

prices. In analogy with the work mentioned above, we find

that temporary and permanent terms of trade and interest changes

have different effects. So do anticipated and unanticipated terms

terms of trade changes. In particular we show that cyclical

adjustments in the current account are likely to occur.

     The paper is in eight sections. The model is set up in

Section 2. Section 3 and 4 deal with anticipated permanent and

temporary terms of trade deteriorations. Section 5 treats un-

anticipated terms of trade deteriorations, and Section 6 changes

in the world rate of interest. Section 7 discusses the Harberger—

Laursen—Metzler effect in some detail. Section 8 presents a summary,

qualifications, and some conclusions.


2.   The Model

     We consider a small open economy which faces perfect world

markets for goods and financial assets. There are two traded

goods, home goods and foreign goods, indexed h and f. The economy

produces and exports home goods and imports foreign goods. The

foreign good is numeraire. Hence, in each time period t, the

economy can trade freely at a given price of home goods in terms

of foreign goods, p. Similarly, the economy can borrow and lend on

the international credit market at a given iaterest rate. The

interest raLe in terms of the imported good, between period t

and N-i, is denoted by rt.

     We first describe the production side of the economy.

We assume that only home goods are produced at home. Pro-

duction is carried out by two factors, (nondepreciating) capital
                                              7




and labor, according to a well—behaved neoclassical production

function. There are constant returns to scale and the labor supply

will be fixed at unity, so production in period t can be expressed

as      =   f(kt),   where kt is the economy's capital stock. Only home

goods are used as capital goods. Little is changed if instead only

foreign goods are used as capital. (In the concluding section we

discuss the implications of having a more general two—sector pro-

duction sector, which complicates the analysis considerably.)

        Capital goods to be used in production in period t+l must be

purchased and installed in period t. With these assumptions, profit

maxiiuizing behavior implies that the capital stock in period t+1 is

given by

                    t+1          t
(2.1)
             fk(k         )   = rh.

That is, what can be thought of as gross investment, namely

the amount of physical capital held from period t to t+l, is

carried to the point where the marginal productivity of capital

     in period t+l equals r , the home goods own rate of interest

between period t and t+l. The latter is defined by


(2.2)        1 +
                   rh
                     t   = (1 +      r t)pt /pt+l

and is thus just a way of expressing the intertemporal relative

price of home goods.1 Equation (2.1) defines kt+l as a decreasing

function


(2.3)        kt+l =
                         k(r),       kr <
                                        8




of the home goods rate of interest. Let us denote the vaIu' of

the capital stock held at the end of period t by Kt. Then, we

can write Kt as a function of the terms of trade and the home

goods interest rate, namely


(2.4)        Kt =   ptkt+l   =   ptk(rt)    =
                                                K(pt, r),

with the derivatives K >           0,   and K < 0.
                             p                  r

         From (2.4) and the definition of the elasticity of substitution

in production S        the   partial elasticities of this function are


(2.5)          £K16p     1, and


(2.6)          CK/Erh


where 0 is labor's distributive share. For specificity in the

following, we assume


(2.7)          >




which makes K/Erh

        Wages in period t    are   given as


(2.8)        W =    t(f(kt)       ktfk(kt)) =       ptw(kt)   =
                                                                  w(pt,kt);

an   increasing function of the turins of trade and the                c3pit1
stock.     We note for future reference that w(kt) is the product

real    wage in period t.

        Having thus described the production side of the ccnuv,
let us so turn to consumers. Since growth is not essenti:iI to
                                              9




our story, we assume a stationary population. All consumers

live oniy for two periods. In each period, a young and an old

generation thus overlap (we set the number of consumers of each

generation equal to unity for simplicity). Both goods are consumed

and we denote consumption of young consumers in period t of the

two goods by c and c while consumption of old consumers in period

t is dt and dt.
      h      f

           Young consumers have a fixed endowment of one unit of

labor which is inelastically supplied. Part of the wages re-

ceived is consumed, part is saved. Old consumers do not work

but consume principal and interest on their savings. There are

neither bequests nor gifts given to old people, so consumers

start and end their lives with zero endowments.

           Consumers are identical in all respects and their pre-

ferences over consumption as young and old can be represented

by a well—behaved utility function of the special form V(ct,
    t+i                         t        t            t+l =      t+i        t+i
d              where   c =                    and d                                    We
          ),
                             U(ch   ,
                                        cf)                   U(dh     ,
                                                                           df     ).


assume that preferences are homothetically separable over time.

Then we may, without loss of generality, choose the sub—

utility function U(c ,                  4) linearly     homogeneous. Finally, we

assume that the sub—utility function is the same in both periods.

These assumptions make it possible to define exact consumer price

indices, which will be convenient for out analysis. Also, the

scalars ct and dt can be interpreted as measures of real consump-

tion in the two periods.

           In determining their consumption when young, consumers maxi-

mize the utility function subject to the life—cycle budget cons—
                                       10




 traint that the present value of their total consumption is

 equal to their wage income (which is their wealth),


 (2.9)       (tt +       c)   +   ( t+ldt+l   +
                                                  d)/(l   +   rt)   =   W.

 Let C =            +c   denote (the value of ) consumption of the

 young in period t. Under the assumptions about the utility

 function, this can be written as a function


 (2.10)      Ct =   C(pt, Pt Wt)

of the terms of trade, of the real rate of interest pt

and the wage (see Appendix). The real rate of interest is

defined by


(2.11)       1 +   p   = (1 +
                                  rt)P(pt)/P(pt).

where p(pt) is the exact consumer price index in period t

(given by the unit—subutility expenditure function corres-

ponding to the subutility function U(c ,
                                                     c)).      The dif-

ference between wages and consumption of the young is savings

of the young, S. It can be written as a savings function


(2.12)     St =        — C(pt, t Wt) = 5(pt, t Wt),


which is also a function of the terms of trade, the real rate

of interest, and wages. Since the properties of this function

are crucial for our story, we will look at them in some detail.

Note first that the terms of trade in period t + 1 do not enter

as a separate argument in the savings function. This follows

from the separability of the overall utility function V(').
                                  11



          t+l                           .       .    .
However, p       does affect the savings decision indirectly via

its effect on the real interest rate (cf. (2.11)).

     The partial elasticities of the savings function with

respect to its three arguments are (for details, see Appendix):


                     —
(2.13)    6SIcp =


(2.14)    S/(l+p) = [(l—c)Icdn =            [(l—a)/a]      (fl—cry) =   (l—ct)(cy—y), and


(2.15)    CS/EW = [1 —     (l—a)y]/a
     Here, a =    S/W    > 0 is the savings ratio,            =
                                                                  pc/C      > 0 is

the share of home goods in consumption when young and hence also

                                                                             >   0 is
the share of home goods in the price index, and y =               WC/C
the wage (or income, or wealth) elasticity of consumption when young.

Looking at (2.13), we see that current terms of trade changes affect

savings via changing the price index p(pt)• This by itself changes the

nominal value of current consumption. However, the change in p(pt) also

has a wealth effect on real consumption, which may or may not exceed

the valuation effect according to whether y is above or below

unity. In the following we assume y = 1 —— a unitary wealth

elasticity. A sufficient condition for this is that the overall

utility function V(ct, dt) is homothetic in real consumption

when young and old. With this assumption, changes in the terms

of trade do not change savings, provided that the real interest

rate and wages are held constant; LSIcp =           0.
     As for (2.14), i =       —        = _(l+pt)(C/a(l+pt))/Ct              0

is the negative of the elasticity of consumption when young with respect

to one plus the real interest rate, fl =       a     > U    is the negative of
                                       12




 the same compensated elasticity, and       > 0 is the elasticity of

substitution between real consumption in the two periods. Expression

 (2.14) thus follows from the Slutsky equation on elasticity form. It

is seen that savings increase in the real interest rate, that

is cS/c(l+p) > 0, if the intertemporal substitution effect on

consumption when young dominates the wealth (income) effect.

Subsequently, we indeed take this to be our "normal" case, that

is we assume        > y.

         The wage elasticity of savings expressed in (2.15) is positive

as long as goods are normal. When y = 1, as we have already

assumed, this elasticity is unity.

     In summary, we have thus assumed       > y =   1, which gives

(2.16)       S = 0, S > 0, and S > 0.

In the same way as with our earlier assumption with regard to

capital formation, these assumptions are mainly for specificity

so as to avoid a taxonomic catalog of comparative static results.

For any other set of assumptions, the reader can easily

work out his/her own results by help of (2.6) and

(2.13)—(2.l5)

     Since there are no bequests, total wealth at the end of

period t At is identically equal to the savings of the young

generation, namely


(2.17)       At =   S   =   S(pt,pt,Wt).
                                           13




       The economy's total claims on the rest of the world are

 the difference between the total wealth of consumers and the value

of the capital stock. Denoting (the value of) foreign assets at

 the end of period t by Ft, we thus have


(2.18) Ft = At       -   Kt.

It is explicitly assumed that foreigners do not hold claims on

the home capital stock (equities). Hence, the net and gross

holdings of foreign financial assets (debt) coincide.

       We may now readily define the current account surplus Bt in

period t as the increase in foreign assets from period t—l to t,

that is


(2.19)       Bt =   Ft   —
                             Ftl,
which, of course, can be rewritten as


             Bt =   (At_Atl)        —
                                        (Kt_Ktl),

that   is   saving minus investment. We note that total saving is

saving by the young StAt plus saving by the old which is

_Atl since the old generation dissaves by selling all its assets.

       If the internationally given interest rate and terms of trade

are constant, the economy will converge to a stationary state

where all variables are constant.2 It is not necessary, but

convenient, to assume that before the changes in the terms of

trade that we shall discuss, the economy is in a stationary state.

In such a stationary state we have, for all periods t,
                                               14


             p
                 t   =   p,
             rt      =    t = t =r
                         rh
             kt =        k =   k(r),
             Kt = K =          pk(r),
(2.20)               =   w = W(p,      r),

             At = A = S(p, p, W),

             Ft = F = A — K, and

             Bt = B =          0.


It is worth observing that although the current account is zero in a

stationary state, the trade balance is not, as long as F is non-

zero. If the economy has positive foreign assets, say, it has

interest income from abroad (GNP is higher than GDP) which allows

a higher consumption than production, that is a deficit in the

trade account.


3.     An anticipated permanent terms of trade deterioration

       Let us suppose that the terms of trade change permanently in

period 1, when the economy previously has been in a stationary

state. To fix ideas, we consider a terms of trade deterioration.

The foreign goods interest rate stays constant, however. In a more

complete treatment where the terms of trade change is seen as an

endogenous   response to son world—wide disturbance, that same
disturbance would be likely                  to affect also the woridinterest rate.

Our   treatment of terms of trade changes in isolation is thus not
motivated by realism, but may                 hopefully help in clarifying   the
different   channels through which the current account adjusts,

In Section 6 we consider the effects of isolated world interest changes,

so the effects of any combined terms of trade and interest rate change
                              15

can be found as the appropriate linear combination of our results.

     The adjustment over time of all the variables of interest

is compactly summarized in Figure 1. Here we have relied on the

assumptions about parameters regarding technology and preferences

that were made in the previous section.


                     (Figure 1)
     In this section we treat an anticipated terms of trade

deterioration, that is, all agents have perfect foresight about

its occurence. Then, as illustrated in the figure, the home goods

and real rates of interest increase in period 0, the former by more

since the price of home goods in period 1 falls more than the price

index.3 For all other periods the two interest rates do not change.

     Due to the increase in the interest rate the capital stock

used in period 1 is lowered, relative to the stationary state.

Therefore the value of capital in the end of period 0 is lower.

From the end of period 1 onward the physical capital stock is again

at its unchanged stationary level, but its value is lower. As

illustrated in the diagram, the drop in K° exceeds that in K1,
          4
though.

     What about wages? Well, they go down in period 1, both because

home goods prices are lower and because the capital stock is lower.

From period 2 on they are lower, relative to the previous stationary

state, since prices are lower, although higher than in period 1,

since the product real wage is back to its unchanged long—run level.

     Knowing the above, we also know how savings and hence also how

total wealth respond. Savings go up in period 0 because of the
          15a


        FIGURE   1




-f —-
--- 0
           -234
 •
                 4—        p




                               &




                      .5
                              16




rise in the rate of interest. In period 1 savings go down because

wages are lower. The terms of trade are lower too, but this by assump-

tion has no direct effect. Savings are lower in period 2 and on,

but less so than in period 1, since wages are then higher than

in period 1.

     Given all this it is clear how foreign assets develop, and

from the changes in foreign assets it is easy to read off the

development of the current account over time. As can be seen

from the figure the current account undergoes a three period

oscillating pattern of surplus—deficit—surplus.

     In drawing Figure 1, we have assumed that the country has

positive foreign assets initially. In the new stationary state

this is still the case but the foreign assets are smaller. Indeed,

as the reader can verify from (2.5), (2.8) and (2.15), under our

assumption that preferences are homothetic (y1) the stationary

level of foreign assets is linear in the terms of trade.


4.   An anticipated temporary terms of trade deterioration

     Think now instead of an anticipated temporary terms of trade

deterioration occurring in period 1. The economy's adjustment to

this shock is portrayed in Figure 2.


                     (Fi gure 2)

As for the permanent terms of trade deterioration, the home goods and

real rates of interest go up in period 0. But, in period 1, when

the terms of trade are temporarily low, future goods are relatively

more expensive, which means that these interest rates go down,

relative to their stationary state level.
            16a


          FIGURE 2




—f    o
     -I
            1        2. 34
                        I —±

                               Pt
                               .pt




                                2(6
                               17




      Because of the response of optimal capital intensity to

 the changes in the home goods rate of interest that we illustrate

 in the figure, the physical capital stock is lower in the

 end of period 0 and higher in the end of period 1. Its value

 follows the same pattern, since the valuation effect of the lower

 prices of home goods in period 1 is domintated by the volume

effect.5

     With regard to wages, they develop in the same way as capital

intensity in production, going down in period 1 and up in period 2.

As in the previous experiment, the negative effect of a lower

product wage in period 1 is further reinforced of the lower product

prices.

     Savings by the young generation and thereby total wealth

adjust as follows: upwards in period 0 because the real interest

rate is higher; downwards in period 1 because wages and the interest

rate are both lower; and upwards in period 2 because wages are higher.

     Putting the pieces together, we get the development of foreign

asset holdings and the current account in the figure. In the new

stationary state, foreign assets have, of course, returned to

their previous long—run level, since the change in the terms of

trade is only a temporary one. The adjustment towards the new

stationary state stretches out during four periods under which the

current account undergoes a sequence of surplus—deficit—surplus—

deficit.

     At this point it may be useful to pause a little and try to

understand what it is that lies behind this quite asymmetric adjust-

ment. As a starting point we may    then   take the cycle in home goods
                              18




 and real interest rates illustrated in figure 2, that the

 temporary drop in the terms of trade gives rise to. The changes

in interest rates by themselves drive gross saving.(total

wealth) and investment (the value of the capital stock) in

different directions with immediate consequences for foreign

assets and the current account. But also, the slump and the

following boom in investment affect capital intensity and hence

wages one period later. Since saving and wages are positively

related, the investment cycle thus leads to a similar cycle in

saving but with a one—period lag. This too contributes to the

cycles in the current account.

     These features of the adjustment are not only limited to the

present experiment, but the same intuition explains also the

results in the previous and subsequent sections.


5.   Unanticipated deteriorations in the terms of trade

     Suppose now that there is a permanent terms of trade deterio-

ration in period 1, which, unlike the other cases we have considered,

is unanticipated. That is, it occurs as a surprise in period 1.

The consequences for the economy of such an unanticipated change

in the terms of trade are illustrated in Figure 3.


                     (Figure 3)

The important difference to the case with an anticipated terms of

trade deterioration is that there the intertemporal relative prices

relevant for decision making, that is the (expected) home goods and

real rates of interest, do not change in period 0. This means that
                 1 8a




           FIGURE 3




 —1   0     1           2   3   4
      I_—---1_                      4-




           'S.—

                                             t




                                         t
—1    0    1            Z   3   4
                              19




the whole path of interest rates is not affected at all. Then,

of course, the physical capital stock stays constant, and the change

in its value is limited to the effect of the fall in home goods

prices from period 1 and onward.

     Similarly, the effect on wages is just that of the fall in

prices, and this change in wages is indeed the only channel whereby

saving is affected.

     The fact that saving and investment do not react in advance

to take advantage of the forthcoming price change, thus leads to

the smooth adjustment illustrated in the figure. The economy settles

directly on its new stationary state path with a (proportionally)

lower level of foreign assets, which is reached via a one—shot

deficit in the current account.

     If the deterioration in the terms of trade is unanticipated

but temporary, we get a different picture, as Figure 4 illustrates.


                      (Fl gure 4)

Here, the period 1 home goods and real interest rates fall, since

the terms of trade are back at their initial level from period 2

and onward. We do not have to go into a detailed explanation of

the different pieces of the adjustment process. The resulting

sequence of deficit—surplus—deficit in the current account is really

precisely the same as that for the expected temporary terms of trade

change (cf. Figure 2), with the important difference that the

adjustment in period 0, the period before the terms of trade change

actually occurs, is absent in the present case.
                  19a



         FIGURE         4



—1   0        1         2   34
                                 Pt'-




         i/z 3 4
         -t
                  /—t       I
                                 4 t1-,e-
                              20




6.   Changes in the world rate of interest

     A fall in the world rate of interest is also of interest

when discussing terms of trade changes in the present context.

One reason is that every young person is a net lender. Hence

from each individual's point of view a fall in the interest rate

is a deterioration in the intertemporal terms of trade. Whether

a fall in the world market rate of interest is a deterioration

in the interteinporal terms of trade for the country as a whole

depends on its net position vis—a—vis the rest of the world.

Indeed, it is a deterioration ii the country is a creditor

(F is positive), but an improvement if it is a debtor (F negative).

     Consider first the adjustment to a permanent fall in the world

rate of interest occurring in period 1, which is summarized in

Figure 5.



                         (Figure 5)


     With no changes in relative goods prices the home goods and

real interest rates, of course, change as the world interest rate.

This means that the capital stock used in production increases

from period 2 and onward, and thus that the value of the capital

stock is higher from the end of period 1. Also, wages increase

from period 2.

     Saving and total wealth go down in period 1 as a result of

the fall in the real interest rate. Although we have drawn an
                   20a



                 FIGURE 5



—1       0
         4
             1     23        d4
                                 %—

                                  PC

                                  2-' 1




                                 jc

                                  F
—1   0           23         .4
                                    21




increase in saving from period 2 and onward, saving may actually fall

depending on the relative force of the (negative) intertemporal sub-

stitution effect, compared to the (positive) effect of increased wages.

     With our earlier assumptions about parameters, and if labor's

factor share is not very low, it follows that the value of the capital

stock must increase proportionally by more than total wealth in the

long run.6 Then, if the share of the capital stock in total wealth is

not too small, foreign assets must fall, resulting in the two—period

adjustment with a deficit followed by a surplus in the current account.

     What about the case of a temporary drop in the world rate of

interest? Well, here we may directly rely on our results regarding

a temporary unanticipated terms of trade deterioration. Noting

that in that case too, there is a one—period fall in the home

goods and real rates of interest, we realize that the results must

be qualitatively although not quantitatively identical in the two

cases (the quantitative differences deriving from the fact that

here the two interest rates change in the same proportion).


7.   The Harberger—Laursen—Metzler effect

     Let us finally see what all this has to do with the Harberger—

Laursen—Metzler effect. Harberger (1950) --      in   discussing the effect

on the trade balance of a devaluation—— and Laursen and Metzler

(1950) ——   in discussing   the transmission of disturbances in a two

country world with endogenous terms of trade and balanced trade

(which they identified with a flexible exchange rate regime) ——

looked at the effect on spending, measured in home goods, of a
terms of trade change. They postulated that expenditure out of
                                                          22

any given income, measured in home goods, should rise with a terms

of trade deterioration, and hence that saving out of any given income

should fall. Let us examine this proposition in the context of our

model. We refer to Svensson and Razin (1983) for a discussion of

the controversies around the Harberger—Laursen—Metzler effect and

for references to the literature.

      We consider the effect on saving in period t, measured in home

goods, of a terms of trade deterioration in periods t and t+1, hold-

ing the foreign goods rate of interest constant, which implies that

wages (measured in home goods) are constant too. (This corresponds

most closely to the case with a given domestic income measured in

home goods.) Denoting saving measured in home goods by Sh, we hence

differentiate

                 t         t            t           t      t
(7.1)           Sh =     S(p   ,    p       ,   W       )/p

                                                 t
Now, with the same notation as in Section 2, (l+p ) = 13
                                                                                       tAt
                                                                                        p   —13
                                                                                                  t+1t+l
                                                                                                    p

and       =   f. Then,             relying on our earlier results (2.13)—(2.15), we

may   derive

(7.2)           S =        —




                     =   (l—a)(a—-ç)(13p—13
                                                              t't   t+l-'t+l
                                                                       p       )   +



                     + [(1 —                             — 13t)(1 —    )"t
where 0 < 13 =           tt/Ct              (       tdt/(tdt        + d)) < 1 is the share of home

goods in consumption period t.

        Let us first consider a permanent terms of trade deterioration,
           't        At+l =
that is p = p               p < 0, and assume that the share of home goods

in consumption is the same in both periods, that is                                    =           = 13.


Then the first term on the right hand side in (7.2) is zero and
                                                23




(7.3)                =    [(1   -   cx)/cx](l - )(l           -         0 for y 1.


Savings falls if y < 1, that is, if period t consumption is less

than unitary elastic in wages (wealth), which corresponds to the case

of a rate of time preference which is decreasing in wealth. Saving

is unaffected if y =                1, which corresponds to intertemporally hone—
thetic preferences and a constant rate of time                             preference.       Saving

increases if I > 1, which corresponds to a rate of time preference

which is increasing in wealth.

        Let us also consider a temporary terms of trade deterioration,

that is, p = p < 0 and p                    =   0.        Then we have


(7.4)                =    [(1   —
                                    a)/al[13a(a      —   i)    + (1 —   3)(l   —




Saving falls if the second bracket, the weighted sum of the inter—

temporal price elasticity of consumption (r =                             a(a   —   y))   and of one

minus the wealth elasticity of consumption (1 —                            y)       is positive.

That happens, for example, if preferences are homothetic (i = 1)

and the substitution effect dominates over the wealth effect

(a > y =       1).       We note that the Cobb—Douglas case,which has

a =   I   =   1, gives a zero effect on saving measured in home goods
for both temporary and permanent terms of trade deteriorations.

      We conclude that the Harberger—Laursen—Netzler effect indeed

can be of either sign for plausible parameters, both for temporary

and permanent terms of trade deteriorations.


8.    Discussion

        In discussing the dynamic adjustment of the current account to

terms of trade changes, we have included the substitution effects
                                 24




within each period ("expenditure switching"), which usually receives

a great deal of attention in static treatments. We have, however,

also included the effects of static terms of trade changes on inter—

temporal relative prices, as measured by various real interest rates,

and how these changes in interest rates might influence savings and

investment. Indeed, we have found it very convenient to emphasize

those induced changes in intertemporal prices in order to understand

the current account dynamics.

       Our results suggest that it is crucial to make a distinction

not only between temporary and permanent but also between anticipated

and unanticipated changes in the terms of trade. From this viewpoint,

it seems that attempting to derive unqualified statements about

the dynamic adjustment of the current account to terms of trade

changes is a futile kind of exercise.

      However, there is one phenomenon that reoccurs in virtually

all   of our experiments, namely a cyclical adjustment in the current
account. What lies behind the swings is, to repeat our earlier
argument,   that terms of trade changes induce fluctuations

in investment goods real rates of interest which implies cycles in

investment which with a lag lead to cycles in wages and income.

Induced cycles in consumer real rates of interest lead to cycles

in savings as do the lagged cycles in income. Altogether, this

gives cycles in the current account.

      Our model is of course extremely simplified in that the horizons

for consumption and investment decisions coincide, and in that con-

sumers earn wage income only in the first period. Allowing for costs
                               25



of adjustment of the capital stock would lengthen the planning hori-

zon for investment, and changes in the optimal capital stock would

lead to investment changes over several periods. Allowing for con-

sumers to live more than two periods, and earning wage income in

several periods, would also spread out savings adjustment to several

periods. Nevertheless the general tendency towards cycles in total

wealth and capital stock, and hence towards cyclical fluctuations in

the current account, would seem to remain, although the specific

dynamics of the current account might be different.

     As for other qualifications, the assumption of only one produc-

tion sector is a convenient simplification, but it is also important

for some of our results. Suppose we instead adopted a two—sector pro-

duction structure as in the Heckscher—Ohlin model. That would clearly

introduce static substitution effects in production in response

to terms of trade changes, but also alter the intertemporal

substitution effects — so as to make the effects on investment

dependent on relative factor intensities, as in Razin (1980).

Furthermore, such an extension would have implications also on

the consumption side. In particular, the response of savings to

terms of trade changes, would also depend on relative factor

intensities. This is so because these intensifies would determine

the relative changes in wages and capital income, associated with

very different marginal propensities to save.
                                            26




 ppendix: Properties of the consumption and saving function


        Consider maximizing the weakly homothetically separable utility function

 (A.l)        v =   V(c, dt) where c = U(c, c) and                         dt+l U(d1, dt)
 and where the subutility function
                                           U(ch, Cf) is linearly hoitogenous. We shall
 interpret the scalars c and dt as real consumption in period t and t+l for

 a consumer who is young in period t. The budget constraint is


 (A.2)
               tt        t       t+lt+l     t+l                 t      t
              (p Ch + Cf) + (p      dh    + df )/(l + r ) = W

 It is well known that the solution to
                                                 maximizing (A.l) subject to (A.2) can be
described as follows: First, nominal consumption in both periods, C =
                                                                        ptct +
 t         t+l    t+l  t+l   t+l
C. , and D     = p
                      dh   + d , can be written as the product of a price index
and the corresponding real consumption,

(A.3)       Ct = P(pt)ct and Dt+l  P(p   )d
                                                 t+J.    t+J.

Here, the exact consumer price index P(p) =               min{p
                                                                    ch + cf: u(ch, cf) =   1)   is

the unit—subutility expenditure function associated with the subutility function

U(ch, c4,).

    Second, the oDtimal aunt of real consumption is the solution to

maximizing     V(ct,   dt) subject to the budget constraint

(A.)       p(pt)ct +     [p(pt+l)/(1 +    rt))Jdt =        Wt

Defining   the real discount factor q't4] =
                                                    p(pt+1)/[p(t)(1        + rtfl and real wealth
(wages) w =     wt/P(pt),      we can write the optimal real consumption in period t as
a function ct =        c(qt,   wt). Defining the real rate of interest Pt according
to qt = 11(1 + t) we can then define
                                                    the (nominal) consumption function

(A.5)      c = C(p, p, Wt) =         p(pt)c(l/(l        + pt) Wt/P(pt))
                                                           27



Straightforward differentiation gives the elasticities

                                                                             t
            cClcp    =
                          PIcp            +    (c!cw)(—P/cp      )
                                                                         =       (1   —

                          t                      t+l                 —           t                 t
 (A.6)      cC/c(l + p        )           —cc/cq       =   —n = —(n      — a              =   —a       (o —   y),   and

            £C/CW
                 t   =    C/wt            = y

where    we note that at = qt+ldt+l/wt is the share of savings in wealth,    =

          is, by standard properties of the price index, the share of home goods
in                       tt
      consumption (p Ch/C ),
                                  t
                                              y is the wealth elasticity of real consumption, TI                          is
the
                     —
      total, and n = a 0
                              t       is      the compensated elasticity of real consumption dth re-

spect to the discount factor, and a is the intertemporal elasticity of substitu-

tion of the V(c, d) function. The savings function                                        is defined as

(A.T)       s(pt,pt,wt) =                     — c(pt,pt,wt)

Since    by logaritbinic differentiation,


(A.8)       S   W/a      - [(i        -    a)/a]C

the elasticities of the savings function in (2.13)—(2.15) follow.
                                     28




Footnotes


*    This paper was written when we were visiting NBER, and we want

to thank the Bureau for its hospitality. We are also grateful to

participants in seminars at MIT, lIES, University of Western Ontario,

and Yale University for helpful comments, in particular to Andy Abel,

Rudi Dornbusch, Elhanan Helpman, Thor Gylfason, Gene Grossman and

Assar Lindbeck. Financial support from the Nordic Economic Research

Council is gratefully acknowledged.


1.   We note that (2.1) and (2.2) can be written [ptl1fk(kt+l) +

(t+1 —   pt)]/pt   =   rt,   which can be interpreted as stating that the

return in period t + 1 to investing in capital goods in period t,

measured in foreign goods and including capital gains, equals the

return to investing in the foreign asset, the rate of interesr rt.


2. With a given world interest rate r and given world market price

p the economy is always stable.           (The given world market prices and

interest rate fix the capital stock, which gives wages and hence

they also fix savings.)

                                        A 0
     We have, from (2.2) and (2.11), (1 + rh) =         —     >
3.
         A
and (1 + p )   =—,p

     We have K' = p < 0 and K° =                       (— cy5/e) [(1 + rh)/rh](_p) =
4.                                        (EK/Erh)r
(c8/0)[(l +    rh)/rh] < 0. Clearly K° < K1 < 0 if            > 0, as we have

assumed in (2.7).
                                        29



5.     This follows, since K1 = (CK/cp)p1 + (k/crh)r =

      - (GS/e)((l   + r)/r)p1 > 0, as long as S > e.


6.     We have, if y =      1,   S = (1 —            — l)(l   + r) + W, and W =
                                                                                      (w/Erh)
[(1 + r)/rJ(l + r) = —[(1 -         O)/e][(1     + r)/r](l + r), where we have used

w/crh = —(1 —       e)/e.   Hence, S =      (l   —            — 1) —   [(1   —

[(1   + r)Ir]}(l + r). Furthermore, K =
                                                      (EK/Erh)[(1      + r)/rJ(l      r)

-    (S/O)[(1   + r)/r](l + r). Thus A - K =             f(l -           - 1)    + [(c5 - (1 -

[(1   + r)/r]} (1 + r) <0 if c > 1 and                 > 0, provided 0 > 1/2.
                                      30


References


Bruno, M., 1982, "Adjustment and Structural Change under Raw Material

     Price Shocks," Scandinavian Journal of Economics 814, 199—221.


Buiter, W.H., 1981, "Time Preference and International Lending and Borrowing

     in an Overlapping—Generations Model,'t Journal of Political Econorrr 89,

     769—797.


Diamond, P.A., 1965, "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,"

     American Economic Review 55, 1126—1150.


Dornbusch, R., 1982, "Intergenerational and International Trade," mimeo, MIT.


Fried, J. ,   1980, "The Intergenerational Distribution of the Gains from

     Technical Change and from International Trade," Canadian Journal of

     Economics 13, 65—81.


Harberger, A.C., 1950, "Currency Depreciation, Income, and the Balance of

     Trade," Journal of Political Econo, 58, 147—60.


Helpman, E. and Razin, A., 1981, "The Role of Saving and Investment in

     Exchange Rate Determination under Alternative Monetary Mechanisms,"

     Foerder Institute Working Paper No. 21—81, Tel—Aviv University.



Kareken, J. and Wallace, N., 1971, "Portfolio Autarky: A Welfare

     Analysis," Journal of International Economics 7, l9143.



Laursen, S. and Metzler, L.A., 1950, "Flexible Exchange Rates and the

      Theory of Employment," Review of Economics and Statistics 32,

      281—299.
                                     31




Marion, N.P. and Svensson, L.E.O., 1981, "World Equilibrium with Oil Price

     Increases," lIES Seminar Paper No.   191, University of Stockholm.

Obstfeld,   M., 1982a, "Aggregate Spending and the Terms—of—Trade: Is there

     a Laursen—Metzler effect?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 97, 251—270.


Obstfeld,   M., 1982b, "Transitory Terms—of—Trade Shocks and the Current Account:
     The Case   of Constant Time Preference," NBER Working Paper No. 831.


Persson, T., 1983, "Deficits and Intergenerational Welfare in Open Economies,"

     NBER Working Paper No. 1083.


Razin, A., 1980, "Capital Movements, Intersectoral Resource Shifts, and

     the Trade Balance," lIES Seminar Paper No. 159, University of Stockholm.


Sachs, J.D., 1981, "The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in

     the 1970's," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No.   1, 201—68.


Svensson,   L.E.O., 1982, "Oil Prices, Welfare and the Trade Balance: An

     Intertemporal Approach," NBER Working Paper No. 991, forthcoming in

     Quarterly Journal of Economics.


Svensson, L.E.O., and Raz.in, A., 1983, "The Terms—cf—Trade and the

     Current Account: The Harberger—Laursen—Metzler Effect," Journal of

     Political Econorr 91, 97—125.



                                     the Consumption Function, and Optiraim
Uzava, H., 1968, "Time Preference,

     Asset Holdings," in Wolfe, J.N., ed., Value, Capital and Growth:
     Papers   in Honor of Sir John Hicks, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
