                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE INCIDENCE OF THE HEALTHCARE COSTS OF OBESITY

                                            Jay Bhattacharya
                                            M. Kate Bundorf

                                         Working Paper 11303
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11303


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2005




We thank the Center for the Demography and Economics of Health and Aging, the National Institute on
Aging, and the Agency for Heath Care Research and Quality for financial support. We thank seminar
participants at the 15th Annual Health Economics Conference held at the University of Alabama, Birmingham
in 2004, at the Stanford Medical School RIP Seminar, the Triangle Health Economics Workshop, and the
Stanford Prevention Research Center for their comments. We thank Eric Finkelstein for generously providing
us with some of the data used in this paper. We thank Victor Fuchs, Darius Lakdawalla, Dana Goldman, and
Neeraj Sood for helpful suggestions, and Kavita Choudhry for excellent research assistance. We hold none
of these people responsible for errors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jay Bhattacharya and M. Kate Bundorf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Incidence of the Healthcare Costs of Obesity
Jay Bhattacharya and M. Kate Bundorf
NBER Working Paper No. 11303
April 2005, Revised September 2006
JEL No. I1, J7

                                           ABSTRACT

The incidence of obesity has increased dramatically in the U.S. Obese individuals tend to be sicker
and spend more on health care, raising the question of who bears the incidence of obesity-related
health care costs. This question is particularly interesting among those with group coverage through
an employer given the lack of explicit risk adjustment of individual health insurance premiums in
the group market. In this paper, we examine the incidence of the healthcare costs of obesity among
full time workers. We find that the incremental healthcare costs associated with obesity are passed
on to obese workers with employer-sponsored health insurance in the form of lower cash wages.
Obese workers in firms without employer-sponsored insurance do not have a wage offset relative
to their non-obese counterparts. Our estimate of the wage offset exceeds estimates of the expected
incremental health care costs of these individuals for obese women, but not for men. We find that
a substantial part of the lower wages among obese women attributed to labor market discrimination
can be explained by the higher health insurance premiums required to cover them.

Jay Bhattacharya
117 Encina Commons
Center for Primary Care and Outcomes Research
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
jay@stanford.edu

M. Kate Bundorf
Health Research and Policy
Stanford University
HRP T152
Stanford, CA 94305-5405
and NBER
bundorf@stanford.edu
1.0     Introduction
Annual medical expenditures are $732 higher on average for obese than normal weight
individuals (Finkelstein, Flebelkorn et al. 2003).1 But who bears the costs of medical
care associated with obesity? In competitive health insurance markets, equilibrium prices
never ignore relevant and easily observable data about the insured (Arrow 1963).
Because obesity is easily observable by insurers2, obese individuals who obtain health
insurance in private markets are likely to pay for their higher utilization of medical care
in the form of higher health insurance premiums. While the vast majority of the under-65
population in the U.S. obtains health insurance from private insurers, most coverage is
obtained through employers. As a result, the incidence of the health care costs of obesity
for the under-65 population is largely a question of the incidence of the costs of
employer-sponsored coverage.


Premiums for employer-sponsored coverage could potentially reflect differences across
individuals in observable risk factors through two mechanisms. First, workers often
make an out-of-pocket contribution to the premium for coverage from an employer.
Although these employee premium contributions could, in theory, vary by employee
characteristics, they are rarely risk adjusted for obesity or any other observable risk factor
(Keenan, Buntin et al. 2001). Alternatively, variation in individual expected expenditures
could be passed on to individual workers in the form of differential wage offsets for
employer-sponsored coverage. In the absence of risk-adjusted premium payments by
workers, if wages did not adjust, firms in a competitive industry could make positive
profits by hiring only thin workers. Equilibrium wage offsets based on weight eliminate
such arbitrage opportunities. The existing literature, however, does not provide evidence
on whether the incidence of the costs of employer-sponsored coverage varies by
individual risk factors.



1
  Differences in payments by insurers for obese and non-obese individuals are limited to some extent by
coverage exclusions; for example, many insurers do not cover bariatric surgery or drugs to aid dieting.
2
  Even if weight and height are not currently reported in claims records, it would be a small change to
require medical providers to report such information. Most providers already collect weight information
during routine office visits, so the costs to providers would be low. Adult height does not change, so
collecting such information would impose a one-time cost.


                                                                                                          2
The absence of risk adjustment of health insurance premiums for observable risk factors
like obesity potentially creates two sources of inefficiency. First, the absence of risk
adjustment may lead to inefficient quantities of insurance coverage. In a population of
heterogeneous risks, a movement of premiums away from the actuarially fair rate toward
the average of the group distorts the quantity of health insurance purchased by
consumers, potentially leading to adverse selection (Pauly 1970; Rothschild and Stiglitz
1976). Second, a lack of risk rating of premiums may even lead to higher rates of obesity
by creating moral hazard in risky behaviors that affect health expenditures (Ehrlich and
Becker 1972). In other words, the failure of the obese to pay for their higher medical
care expenditures through higher health insurance premiums may reduce incentives for
individuals to maintain a normal weight (see (Bhattacharya and Sood 2006)). In
summary, insurance underwriting procedures that ignore body weight potentially yield
inefficient outcomes for both the obese and non-obese.


In this paper, we examine whether obese individuals receiving employer provided health
insurance pay for their higher medical costs through reduced wages. Our empirical work
is based upon a simple idea: all else equal, obese individuals with health insurance from
an employer should receive lower wages relative to their similarly insured non-obese
colleagues, while there should be no difference between the wages of obese and non-
obese individuals in jobs without health insurance. We find that, while obese individuals
who receive health insurance through their employer earn lower wages than their non-
obese colleagues, obese individuals who receive health insurance through other sources
or are uninsured earn about the same as their thinner colleagues. Furthermore, we show
that a substantial part of these wage penalties at firms offering insurance can be explained
by the difference between obese and non-obese individuals in expected medical care
costs. Finally, we show that obese individuals pay no wage costs for other employer-
provided fringe benefits, where obesity is not a relevant risk factor in price setting.


By providing evidence consistent with the risk rating of premiums for obesity through
differential wage offsets, our findings reduce concerns over the possibility that
inefficiencies in insurance markets are (in part) responsible for rising rates of obesity.



                                                                                             3
Our results suggest that the obese, at least those with employer-sponsored coverage, bear
the full cost of the incremental medical care associated with obesity.


Our results also provide evidence on the validity of two controversial and important
findings in economics, each of which has generated a large literature. The first is that
even if employers nominally pay for health insurance premiums, it is really employees
who bear the cost of employer-sponsored insurance. While there is only limited
empirical evidence demonstrating the existence of any wage offset for health insurance,
even less evidence is available on whether the wage offset varies across workers. Many
studies, in fact, have produced estimates of either no relationship or a positive
relationship between wages and the provision of health insurance (Gruber 2000). The
few studies that produce evidence consistent with the theory of compensating
differentials leave open the question of whether incidence is at level of the individual or
the group (Gruber 1994; Pauly and Herring 1999; Sheiner 1999). Our results indicate
that, in the case of obesity, these wage offsets not only exist, but also vary by individual
characteristics.


The second finding is that the wages of obese workers are lower than those of their
normal weight peers, and in the case of white women, the relationship appears to be
causal (Cawley 2004). While obesity could cause lower wages through either invidious
workplace discrimination or a negative effect of obesity on worker productivity, the
absence of an effect of obesity on wages for either men or black women casts doubt on
lower productivity as the explanation. In other words, the literature leaves open the
possibility that white women experience significant labor market discrimination in the
form of lower wages due to obesity. Our results suggest a reinterpretation of this
literature. The lower wages of obese white women appear to be due, at least in part, to
the higher cost of insuring these workers.


2.0     Empirical Framework
Standard economic theory predicts that jobs that provide fringe benefits provide
correspondingly lower cash wages, reflecting the costs to employers and the value to



                                                                                               4
workers of the fringe benefit (Rosen 1986). Although theory predicts that workers, not
employers or firms, bear the incidence of the costs of fringe benefits, less is known about
how these costs are allocated across workers when the cost of providing the fringe benefit
varies across individuals. Individual-specific incidence requires that employers
effectively risk rate premiums at the individual level and adjust the components of the
compensation package correspondingly. Under these conditions, the wage differential for
health insurance will be equal to the cost of providing health insurance to a particular
worker. In practice, however, it is difficult to see how firms could appropriately set
worker specific compensating differentials (Gruber 2000). Yet, the alternative - that
employers pass on the average cost of providing health insurance to workers within a
firm - is also potentially problematic in theory. Under this assumption, a worker’s total
compensation, the total cash wages and the value of the fringe benefits, would be
dependent upon the health status of coworkers. Yet, in competitive labor markets, these
types of differences across firms would not be sustainable.


In a job with no fringe benefits, in a competitive spot labor market the wages of worker i,
wi, will equal her marginal revenue product, MRPi.3 In firms that provide health
insurance to their employees, this equality between wages and marginal product will be
modified in equilibrium by the fact that health insurance provision is costly to firms.
Suppose that health insurance premiums are actuarially fair and that workers within a
firm vary in their expected health expenditures.4 In that case, the premium charged to the
firm for the coverage of worker i, say pi, will exactly equal the expected medical costs of
coverage, Emi.5 If incidence is specific to the individual worker, the equilibrium
condition is:


(1)      wi = MRPi − pi = MRPi − Emi .




3
  By focusing on spot labor markets, we are abstracting away issues of investment in job-specific human
capital which can also lead to differences between wages and marginal revenue product.
4
  This assumption could be relaxed to permit fixed loading charges without altering our main points.
5
  We assume for the sake of staying focused on our point that there are no employee out-of-pocket
contributions to enroll in the employer provided health plan.


                                                                                                          5
Equation (1) implies that the worker pays the full cost of health insurance coverage
through decreased wages, even though the employer nominally provides the coverage,
and that the wage offset varies by individual risk. Suppose instead that firms pool risk
among workers, and that the wage offset for each employee is the mean cost of insuring
each member of the firm:        1
                                K    ∑   k
                                             Em kt = p . In this second case, the equilibrium condition

is:


                        1
(2)     wit = MRPit −
                        K
                            ∑   k
                                    Em kt = MRPit − p



To estimate the model, we parameterize the worker’s marginal revenue product as a
linear function of observable characteristics, Xi, that are correlated with productivity:


(3)    MRPi = α + Xiβ



Substituting this into equation (1), we obtain



(4)     wi = α + X i β − p i



If we had information on pi and p we could test directly whether wage offsets operate at
the level of the individual or the group by estimating the following model:


(5)     wi = α + X i β − p − ( p i − p )


However, in our data we observe neither pi nor p . Instead, we observe whether an
individual is enrolled in health insurance through her employer and whether the
individual is obese, which is associated with higher expected health expenditures. Let εi
represent a zero mean and orthogonal regression error and let α, β, δ, γ, and λ represent
the parameters of the regression. Our empirical model is:


                                                                                                          6
(6)      wi = α + X i β + δHI i + γOi + λHI i ⋅ Oi + ε i


where HIi indicates whether worker i enrolls in health insurance through her employer, Oi
represents whether worker i is obese, and Xi represents a set of observable covariates that
determine either labor market productivity, expected medical costs of insurance coverage,
or both. λ represents the difference-in-difference estimate of the wage offset attributable
to insuring obesity.


A key assumption underlying our identification strategy is that the factors that contribute
to the observed negative relationship between obesity and wages (other than the higher
cost of health insurance) are similar between workers in insured and uninsured jobs. One
source of these types of differences is unobserved productivity differences between obese
and non-obese workers. But such productivity differences by themselves are not enough
to bias our estimates. Rather, our estimates will be biased only if such productivity
differences differ between firms that do and do not provide health insurance. For
example, one possibility is that health insurance increases the marginal productivity of
obese workers by improving health.6 We test whether differential productivity
differences can explain our results by conducting a falsification exercise. In particular,
we estimate a version of equation (6) in which we replace employer health insurance (HI)
by indicators for other fringe benefits whose value depends weakly or not at all on body
weight. If differential productivity differences are driving our main results, then we
should find wage differentials (λ < 0) in our falsification exercise as well.


We conduct a similar falsification test by examining the relationship between the
availability of health insurance through sources other than the workers’ own employer
and wages. If our estimate of the wage offset for obesity is biased by differences in the


6
 The empirical literature suggests that health insurance coverage does not have a large marginal effect on
worker health. For example, in the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, the marginal health effects of
generous first-dollar health insurance coverage over more stingy insurance are small (Newhouse, 1993).
Levy and Meltzer (2004) survey the literature on the health effects of health insurance coverage and also
conclude that the effects are small on the margin.


                                                                                                             7
effect of obesity on worker productivity between insured and uninsured workers, we
would expect to see similar wage offsets for workers with coverage from sources other
than their own employer. Evidence that wage offsets do not exist for workers obtaining
coverage through their spouse’s employer, for example, would reduce this concern.


If workers with higher expected medical expenditures pay for employer-provided health
insurance through lower wages, then we should find that wage offsets vary by the level of
expected medical expenditure. Because expected health care expenditures increase with
BMI, we expect that the wage offsets should also increase with BMI (Finkelstein,
Flebelkorn et al. 2003). Thus, as an additional robustness check, we estimate a version of
equation (6) that includes separate dummy variables and interaction terms for overweight
(25<=BMI<30), mildly obese ( 30 ≤ BMI < 35 ), and morbidly obese ( BMI ≥ 35 )
individuals.


Finally, we test for differences between small and large firms in the magnitude of the
wage offset for obesity. Equation (2) implies that all the workers within the firm pay, in
part, for the high medical costs of one of the employees. A one dollar increase in medical
expenditures for worker i will decrease her wages by only $ 1 K . Obviously, under
pooling, as the firm size grows large, the marginal costs to any particular worker of
higher expected medical costs tend toward zero. An implication of this is that, even if
pooling exists at the level of the firm, we may observe wage offsets associated with
obesity driven by limitations in pooling among small firms. In this case, it would not be
possible to differentiate between firm level pooling, with differences by firm size in the
extent of pooling, and individual incidence. We examine this by testing for differences in
the magnitude of the wage offset by firm size. If the wage offsets we observe operate at
the level of the firm, but emerge through this mechanism, we should find that they exist
in small but not large firms. Alternatively, if the wage offsets operate at the level of the
individual, they should exist in both small and large firms.


We estimate all of our models using ordinary least squares, applying the NLSY sample
weights and allowing for within-person clustering when calculating the standard errors.


                                                                                               8
3.0      Data
The empirical work in this paper is based on two data sources, including the NLSY,
collected by Bureau of Labor Statistics, for our analysis of obesity and worker wages, and
the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) for our analysis of obesity and medical
expenditures.


3.1      National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
The NLSY is a nationally representative sample of 12,686 people aged 14-22 years in
1979. The survey was conducted annually until 1994, and biennially through 2004. The
NLSY retention rates are high and attrition has not been found to be systematic.7 Our
study uses NLSY data from 1989-2002. We use only post-1988 data because earlier
years of the survey did not include questions on health insurance status or other types of
fringe benefits offered by employers. We omit 1991 from our analyses due to the lack of
information on health insurance status for that year. After these restrictions on the survey
years, 88,412 person-year observations are eligible to be included in the study sample.


We further restrict the sample to individuals employed full-time in either a private or
non-profit firm in a given year, defining full-time workers as those who indicate they
usually worked 7 or more hours a day at their primary job (N = 52,594 person-years).8
We exclude 770 observations of pregnant women from our study sample. Our main
analysis sample is further limited to workers indicating they either had employer-
sponsored health insurance in their own name from their current employer or were
uninsured. After exclusions for missing data for control variables and key study variables
(hourly wage, BMI, and insurance coverage), this sample includes 31,176 observations.
We also construct an alternative analysis sample for our robustness check involving
workers who receive health insurance from sources other than their employer. This
7
  Looking for evidence of differential attrition on the basis of wages, earnings, and education,
MaCurdy, Mroz, et al. (1998) conduct an exhaustive examination of the NLSY 1979. They conclude that
their “analysis offers little basis for suspecting that the NLSY79 presents an inaccurate picture of youths’
labor market experiences.”
8
  We exclude workers employed by the government as well as those who were either self-employed or
employed in a family business due to differences in these types of employment situations in the wage
setting process.


                                                                                                               9
alternative sample includes all the workers in our main sample in addition to those with
health insurance from other sources, so the sample size rises to 38,645 observations.
Descriptive statistics for each sample are presented in Table 1.


The dependent variable in our analysis is the worker’s hourly wage, which is the hourly
rate of pay for the respondent’s current or most recent job. We top and bottom code the
wage at $1 and $290 per hour, respectively to correct errors in coding.9 The NLSY
includes measures of individual self-reported weight in each year and height in 1985 for
each respondent.10 We use these measures to calculate body mass index11 (BMI) and
indicators for overweight (25<=BMI<30) and obesity (BMI >=30). In some
specifications, we distinguish mild obesity ( 30 ≤ BMI < 35 ) from morbid obesity
( BMI ≥ 35 ).


Health insurance status is defined in the NLSY questionnaire as coverage “by any kind of
private or government health or hospitalization plans or health maintenance organization
(HMO) plans.”12 Health insurance sources are identified for those with health insurance
as either current employer, other employer (former employer coverage or spouse’s
current or former employer coverage), individually purchased, public (Medicaid, Medi-
Cal, Medical Assistance, Welfare, Medical Services), or other source. Survey
respondents are able to indicate more than one source of coverage, and we classify those
indicating more than one source into a single source based on the following hierarchy:
employer-sponsored coverage in own name, other source of employer-sponsored
coverage, individual coverage, public coverage, and, finally, other coverage.




9
  Cawley (2004) follows this same procedure.
10
   In both the NLSY and MEPS data we use for the project, weight is self-reported. Although both men and
women systematically misreport their weight,
Lakdawalla and Phillipson (2002) find that this misreporting is small enough that it does not affect the
qualitative conclusions of their empirical work.
11
   BMI is weight, measured in kilograms, divided by height, measured in meters squared.
12
   The NLSY question on health insurance does not specify any particular time period of coverage, but in
the context of the rest of questionnaire, it seems likely that respondents are giving information about their
current health insurance coverage.


                                                                                                         10
The control variables that we include in Xit are the survey year, gender, race (white,
black, and other), an indicator of whether there are any children in the household and its
interaction with gender, marital status (never married, married with spouse present, and
other), age, age squared, education level measured by highest grade completed (0-8
years, 9-12 years, and 13 or more years), AFQT score (0-24th percentile, 25th-50th
percentile, 51st-75th percentile, 76th-100th percentile), job tenure (less than 48 weeks, 48-
143 weeks, 144-287 weeks, and 288 or more weeks), location of residence (urban or
rural), number of employees at workplace (less than 10 people, 10-24 people, 25-49
people, 50-999 people, and 1000 or more people), industry category (agriculture; forestry
and fisheries; mining; construction; manufacturing; transportation, communications, and
other public utilities; wholesale trade; retail trade; finance, insurance and real estate;
business and repair services; personal services; entertainment and recreation services;
professional and related services; and public administration), and occupation category
(managerial and professional specialty; technical and sales; administrative support;
service; farming, forestry, and fishing; precision, production, craft, and repair; operators,
fabricators, and laborers; and armed forces). Summary statistics for each analysis sample
are presented in Table 1.


3.2      Medical Expenditure and Obesity Data
Because the NLSY does not report information on medical expenditures, we use an
alternative data source to examine the relationship between obesity and medical
expenditures. The 2003 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) collects nationally
representative data on how much non-institutionalized Americans spend on medical
care.13 The MEPS tabulates expenditures on a comprehensive set of categories including
inpatient care, outpatient care, and prescription drugs. The MEPS is the best available
source of data on medical expenditures for a broad population because it combines a
detailed survey of respondents along with an audit of those responses conducted by
13
  In an earlier draft of this paper, we also examined data from the 1998 MEPS. The results using 1998
data are substantively similar to the ones we report here. The main advantage of using the 2003 data is that
unlike 1998, MEPS respondents were directly asked about their height and weight. To get such
information for the 1998 sample, we had to link together the MEPS and 1996 and 1997 National Health
Interview Survey data (where some MEPS respondents were asked about height and weight). Thus, the
height and weight data for the 1998 MEPS come from 1997, while medical expenditure information comes
from 1998. In 2003 height, weight, and expenditures are contemporaneously measured.


                                                                                                         11
consulting the administrative records of health insurance companies, pharmacies, and
hospitals. We exclude people who received health insurance through the Veterans’
Administration or through Workers’ Compensation programs from our analysis as well as
children (under age 18) and pregnant women.


4.0    Results


4.1    Difference in Difference Estimates
Table 2 presents the difference-in-difference estimates of the effect of obesity on hourly
wages using our main sample. When the data are pooled across all the years (1989-
2002), the unadjusted difference-in-difference estimate of the incidence of obesity on
wages for workers insured through their employer is -$1.68, and the estimate is
statistically significant at the 1% level. The results indicate that the magnitude of the
wage offset for obesity among those insured through their employer increased over time.
The unadjusted estimate for 1989 is positive (+$0.28) and not statistically significant,
while the direction of the effect changes and its magnitude becomes larger over time. By
2002, the unadjusted estimate is -$3.37 and statistically significant.


This trend in the difference-in-difference estimate emerges primarily because the wages
of obese workers with health insurance grew less quickly than those of thinner workers
with health insurance. The difference in average wages between the obese and the non-
obese with health insurance grew from -$1.09 in 1989 to -$4.87 in 2002. Among workers
without health insurance, in contrast, we do not observe a consistent time trend in the
relative wages of the obese and the non-obese. While in most years, obese individuals
earned less than non-obese individuals, this difference is rarely statistically significant,
and in 1992, 1998, and 2000, obese individuals earned more than non-obese individuals
in our sample. When we adjust for an extensive set of control variables, the estimate of
the wage incidence of obesity declines in magnitude to -$1.45, but remains statistically




                                                                                               12
significant.14 Our qualitative results for the time trend in the wage differential also
remain the same.


There are at least three plausible explanations for the time trend in the obesity wage
penalty. First, the costs of treating obesity may have increased over time. Better, but
more costly, treatments for the health consequences of obesity may have diffused into
standard medical practice during this period, raising the cost of treatment conditional on
being obese. In addition, those classified as obese may have become increasingly
disabled, requiring more medical care. This explanation is consistent with evidence that
body weight at the 95th percentile of the weight distribution has increased more rapidly
than median body weight (Anderson, Butcher et al. 2003). Second, the trend may be
attributed to the aging of the panel since the incremental medical expenditures associated
with obesity increase with age (Finkelstein, Flebelkorn et al. 2003). The average age of
individuals in the panel increased from 28 to 41 years from 1989 to 2002. Finally, the
mechanism by which wages adjust may be that the wages of obese workers with health
insurance rise more slowly than other workers. This is explanation is consistent with the
structure of our panel data in the sense that they enter the study near the beginning of
their working years and are tracked over time.


In Table 3, Model 1 presents the regression results we use to develop the adjusted
estimate from the pooled sample in Table 2. The key coefficient is the interaction term
between obesity and employer coverage, which represents our adjusted difference-in-
difference estimate. Unsurprisingly, in Model 1, we find a large, positive relationship
between employer-sponsored coverage and wages. Because we believe this is driven
primarily by unobserved characteristics of worker productivity that are correlated with
compensation in the form of both wages and health insurance, we do not interpret this as
an estimate of employee incidence. We also find no evidence of an obesity wage penalty
among workers without employer-sponsored insurance in this model.


4.2        Wage Offsets for Obesity among Workers with Alternative Sources of Coverage

14
     The list of control variables is described at the end of Section 3.1.


                                                                                           13
We next examine whether we see similar wage offsets for obesity among workers with
health insurance from sources other than their own employer (Table 3 – Model 2). We
expect that these workers, even though they are insured, should not experience a similar
wage offset since their coverage is not part of their compensation package.
Correspondingly, we expand our sample to include all eligible workers regardless of
health insurance status and include both the main effects of different types of coverage
(health insurance through a different employer, individual coverage, public coverage, and
other source) and their interactions with obesity.


In Model 2, we find the same statistically significant health insurance induced wage
offset for obesity as we find in Model 1: -$1.44. By contrast, for health insurance
through each of the other sources, the estimate of the wage offset is not statistically
significant. Obese workers who receive employer-provided health insurance from other
sources (such as their spouses) receive a statistically insignificant -$0.87 wage offset.
Similarly, for obese workers who receive health insurance from the government, from
other private sources, or from unknown sources, we find a statistically insignificant wage
offset, even if the point estimates for such wage offsets are in places uncomfortably large.


Our favored explanation for the large point estimates for the wage-offset in the case of
public insurance and other non-employer-based private sources is that in the NLSY, the
timing of the insurance coverage information does not match perfectly with that of the
reported wage. In the subset of full-time workers that we examine, coverage by public
insurance or non-employer provided private insurance is a transitory phenomenon, used
to bridge temporal gaps in employer-sponsored coverage (Ziller, Coburn et al. 2004).
Many of the full time workers in our sample who report having non-employer provided
insurance, for instance, will have moved on to employer-provided coverage by the time
their wages are measured. The measured wage-offset due to coverage by an alternative
employer is less likely to be affected by the asynchronous measurement of insurance
coverage and wage since coverage by a spouse’s employer tends not to be transitory.
Consequently, our preferred test of the effects of alternative coverage is based on
coverage through an alternative employer. The absence of differential wage offsets



                                                                                            14
among the obese with coverage from an alternative employer provides evidence that our
results are not driven by unobserved characteristics correlated with both health insurance
and obesity. Furthermore, it lends support to our interpretation of the interaction term
between employer-provided insurance and obesity as a measure of the wage-offset due to
obesity at firms that provide health insurance.


4.3     Wage Offsets for Overweight and Obesity
Models 3 and 4 in Table 3 return to our main sample of full-time workers either covered
by their employer or uninsured. In Model 3, we include an indicator of overweight
(25≤BMI<30) and distinguish mild obesity (30≤BMI<35) from morbid obesity
(BMI≥35), interacting each of these variables with the indicator of employer-provided
health insurance. In the literature on medical costs of obesity, overweight individuals
typically have much lower expenditures than the obese, and often have expenditures that
do not differ substantially from normal weight individuals (Finkelstein, Flebelkorn et al.
2003). If the wage offsets we have observed for the obese do reflect increased medical
expenditures, the relatively low medical expenditures of the overweight suggests there
should be little or no wage offset for overweight in jobs that provide health insurance. In
addition, because the health care expenditures of the morbidly obese are larger than those
of the mildly obese, we expect their wage offset to be larger. The results from Model 3
are consistent with these relationships. We find no evidence of a wage offset for
overweight workers. Overweight workers in jobs that provide health insurance earn a
statistically insignificant $0.35 less than normal weight workers in similar jobs. We also
find evidence suggesting that the wage offset for health insurance increases with obesity.
The estimates of the wage offset is a statistically significant -$1.27 for mildly obese
workers and -$2.22 (p≤0.11) for morbidly obese workers.15


4.4     Log Transformed Wage
In Model 4 (Table 3), we re-estimate Model 1 using a log transformation of the hourly
wage. While most studies of the wage offset for obesity use a log transformation, we do

15
  Although we cannot reject the hypothesis that the estimates of the wage offset for mildly and morbidly
obese workers are the same, the small number of morbidly obese, uninsured workers limits our ability to
detect this effect.


                                                                                                       15
not because it is not the correct specification to test the hypothesized relationship
between obesity and wages in our study. In particular, the wage offset represents the
incremental health care costs of obesity, and its magnitude should be independent of, not
proportional to, the worker’s wage. Using a log specification would be equivalent to
parameterizing the health care costs of obesity as a percent of worker wages, and we see
no a priori theoretical justification for this relationship. Nonetheless, we test this version
of the model in order to provide estimates that are more comparable with the existing
literature on the effects of obesity on wages. In this model, the point estimate indicates a
statistically significant 5% average wage reduction. While our results our robust to this
test, this is not our preferred specification because the theory of equilibrium wage-setting
(Equation 1) suggests a linear decrease in wages with respect to the premium for health
insurance as opposed to a proportional reduction relative to wages.


4.5 Obesity and Other Fringe Benefits
Health insurance is not the only fringe benefit that employers sometimes provide to their
employees. The NLSY also asks survey respondents about the availability of other types
of fringe benefits including life insurance, dental insurance, maternity leave, retirement
benefits, profit-sharing, vocational training, child care, and flexible hours. Because the
value of these benefits, for the most part, does not vary with worker weight, they provide
an additional opportunity to test our empirical specification. While obese individuals do
have shorter life spans than non-obese individuals (Flegal, Graubard et al. 2006), life
insurance premium differences are substantially smaller than differences in medical
expenditures. Obese workers should suffer little or no extra wage penalty if employers
provide these benefits. This test allows us to determine if the results we find for health
insurance are driven by omitted factors relating to worker productivity that affect the
availability of all types of benefits.


We use the same differences in differences approach to test the incidence of other types
of employer-sponsored benefits on worker wages. In other words, we regress hourly
wage on indicators of obesity, the availability of a particular type of fringe benefit, and
interaction of the two as well as the control variables included in the main models. The



                                                                                              16
results in Table 4 indicate no wage penalty for the obese when employers offer any of the
other fringe benefits that we consider, whether we adjust for covariates or not. For all the
benefits listed, with the exception of health insurance, the survey does not provide
information about whether the worker was enrolled, so we unfortunately cannot check
whether the same results hold for enrollment for the other fringe benefits. Overall, these
results provide strong evidence that our main findings are not driven by omitted variables
that affect the availability of many types of benefits, such as unobserved productivity
differences.


4.6 Gender Differences in Obesity Wage Penalties
One important finding of the obesity-wage literature is that it is women, rather than men,
who suffer the greatest wage penalty from being obese.16 In Table 5, we analyze the
effects of including the insurance coverage variables in the wage regressions on the
estimate of the effect of obesity separately for men and women. We find that obese men
earn $1.21 per hour less than non-obese men, while obese women earn $1.66 less than
non-obese women (Model 1 for men and women, respectively). Model 2, which includes
enrollment in employer-provided health insurance (HIit) as an additional control produces
essentially the same results as Model 1 for both men and women. However, the results
change considerably in Model 3, which includes an interaction term between obesity and
HIit. For women, we find that the wage penalty for obesity is concentrated in firms where
employers provide health insurance—a $2.64 penalty. In firms that do not provide health
insurance, obese women earn 43 cents more than non-obese women, though the estimate
is not statistically significant. For men, by contrast, while the wage penalty for obesity is
no longer statistically significant in Model 3, the interaction between obesity and
employer-provided insurance is also not statistically significant. In other words, the wage

16
  The most robust version of this finding is presented by Cawley (2004). Using the same dataset as our
study, Cawley estimates wage regressions including individual fixed effects and finds evidence that the
wage penalty for obesity is concentrated among white women. When we estimate our models like
Cawley’s—including fixed effects and a subset of time varying control variables—we do not find evidence
of the wage offset for health insurance among the obese. However, we also do not find any evidence that
obese individuals earn less than thinner individuals in the case of either male or female workers. These
results, not included here, are available upon request from the study authors. Because the results presented
by Cawley are based on a much longer panel (he includes NLSY data from before 1988 when respondents
were not queried about health insurance) we believe that our inability to replicate Cawley’s (2004) findings
with our sample is driven by a lack of statistical power.


                                                                                                         17
penalty associated with obesity is concentrated among workers with coverage from their
employer for women, but not for men.


The results in Table 5 present important new evidence that suggests a rethinking of the
conclusion that the obesity wage penalty for women is due mostly to discrimination.
However, our finding of a substantial obesity wage-offset for women but not for men is
potentially inconsistent with our interpretation that the differential wage-offset is due to
the provision of health insurance. An important premise of this argument, however, is
that obese individuals spend more on health care than do non-obese individuals. While
results from the studies we discussed earlier indicate that this is indeed the case, we know
of no estimate in the literature from nationally representative data that reports yearly
medical expenditures for obese and non-obese separately for men and women.


Table 6 reports our calculations from 2003 MEPS which includes all adult Americans in
its sample frame. The difference in the average health expenditures between the obese
and the non-obese is larger for adult women than for adult men. Obese women spent
$1,457 more per year on healthcare than did non-obese women; the analogous difference
for men is $405. When we examine adults 20-50 and privately insured adults 20-50, the
difference is even more striking. For these groups, obese men do not have greater
medical expenditures than non-obese men. For privately insured women, however, the
incremental medical expenditures associated with obesity are $583. These differences
indicate that the absence of the wage offset for obesity among those with employer-
provide insurance for men can be explained by the fact that the medical expenditures are
not higher for obese men than for their normal weight counterparts.


Though a complete examination of the differences in medical expenditures between thin
and obese men and women is beyond the scope of this paper, in Table 7 we provide some
information on the sources of the medical expenditures differences that we report in
Table 6. MEPS respondents are asked whether a doctor has diagnosed them to have (or
have had) a number of common medical conditions, including diabetes, asthma,
hypertension, coronary artery disease, angina, myocardial infarction, other disease,



                                                                                           18
stroke, emphysema, non-specific joint pain, and arthritis.17 In the left columns in Table
7, we report the prevalence of each condition among thin and obese workers aged 20-
50.18 Among both men and women, obese individuals are more likely to be afflicted with
a wide variety of conditions. These differences are both statistically and medically
significant. Of particular note is the fact that obese women are 9.89 percentage points
more likely to have an arthritis diagnosis than thin women, while obese men are only
6.06 percentage points more likely than thin men. This is of particular note because,
among the set of conditions we consider, arthritis is the only one in which obese
individuals with the condition spend (statistically significantly) more than thin
individuals. For female workers with arthritis, the medical expenditure difference
between obese and thin individuals is $1,956; for male workers with arthritis, the
difference is $1,224. Clearly, differences between men and women in the connection
between obesity and arthritis are an important part of the reason why obese female
workers spend so much more on medical care than thin female workers, while obese male
workers spend about the same as thin male workers. The story is certainly more
complicated than just arthritis, though, and deserves a more careful treatment than what
we can afford here.


Workers in both small and large firms with employer-sponsored health insurance
experience a wage offset for obesity (Table 8), and the wage offset for obesity is
concentrated among women with employer-sponsored coverage among workers in both
small and large firms.19 The existence of a wage offset in large firms suggests that our
findings are driven by individual incidence rather than group incidence. If the incidence
of premiums were at the level of the group, we would expect to see little evidence of an
obesity wage offset among insured workers in large groups. This is because the health
care costs of an individual would have little effect on the average premium of the group.


17
   Of course, respondents may have been diagnosed with more than one condition.
18
   All of the estimates and statistical tests in Tables 6 and 7 take account of the complex sampling stratified
scheme used by the MEPS.
19
   These results are not sensitive to the definition of firm size. The NLSY divides firms with 50 or more
employees into two categories: 50-999 and 1000+. When we define a large firm as one with 1000+
workers, the results are substantively the same, although the sample size in the largest category is relatively
small.


                                                                                                            19
Our estimates of the incremental medical care costs associated with obesity allow us to
make a “back of the envelope” calculation to determine whether the incremental medical
expenditures of the obese can explain the wage offset we observe. In the NLSY, obese
women who work full-time and enroll in employer provided health insurance work an
average of 2,191 hours per year. Thus, the yearly income penalty from being obese is
$5,784= 2,191 * $2.64. The results from the MEPS indicate that approximately $600 of
this penalty can actually be attributed to higher expected medical expenditures. Although
the difference between these estimates is large, the calculation is subject to a number of
qualifications. First, the estimates are from different samples covering different time
periods which may contribute to the differential. In addition, premiums are unlikely to be
actuarially fair and accounting for the loading of insurance in our estimate of medical
expenditures would bring the estimates closer. Finally, it is possible that only part of the
wage differential we observe is due to the higher expected medical spending of the obese
and the remainder is due to residual discrimination.


Though we cannot rule out residual discrimination as an explanation for the calculation in
the previous paragraph, some of our other findings suggest that it is not a likely
explanation. First, because we find no evidence of similar wage discrimination for obese
women without health insurance or obese men with coverage, attributing the residual
difference to discrimination requires an explanation of why discrimination exists only for
obese, insured women. Second, we find no evidence of similar wage offsets for different
types of benefits or for the working obese with coverage from alternative sources.
Maintaining an explanation based upon discrimination thus requires potentially ad hoc
reasoning about obese women outside of work settings where employers provide health
insurance.


5.0    Conclusions
Our results indicate that obese workers with employer-sponsored health insurance pay for
their higher expected medical expenditures through lower cash wages. This conclusion is
strengthened by our findings that these types of wage offsets do not exist either for obese




                                                                                          20
workers with coverage through alternative sources or for other types of fringe benefits for
which the cost to the employer of providing is less likely to be affected by BMI.


Although the existence of a wage offset for health insurance is the standard theoretical
prediction from economic models of worker compensation, this finding is noteworthy
given the dearth of empirical evidence of the existence of these types of wage offsets.
Not only do our findings provide evidence supporting the few existing studies that find
that these types of wage offsets exist, but they also provide new evidence on the level at
which they occur. We find that the magnitude of the wage offset for employer-sponsored
coverage varies by individual characteristics that affect expected medical expenditures, in
this case obesity. The fact that we find evidence for the existence of the wage offset in
both small and large firms indicates that this wage-offset is not a firm level effect that
emerges through differences between small and large employers due to the inability of
small employers to effectively pool premiums. Assuming that obese workers are not
highly concentrated within particular firms, this suggests that the wage offset for health
insurance varies across individuals within a firm based on their health risk.


Nevertheless, our results do not provide direct evidence that employees bear the full
incidence of the cost of employer-sponsored coverage. Our empirical specification
leaves open the possibility that employers either partially or fully subsidize the average
premium. The evidence we generate provides support for a weaker version of employee
incidence—that employees pay for individual characteristics that make them high cost to
insure. Nonetheless, our results imply that having insurance provided through an
employer does not guarantee the pooling of health risks across employees. Because
obesity is arguably an unusual indicator of health status, future research should examine
whether similar types of wage offsets exist for other conditions.


Our findings on the incidence of obesity-related medical care costs among workers with
employer-sponsored coverage have important implications for research on the
relationship between obesity and wages. While these studies have provided evidence
consistent with the proposition that obese, particularly white women, experience



                                                                                             21
significant labor market discrimination in the form of lower wages, our results point to
and provide empirical evidence supporting an alternative explanation. We find that the
wage penalty for obesity among women is concentrated in firms providing health
insurance. We also find that, among relatively young people, obese women, but not
obese men, have higher health care expenditures than their non-obese counterparts.
Taken together, these results suggest that the wage penalty for obesity among women can
be explained, at least in part, by their higher health care expenditures.


While our findings provide a strong case that wage offsets for health insurance are a
cause of lower wages among obese women, alternative explanations do exist. For
example, among obese workers, those with relatively low productivity due to the health
consequences of obesity may consume more medical care and, as a result, self select into
firms offering health insurance. In this case, the observed relationship may represent
both the lower productivity and greater demand for health insurance among these
workers. The absence of a wage-offset for obese male workers, however, weakens this
explanation. For this alternative explanation to be true we would have to assume that
only obese women are subject to this type of selection. Presumably, similar differences
among obese men in their productivity exist.


Other alternative explanations for our empirical findings include invidious discrimination
against the obese mainly in high end jobs that provide health insurance, job sorting of the
obese into relatively low wage occupations among the high end jobs, and perhaps even
productivity differences between the obese and non-obese in high end but not low end
jobs. In each case, however, these explanations would have to characterize obese
women, but not obese men. None of these alternative explanations are inconsistent with
our favored explanation of obesity induced wage-offsets at firms that provide health
insurance.


The findings of our study raise the obvious question of the mechanism by which these
wage offsets occur. While our analysis does not provide direct evidence on this point, it
does suggest that perhaps these wage offsets emerge slowly over time in the form of less



                                                                                           22
rapid wage increases for obese workers insured through their employer than obese
workers without this coverage.


It is also possible that labor market discrimination against the obese and the higher costs
of providing health insurance to these workers are not mutually exclusive explanations
for the obesity wage penalty. In theory, competitive labor markets make invidious
discrimination costly to the discriminator (Becker 1971). This is because firms have
strong incentives to hire workers for whom the prevailing wage is less than their marginal
productivity; this type of competition among firms for workers will eliminate wage
disparities unrelated to worker productivity. In the case of the wage penalty associated
with obesity, the differential costs of insuring the obese may be a mechanism that allows
labor market discrimination to persist in competitive markets. Firms that do not make
these types of wage offsets and instead enforce the pooling of premiums among obese
and non-obese workers will be at a competitive disadvantage relative to those who are
able to provide non-obese workers with a cash wage and benefits combination that better
reflects the costs of insuring these workers.


Finally, our results have implications for the policy debate over what to do about the
obesity crisis. Some have suggested that the right response is a tax on fast food and junk
food (Brownell and Horgan 2003). Whether such a tax is a good idea depends, mainly,
upon the extent to which individuals pay fully for the consequences of their decisions
about diet and exercise.20 If there are no externalities in these decisions, then “twinkie”
taxes will only distort already optimal decisions. But if employer-provided insurance
pools the health risk of the obese and non-obese, it will create an externality that reduces
incentives to maintain a normal weight. Our evidence on the incidence of the obesity
wage premium suggests that pooling of the obese and non-obese does not occur in the
employer-sponsored insurance market; hence the externalities caused by health insurance
on decisions about body weight are small.

20
  Other authors, like Cutler, Glaeser, et al. (2003) have suggested that self control problems on the part of
individuals represent an “internality” that make body weight decisions inefficient. Time-inconsistent
individuals do not take into account the future health implications of the food choices they make in the
current period. Bhattacharya and Lakdawalla (2004) argue that even in the presence of such “internalities,”
sin taxes such as a “twinkie” tax will not, in general, improve the welfare of obese individuals.


                                                                                                          23
                                          References

Anderson, P. M., K. F. Butcher, et al. (2003). "Economic perspectives on childhood obesity."
        Economic Perspectives 3Q: 30-48.
Arrow, K. J. (1963). "Uncertainty of the Welfare Economics of Medical Care." American
        Economic Review 53(5): 941-73.
Becker, G. S. (1971). The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago, The University of Chicago
        Press.
Bhattacharya, J. and D. Lakdawalla (2004). Time-Inconsistency and Welfare, National Bureau of
        Economic Research.
Bhattacharya, J. and N. Sood (2006). Health Insurance and the Obesity Externality. Advances in
        Health Economics and Health Services Research. K. Bolin and J. Cawley. 17.
Brownell, K. and K. Horgan (2003). Food Fight: The Inside Story of the Food Industry,
        America's Obesity Crisis, and What We Can Do About It. New York, NY, McGraw-
        Hill/Contemporary Books.
Cawley, J. (2004). "The Impact of Obesity on Wages." Journal of Human Resources XXXIX(2):
        451-474.
Cutler, D. M., E. L. Glaeser, et al. (2003). "Why have Americans become more obese?" Journal
        of Economic Perspectives 17(3): 93-118.
Ehrlich, I. and G. S. Becker (1972). "Market Insurance, Self-Insurance, and Self-Protection."
        Journal of Political Economy 80(July/August): 623-648.
Finkelstein, E. A., I. C. Flebelkorn, et al. (2003). "National medical spending attributable to
        overweight and obesity: How much, and who's paying?" Health Affairs: W3-219-226.
Flegal, K., B. Graubard, et al. (2006). "Excess Deaths Associated with Underweight,
        Overweight, and Obesity." JAMA 293: 1861-1867.
Gruber, J. (1994). "The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits." American Economic
        Review 84(3): 622-641.
Gruber, J. (2000). Health Insurance and the Labor Market. Handbook of Health Economics. A. J.
        Cuyler and J. P. Newhouse, Elsevier. 1a: 645-700.
Keenan, P. S., M. J. B. Buntin, et al. (2001). "The Prevalence of Formal Risk Adjustment in
        Health Plan Purchasing." Inquiry 38(Fall): 245-259.
Lakdawalla, D. and T. Phillipson (2002). The growth of obesity and technological change: A
        theoretical and empirical examination, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Levy, H. and D. Meltzer (2004). What Do We Really Know about Whether Health Insurance
        Affects Health? Health Policy and the Uninsured. C. G. McLaughlin. Washington D.C.,
        The Urban Institute Press: 179-204.
MaCurdy, T., T. Mroz, et al. (1998). "An Evaluation of the National Longitudinal Survey of
        Youth." Journal of Human Resources 33(2): 345-436.
Newhouse, J. P. (1993). Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment,
        Harvard University Press.
Pauly, M. V. (1970). "The Welfare Economics of Community Rating." The Journal of Risk and
        Insurance 37(3): 407-418.
Pauly, M. V. and B. Herring (1999). Pooling Health Insurance Risks. Washington DC, AEI
        Press.



                                                                                            24
Rosen, S. (1986). The Theory of Equalizing Differences. Handbook of Labor Economics. O.
        Ashenfelter and R. Layard, Elsevier Science Publishers. 1.
Rothschild, M. and J. Stiglitz (1976). "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay
        on the Economics of Imperfect Information." Quarterly Journal of Economics 90: 629-49.
Sheiner, L. (1999). Health Care Costs, Wages, and Aging. Washington D.C., Federal Reserve
        Board of Governors.
Ziller, E., A. Coburn, et al. (2004). "Patterns of Individual Health Insurance Coverage, 1996-
        2000." Health Affairs 23(6): 210-221.




                                                                                           25
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Study Samples

                                   Full-time workers either with
                                   employer-sponsored coverage
                                    in own name or uninsured       All full-time workers
Variable                                Mean         Std. Dev.     Mean         Std. Dev.
N                                          31,176                   38,645
Hourly wage                                 14.98         15.58       14.57          15.31
Employer coverage (own)                      0.80                       0.64
Employer coverage (other)                     -                         0.14
Individual coverage                           -                         0.03
Public coverage                               -                         0.02
Uninsured                                    0.20                       0.16
Unknown source of coverage                    -                         0.01
Non-employer coverage                         -                         0.06
Obese (BMI>30)                               0.19                       0.19
Mildly obese (BMI>30 and <35)                0.13                       0.13
Morbidly obese (BMI>=35)                     0.06                       0.06
Overweight                                   0.37                       0.36
Obese*Employer coverage (own)                0.15                       0.12
Female                                       0.37                       0.41
Any children in household                    0.54                       0.57
Race - Black                                 0.13                       0.12
Race - Other                                 0.02                       0.02
Never Married                                0.25                       0.22
Formerly Married                             0.21                       0.19
Age                                         34.23           4.81      34.32           4.80
Education: <9                                0.02                       0.02
Education: 9-12                              0.53                       0.53
Education: 13 and over                       0.45                       0.45
AFQT: 0-25                                   0.15                       0.14
AFQT: 25-50                                  0.22                       0.23
AFQT: 50-75                                  0.29                       0.29
AFQT: 75-100                                 0.34                       0.34
Urban residence                              0.75                       0.75
Job tenure: 0-1 years                        0.20                       0.21
Job tenure: 1-3 years                        0.23                       0.24
Job tenure: 3-6 years                        0.21                       0.21
Job tenure: 6+ years                         0.36                       0.34
Employer size: 0-9                           0.18                       0.21
Employer size: 10-24                         0.14                       0.15
Employer size: 25-24                         0.12                       0.12
Employer size: 50-999                        0.42                       0.40
Employer size: 1000+                         0.14                       0.12
N                                          31,176                   38,645
Note: Weighted Estimates


                                                                                             26
Table 2: Difference-in Difference Estimates of the Wage Offset for Obesity

Sample: Full-time workers either with employer-sponsored coverage in their own name or uninsured

                               Insured                                       Uninsured                       Difference-in-Difference
                  Obese       Not Obese     Difference           Obese       Not Obese     Difference        Unadjusted Adjusted
  All years       15.22         16.64          -1.42              9.47         9.21             0.25            -1.68          -1.45
                                            [0.40]***                                         [0.50]         [0.63]***      [0.57]**
    1989          10.83          11.93        -1.09              6.42           7.79           -1.38             0.28           0.8
                                              [0.81]                                         [0.76]*           [1.11]         [1.11]
    1990          10.36          13.10        -2.74              7.10           7.89           -0.79            -1.95          -1.07
                                            [0.55]***                                         [0.51]         [0.75]***        [0.73]
    1992          13.01          13.92          -0.9             11.28          8.80            2.49            -3.39          -2.64
                                              [1.41]                                          [3.84]           [4.09]         [3.98]
    1993          12.47          14.69        -2.22              7.82           8.41           -0.59            -1.63          -1.68
                                            [0.51]***                                         [0.56]          [0.75]**      [0.66]**
    1994          12.83          15.24        -2.41              9.05           9.39           -0.34            -2.07          -1.74
                                            [0.49]***                                         [1.19]           [1.29]         [1.18]
    1996          14.27          16.72        -2.45              9.58           9.83           -0.26            -2.19          -1.47
                                            [0.50]***                                         [0.84]          [0.98]**        [0.92]
    1998          16.05          19.38        -3.33              9.68           9.63            0.05            -3.38          -1.55
                                            [0.76]***                                         [0.62]         [0.98]***        [1.04]
    2000          17.69          22.29          -4.6             11.66         10.75            0.91            -5.51          -4.27
                                            [0.76]***                                         [1.03]         [1.28]***     [1.28]***
    2002          20.37          25.24        -4.87              10.59         12.08           -1.49            -3.37          -2.27
                                            [1.03]***                                       [0.69]**         [1.24]***       [1.20]*
      N               4,955       19,059                            1,427          5,735
*significant at 10%; **signficant at 5%, ***significant at 1%
Note: Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for repeated obeservations of individuals. Adjusted estimates include controls
for sex, children in the household and its interaction with female, race, marital status, age, education, urban residence, job tenure,
employer size, year (for pooled estimate), industry, and occupation.


                                                                                                                                         27
Table 3: Estimates of the Obesity Wage Offset for Health Insurance

                                                     (1)              (2)             (3)         (4)
                                                                               Overweight,
                                                                  Alternative Obese, and         Log
                                                 Main Study       Sources of    Morbidly Transformed
                                                   Sample         Coverage         Obese       Wage
Obese                                                 -0.2            -0.15                     -0.03
                                                    [0.49]           [0.48]                    [0.02]
Employer coverage (own)                              2.37              2.48          2.47        0.23
                                                 [0.26]***        [0.25]***     [0.34]***    [0.01]***
Obese*Employer coverage (own)                        -1.45            -1.44                     -0.05
                                                  [0.57]**         [0.56]**                   [0.02]**
Employer coverage (other source)                                       0.62
                                                                    [0.37]*
Obese*Employer coverage (other source)                               -0.87
                                                                     [0.70]
Individual coverage                                                    1.38
                                                                  [0.49]***
Obese*Individual coverage                                             -0.92
                                                                     [1.06]
Public coverage                                                        0.94
                                                                     [1.29]
Obese*Public coverage                                                 -1.94
                                                                     [1.47]
Unknown source of coverage                                             2.39
                                                                  [0.66]***
Obese*Unknown source of coverage                                      -1.54
                                                                     [1.31]
Overweight (25<=BMI<30)                                                             -0.35
                                                                                   [0.38]
Mildly obese (30<=BM1<35)                                                           -0.53
                                                                                   [0.39]
Morbidly obese (BMI >=35)                                                            0.02
                                                                                   [1.31]
Overweight*Employer coverage (own)                                                  -0.18
                                                                                   [0.50]
Mildly obese*Employer coverage (own)                                                -1.27
                                                                                 [0.53]**
Morbidly obese*Employer coverage (own)                                              -2.22
                                                                                   [1.38]
Constant                                              23.27          21.95         14.17         2.13
                                                    [7.27]***     [6.73]***       [7.31]*    [0.22]***
Observations                                              31,176        38,645        31,176      31,176
R-squared                                              0.18            0.17          0.18         0.5
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Note: Estimates are weighted and standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for repeated obeservations
of individuals. Adjusted estimates include controls for sex, children in the household and its interaction
with female, race, marital status, age, education, urban residence, job tenure, employer size, year,
industry, and occupation.


                                                                                                             28
Table 4: Estimates of the Obesity Wage Offset for Other Fringe Benefits


Fringe Benefit                             n           Unadjusted           Adjusted
Life Insurance                            30,469           -0.1                0.12
                                                         [0.52]              [0.43]
Dental Insurance                            30,700        -0.47               -0.47
                                                         [0.58]              [0.49]
Maternity Benefits                          28,682        -0.24               -0.31
                                                         [0.63]              [0.55]
Retirement                                  30,362        -0.51               -0.59
                                                         [0.57]              [0.49]
Profit Sharing                              30,476        -0.42               -0.49
                                                         [0.66]              [0.53]
Training/Education                          30,354         0.13                0.17
                                                         [0.58]              [0.48]
Childcare                                   30,114          1.1                0.86
                                                         [1.54]              [1.38]
Flexible Working Hours                      30,781        -0.33                0.15
                                                         [0.58]              [0.46]
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Note: Estimates are weighted and standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for
repeated obeservations of individuals. Adjusted estimates include controls for sex,
children in the household and its interaction with female, race, martial status, age,
education, urban residence, job tenure, employer size, year, industry, and occupation.




                                                                                         29
Table 5: Analysis of the Wage Offset for Obesity by Age and Sex

                                                                           All Ages
                                                       Men                                         Women
                                           (1)          (2)           (3)             (1)             (2)          (3)
Obese                                    -1.21        -1.27         -0.79           -1.66           -1.66         0.43
                                       [0.39]***    [0.39]***      [0.48]         [0.39]***       [0.39]***      [0.98]
Employer coverage (own)                                 2.3           2.4                            1.81         2.37
                                                    [0.33]***    [0.35]***                        [0.39]***    [0.33]***
Obese*Employer coverage (own)                                       -0.58                                        -2.64
                                                                   [0.63]                                      [1.00]***
Constant                                22.36          20.22        20.12              15.35         9.83         9.51
                                       [9.47]**      [9.51]**     [9.50]**            [10.89]      [10.81]      [10.81]
Observations                              19,183        19,183       19,183             11,993       11,993       11,993
R-squared                                0.19          0.19          0.19               0.14         0.14         0.14

                                                                          Age <=35
                                                       Men                                        Women
                                           (1)          (2)           (3)             (1)             (2)          (3)
Obese                                     -0.42       -0.45         -0.11            -1.38          -1.37         1.08
                                         [0.42]       [0.42]       [0.57]          [0.54]**       [0.54]**       [1.84]
Employer coverage (own)                                1.77          1.83                            1.32         1.88
                                                    [0.39]***    [0.42]***                        [0.58]**     [0.41]***
Obese*Employer coverage (own)                                       -0.43                                        -3.19
                                                                   [0.76]                                       [1.82]*
Constant                                  9.13         9.45          9.41              20.04        18.69        19.08
                                        [18.15]      [18.06]      [18.08]             [26.95]      [26.96]      [26.96]
Observations                              12,585        12,585       12,585               7,755        7,755        7,755
R-squared                                 0.10        0.10           0.10               0.07         0.08         0.08

                                                                           Age >35
                                                       Men                                         Women
                                           (1)          (2)            (3)            (1)             (2)           (3)
Obese                                    -2.06        -2.21         -0.48           -1.83           -1.85          0.49
                                       [0.60]***    [0.60]***       [0.78]        [0.51]***       [0.51]***      [0.50]
Employer coverage (own)                                3.84           4.3                             2.8          3.56
                                                    [0.53]***    [0.57]***                        [0.41]***    [0.49]***
Obese*Employer coverage (own)                                        -2.04                                        -2.87
                                                                  [1.00]**                                     [0.75]***
Constant                                  0.35        -1.12           0.32            -10.07        -14.78       -15.44
                                        [65.41]      [65.10]       [65.03]            [48.72]      [48.60]      [48.57]
Observations                                6,598        6,598          6,598             4,238        4,238         4,238
R-squared                                 0.24         0.25           0.25              0.27         0.27          0.27
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Note: Estimates are weighted and standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for repeated obeservations of individuals.
Adjusted estimates include controls for sex, children in the household and its interaction with female, race, martial
status, age, education, urban residence, job tenure, employer size, year, industry, and occupation.




                                                                                                                        30
Table 6: Total Medical Expenditures

Women
                             Non-Obese        Obese    Difference
18-64                            $2,718         $4,175     $1,457
20-50                            $2,406         $3,193       $787
20-50 Privately Insured          $2,586         $3,169       $583

Men
                              Non-Obese        Obese       Difference
18-64                               $2,498        $2,904         $405
20-50                               $1,719        $1,881         $162
20-50 Privately Insured             $1,896        $1,949          $52
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                        31
Table 7: Expenditure and Prevalence Differences by Condition

Women
                                    Disease Prevalence                     Expenditures Conditional on Disease
Condition                    Non-Obese     Obese    Difference             Non-Obese      Obese     Difference
Diabetes                         1.15%       4.64%      3.49%        ***       $4,246      $5,769       $1,522
Asthma                           9.29%      14.58%      5.30%        ***       $3,805      $4,147         $342
Hypertension                     6.18%      22.14%     15.96%        ***       $3,834      $4,278         $444
Coronary Artery Disease          0.13%       0.68%      0.56%        ***      $19,274      $6,641 -$12,633
Angina                           0.18%       0.46%      0.29%          *       $2,637      $8,574       $5,937
Myocardial Infarction            0.22%       0.69%      0.48%         **       $6,709      $8,240       $1,531
Other Heart Disease              3.26%       4.46%      1.21%          *       $4,333      $3,900        -$433
Stroke                           0.44%       0.62%      0.17%                 $10,728      $7,969      -$2,760
Emphysema                        0.10%       0.24%      0.14%                 $13,712      $8,851      -$4,861
Joint Pain                      22.53%      35.57%     13.04%        ***       $3,740      $4,726         $987
Arthritis                        8.07%      17.96%      9.89%        ***       $4,141      $6,097       $1,956   **

Men
                                       Disease Prevalence                  Expenditures Conditional on Disease
Condition                    Non-Obese        Obese     Difference         Non-Obese      Obese     Difference
Diabetes                           1.23%        6.60%        5.38%   ***       $5,425      $4,623        -$802
Asthma                             7.99%        6.66%       -1.33%             $2,043      $2,533         $490
Hypertension                       9.76%       26.84%      17.08%    ***       $3,276      $2,996        -$280
Coronary Artery Disease            0.50%        1.15%        0.64%    **      $12,618      $6,959      -$5,658
Angina                             0.28%        0.74%        0.46%    **       $7,766      $9,610       $1,844
Myocardial Infarction              0.54%        1.06%        0.52%     *      $11,812      $6,123      -$5,690
Other Heart Disease                2.03%        2.75%        0.72%             $2,440      $4,014       $1,574
Stroke                             0.15%        0.56%        0.41%   **        $5,635     $12,730       $7,095
Emphysema                          0.11%        0.20%        0.09%             $1,781        $106      -$1,675
Joint Pain                        24.93%       31.53%        6.59%   ***       $4,514      $3,215      -$1,298
Arthritis                          6.54%       12.60%        6.06%   ***       $2,926      $4,150       $1,224   *
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


                                                                                                                      32
Table 8: Estimates by Firm Size
                                                    Small Firms (0-49)                       Large Firms (50+)
                                               All        Women         Men              All      Women        Men
Obese*Employer coverage (own)                 -1.59         -3.78       -0.36          -1.54        -1.6       -1.35
                                            [0.80]**      [1.49]**     [0.85]        [0.60]*** [0.59]***      [0.94]
Observations                                    13,625        4,498       9,127         17,551       7,495     10,056
R-squared                                      0.14          0.13        0.15           0.21       0.17         0.22
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Note: Estimates are weighted and standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for repeated obeservations of
individuals. Adjusted estimates include controls for sex, children in the household and its interaction with female,
race, marital status, age, education, urban residence, job tenure, employer size, year, industry, and occupation.




                                                                                                                       33
