                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE GREAT ESCAPE:
                         A REVIEW ESSAY ON FOGEL’S
            THE ESCAPE FROM HUNGER AND PREMATURE DEATH, 1700-2100

                                             Angus Deaton

                                         Working Paper 11308
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11308


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2005




Prepared for the Journal of Economic Literature. I am grateful to Anne Case and to Adriana Lleras-Muney
for helpful discussions. I gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Institutes of Health
through the NBER, Grant Number P01 AG05842-14. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Angus Deaton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Great Escape: A Review Essay on Fogel’s The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death,
1700-2100
Angus Deaton
NBER Working Paper No. 11308
April 2005
JEL No. I1, N3

                                            ABSTRACT

In this essay, I review Robert Fogel's The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100

which is concerned with the past, present, and future of human health. Fogel's work places great

emphasis on nutrition, not only for the history of health, but for explaining aspects of current health,

not only in comparing poor and rich countries, but in thinking about rich countries now and in the

future. I discuss Fogel's analysis alongside alternative interpretations that place greater emphasis on

the historical role of public health, and on the current and future role of improvements in medical

technology.

Angus Deaton
328 Wallace Hall
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu
In recent years, economists have changed the way that they think about health. Amartya Sen

(1999) has successfully pressed the importance of recognizing aspects of well-being beyond real

income, and argued that health has the primary claim on our attention. Jeffrey Sachs, and the

Commission on Macroeconomics and Health (2001) which he led, argue that good health is

necessary (and perhaps even sufficient) for economic growth in the poorest countries of the

world. And economists have begun to rise to the challenges posed by social epidemiologists who

argue that it is socioeconomic status, including income, that is the primary determinant of health,

not health care. Robert Fogel has been thinking about these issues for perhaps longer than

anyone. His accumulated wisdom and the historical experience have much to bring to the current

debates. In The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, he restates his grand historical

account of the synergistic improvement of living standards, morbidity, and mortality since the

18th Century. He also develops the implications for understanding health in poor countries now,

and for thinking about the future of health and living standards for those of us who are fortunate

enough to live in countries that are already rich, whose inhabitants are tall and strong, whose life

expectancy at birth is ten years or more in excess of three score and ten, and half of whose

recently-born children may well still be alive a century from now.



1. Ascending Mount Waaler

The analytical device that underpins much of Fogel’s book is the “Waaler” curve. Hans Waaler is

a Norwegian economist turned epidemiologist who, in 1984, published a monograph in which he

used a sample of 1.8 million people to investigate the links between height, weight, and

mortality. What I call Mount Waaler is the three-dimensional plot of life-expectancy (the height


                                                 1
of Mt. Waaler) against height and weight (longitude and latitude). One useful cross-sectional cut

through the mountain is to make a two-way plot between life-expectancy and the body-mass

index (BMI), defined as weight in kilos divided by the square of height in meters. A six foot man

who weights 200 pounds has a BMI of 27.1; at 225 pounds, his BMI would be 30.5, just over the

threshold of obesity, which by convention begins when BMI crosses 30. Among those who are

underweight, with a BMI below about 20, mortality risk decreases with BMI; it is then more or

less flat until BMI reaches 30, at which point it rises again. But BMI does not give us a complete

picture of Mt. Waaler because, at any given level of the body-mass index, taller people live

longer, at least up to a point. You reach the top of Mt. Waaler when you are 6' 3" tall and weigh

about 190 pounds, at least if you are a Norwegian man.

  Provided that Mt. Waaler does not change its shape or height over time—and Fogel provides

some evidence for constancy by comparing Waaler’s results with his own data from Union Army

Veterans from the American Civil War—then the history of human physiology, and to an extent,

the history of economic growth, can be usefully thought of as a(n uneven) ascent of Mt. Waaler.

The escape from hunger and premature death is the movement up Mt Waaler from the southwest,

where the inhabitants are short, thin, and weak, towards the northeast, where the inhabitants are

tall and powerful. We can also mark the position of the typical Indian or Chinese on Mt Waaler,

and compare it to the typical American now, or the typical American in 1800. And we can think

about current trends in weights and heights, and where they are leading to on the mountain.

  How did our ancestors move up the mountain over the last two centuries? By eating more,

which required more food production, which was possible in turn because they were bigger and

stronger, which was because they (or their parents) ate more, and so on. The escape from hunger


                                                2
and premature death was the escape from a nutritional trap where we could not work to produce

food because we were too weak, and we were too weak because we could not work to produce

food to make us strong. This synergistic improvement of health and living standards is referred to

by Fogel and his collaborators, see particularly Fogel and Dora Costa (1997), by the inelegant

term techno-physio evolution, “a synergism between technological and physiological

improvements that is biological, but not genetic, rapid, culturally transmitted, and not necessarily

stable,” (page 20).

  The story has many interesting and not obvious implications. Inventing a Wellsian time-

machine to take us all back to eighteenth century England would be as good for our health as

transporting us to the moon without spacesuits. Our bodies are simply too large to survive on the

average food supply then available. When the food supply is low, people cannot be large,

because large bodies use up too many calories simply in resting and maintenance, leaving

nothing for work. Our ancestors could manage to survive and procreate because they were much

smaller than we are. But, because they were small and subject to the laws of Mt. Waaler, they

lived shorter lives than we do. Both they and their lives, if not nasty and brutish, were certainly

short. If we were so transported, of course, most of us would adapt quite quickly to meager

rations by becoming thinner, but only the short would be able to survive, so that the average

height of the population would shrink, though more slowly than average weight. The reverse

process is how our ancestors made their great escape from hunger and death, and turned

themselves into the large, long-lived animals that we are today. According to Fogel, the fact that

we are bigger and stronger can account for around half of the growth in national income in

Britain since 1790, (page 34). It also accounts for, not only the increase in longevity since


                                                  3
1790—the movement up Mt. Waaler—but also much of the reduction in morbidity in the United

States of the 20th Century, including that from non-infectious diseases, including musculoskeletal

disease, digestive disease, heart disease, and cancer.

  The process of getting bigger and stronger is still running. A recent compilation of evidence

from ten western European countries, A. Cavelaars et al (2000), showed that in each decade men

became taller by 0.6 inches and women by 0.3 inches. This is true in the tallest countries,

Norway, Sweden, Denmark and The Netherlands, as well as in the shortest, France, Italy, and

Spain, so that the gap between the top group and the bottom group, 3.5 inches for men and 2.7

inches for women, has not changed over time. The same is not true for the United States, long the

tallest country in the world, and still so at the end of World War II. But height has been

stagnating in the US for a decade, and Americans are now shorter on average than many

Europeans, including not only the very tall Dutch and Scandinavians, but even the citizens of the

former East Germany, see John Komlos and Marieluise Baur (2004). While Americans are not

expanding upwards, they continue to expand outwards, and the average American, like the

average Briton, is now heavier than the weight that would minimize mortality risk given average

height. While we are still some way from the top of Mt. Waaler, we are not at the highest point

given our heights. Consistent with the laws of the mountain, the inhabitants of the United States

also have shorter life spans than those of many other taller countries, again including Sweden,

Norway, The Netherlands, and Germany. Of course, Mt. Waaler is certainly not the whole story;

life expectancy in the US is also less than in Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong, Israel, Greece, Costa

Rica, Guam, and Puerto Rico.

  Fogel’s argument that nutrition was a key element of the historical great escape, is surely right,


                                                  4
as is the proposition that poor nutrition remains an impediment to health in much of the world

today, Much less obvious is the idea that nutritional deficits are an important part of the health

story in the rich world today. Yet there is a good deal of evidence, even—and in some cases

particularly—in populations whose most obvious nutrition-related problem is obesity and over

nutrition. One key line of work here is associated with David Barker and his group at the

University of Southampton in England. The “Barker hypothesis,” sometimes referred to as the

“womb with a view” hypothesis, is that events in the womb have long-lasting effects on health

throughout life, and perhaps particularly for health outcomes that express themselves in late life.

Nutritional insults in utero, which prevent the foetus developing its full potential, cause the

selective abandonment of function, with evolution disfavoring those features whose primary

function is to prevent disease in late life beyond the normal reproductive span. Although the

Barker hypothesis remains deeply controversial, there is fascinating evidence that supports it.

Gabrielle Dobblhammer and James Vaupel (2000) and Dobblhammer (2002), have shown that

life expectancy at 50 varies seasonally with month of birth. In the northern hemisphere, 50 year

olds who were born in October and November, so that their mothers had access to cheap and

plentiful fresh fruits, vegetables, and eggs through most of their pregnancy, can expect to live

about three-quarters of a year longer than those who were born in the spring. In the southern

hemisphere, the same seasonal pattern occurs, although shifted by six months, except that those

who were born in the Northern hemisphere but died in the South (European immigrants to

Australia) display the Northern pattern. There is other evidence, for example from the Dutch

famine of 1943, that nutritional deficits in pregnancy have long-term effects on obesity, with

deficits in the first trimester predicting later adiposity, and deficits in the third trimester


                                                    5
inhibiting it. And indeed, explosions of obesity and associated diseases (adult-onset diabetes,

heart disease, and so on) often come close on the heels of a loosening of nutritional constraints,

when those whose parents were undernourished, who were themselves undernourished in utero,

move into an environment in which food is plentiful and heavy manual work is no longer

required. For example, in the black township of Khayelitsha near Cape Town in South Africa,

more than a half of the adult women have BMIs above 30, Anne Case and Angus Deaton (2005).

   Today, movements in life expectancy in rich countries are driven by trends in chronic disease

among those over 50—infant and maternal mortality rates are no longer important—so that, if the

“womb with a view” stories are even partly correct, it is not nutrition today that is important for

population health today, but nutrition before 1950. Indeed, the consequences of the nutritional

improvements of the first half of the last century, not only in quantity of food, but in the

increased availability of fresh produce throughout the year, and in a better understanding of

nutritional requirements, have still to deliver their full payoff in reductions in morbidity and

mortality. Middle-aged and elderly Chinese who are currently alive are the survivors of a period

in which nutritional and other insults killed 20 percent of their contemporaries in their first year

of life. Although they survived, many of them experienced the same insults as those who died,

albeit in less severe form, and so will suffer from a particularly high burden of chronic disease in

later life (page 91).

   Moving from poor to rich, the rising life-expectancy and falling morbidity of the middle-aged

and elderly in the US now owes much to the fact that, compared with 1910, infant mortality in

1930 had been cut by a half, and by 1940, by two-thirds. The children who survived their first

year in the 1930s, and who are seventy now, have a lower burden of chronic disease than did


                                                  6
their parents, whose early health environment was much more dangerous. This pattern of

declining morbidity from chronic disease is a challenge to the standard account of the

epidemiological transition, according to which the era of infectious disease, largely affecting

children, gives way to an era of chronic disease, largely affecting the elderly. According to Fogel,

much of whose evidence comes from comparisons of Union army veterans with their modern

counterparts, chronic diseases have declined alongside infectious disease, although the demise of

the latter has made the former more important in relative, although not absolute, terms.



2. Disease, the germ theory, income, and public health

Is Fogel’s account of history right? His research program, as well as much current thinking about

the social and medical determinants of health, traces back to the work of Thomas McKeown

(1976, 1979), who argued that economic growth and better nutrition were the fundamental causes

of the remarkable improvement in population health since the 18th Century. McKeown’s main

target was the idea that population health had improved through better medical treatments,

particularly through drugs and vaccines, and he drew a series of famous graphs showing the

reduction in mortality from various diseases over time (tuberculosis, typhus, scarlet fever,

dysentery, cholera, smallpox, etc. ), and pinpointing the dates of important prophylactic

innovations, such as sulfonamide and penicillin against infectious diseases, or streptomycin for

tuberculosis. These graphs provide clear evidence that, with the possible exception of vaccination

against smallpox, innovations in treatment accounted for little, if any, of the escape from disease;

declines were well underway before the relevant medical innovations were discovered, and

continued at much the same pace afterwards. McKeown then turned his guns towards public


                                                 7
health measures, and argued that, they too, had little effect. By elimination, McKeown concluded

that the reduction in mortality came from the general improvement in living standards,

particularly the associated increase in nutrition. Fogel’s research program begins where

McKeown’s ended, replacing indirect, negative evidence by direct, positive evidence for the

importance of nutrition, documenting levels of calorie availability and their effects on health,

with Mt. Waaler the single most important bridge between the two.

  Subsequent research has successfully challenged McKeown’s conclusions, at least in part.

While the arguments about the limited role of new medical treatments are still accepted—for the

past if not for the present—the arguments about public health have been debunked, see the

important paper by Simon Szreter (1988), as well as Samuel Preston’s (1996) succinct overview.

Today, it is clear that public health measures, particularly the provision of clean water and better

sanitation (for example, to stop sewage being discharged into drinking supplies) were the

fundamental forces for mortality reduction during the century from 1850 to 1950, see for

example Cutler and Miller (2005) on cities in the US. Although progress began under the

sanitarians, Duffy (1990), whose (incorrect) understanding of disease (if it smelled bad, it caused

disease) was essentially unchanged from medieval times, the process was reinforced and speeded

up once the germ theory of disease had supplied a more useful scientific basis for policy. Even

once the scientific understanding was there, starting about 1870, it took many years for the

appropriate public health measures and behavioral changes to diffuse into the population, and to

make our health what it was by mid-century, see Nancy Tomes (1998), Richard Easterlin (2004,

Chapter 7), and Joel Mokyr (2002, Chapter 5). But if there is one single factor that was primarily

responsible for the great escape, it was the discovery of the germ theory of disease and its


                                                 8
implementation through public health measures, first in northwestern Europe and North America,

later (and more quickly) in southern and southwestern Europe, and most recently (and most

rapidly of all) in the third world since World War II, Davidson Gwatkin (1980), Preston (1975,

1980).

  There is good reason to doubt the ability of a nutritional trap, by itself, to hold its victims for

long. In currently poor countries, for which nutritional wage stories were first proposed and fully

worked out in papers by James Mirrlees and Joseph Stiglitz in the 1970s, subsequent empirical

work has consistently failed to provide support. In modern economies, even very poor ones, the

trap cannot be binding; the 2,000 or so calories that can provides the means key to escape can be

bought with only a fraction of the daily wage, Shankar Subramanian and Deaton (1993). Anyone

who has tried to lose weight can ruefully attest to the number of miles of running or hours on an

exercise machine that are required to use up a few hundred calories, and the converse also holds,

a single kilo of bread will fuel all but the most energetic day’s work. People whose life chances

were crippled by the lack of a few hundred calories, and who understood the nature of their

problem, would have devoted every hour of every day to the search for calories, cultivating their

own crops, or accepting even the lowest paying work. Were real wages really so low, the prices

of staples so high, and the opportunities so limited, that people were trapped in a way that is not

true today in economies whose per capita incomes are as low or lower than those of Europe at the

outset of the industrial revolution?

  Nutritional traps are much easier to understand once disease is given its proper place in the

story. Disease interacts with nutrition, and each reinforces the other. Malnutrition compromises

the immune system, so that people who do not have enough to eat are more likely to succumb to


                                                  9
infectious disease. At the same time, disease prevents the absorption of nutrients so that, even

when food is obtainable—through own cultivation, or in exchange for work—it cannot be turned

into nutrition. A child who is suffering from acute diarrhea cannot be cured by giving her more

food.

  What difference does the primacy of the germ theory and of public health make to Fogel’s

story? Fogel fully understands the importance of cleaning up the water supply and of the

associated reductions of disease, as well as the interaction of diseases and nutrition, and he

makes these points repeatedly, not only in The Escape but also in his magisterial essay on

mortality in the Handbook of Family Economics, which was written around the same time as the

lectures that became The Escape, and should be read alongside it or, for that matter, by anyone

who would like to read one of the great papers in the mortality literature. Yet Fogel, while

making all of the right points, always eventually turns away from disease and from public health

towards nutrition. In one sense, this is just fine. Given the power of the interaction between

disease and nutrition, it makes little sense to fight over which was the most important; or to try to

parse the total into shares that add up to 100 percent. And even if we choose to accept the

primacy of the germ theory and of its systematic implementation, as I do, then it was the removal

of human waste from the drinking water (for example) that permitted nutrition to do its work on

the human body, making us all bigger and stronger, and enhancing the efficiency of labor,

particularly in manual occupations. So the improvement in nutrition and its effects are real

enough, and important, precisely as Fogel argues.

  But there is another version of the story that is harder to defend. The synergism between

economic growth and the growth of the size and the durability of the human body can turn into


                                                 10
an overemphasis on links between economic growth and health, and an underemphasis on the

role of disease and its prevention. Fogel is rarely guilty of such overemphasis, though he is at

some pains to emphasize the close tracking of health and income, provided the latter is

appropriately measured. While the synergism is surely there, it is far from automatic. In Britain,

the United States, and much of Europe, there were periods in the 19th century when urbanization

ran ahead of the rate of public health provision, and population health deteriorated during periods

of rapid economic growth. In a country by country examination of mortality decline, whether in

Europe in the 19th Century, Easterlin (1996, 2004, Chapter 7) or in the third world since World

War II, William Easterly (1999), we sometimes find that economic growth is correlated with

improvements in longevity, but just as often not. While it is hard to imagine the absence of a

correlation between health and income in the longest of long runs, the relationship can vanish for

substantial periods of time. This is important, not just for getting the history straight, but for

health policy throughout the world now. If economic growth reliably improved nutrition in poor

countries now, and if nutrition is the primary barrier to health, then we should worry about

growth, and let health look after itself. But if causation runs the other way, as Jeff Sachs argues,

or if growth by itself is no guarantee of health improvement, then some sort of public action,

whether through public health or provision of health systems, is required to turn economic

growth into improvements in health. Economic growth frequently needs help to guarantee an

improvement in population health. There are other, and sometimes faster, ways of climbing Mt

Waaler than to wait for income to make people taller and stronger.




                                                  11
3. Back to the future

Fogel devotes two chapters and an appendix of The Escape to his thoughts about the future, in

many cases referring back to the material in his last book The Fourth Great Awakening. He is not

afraid to make bold predictions about the lifespan, the share of GDP devoted to healthcare, and

leisure, all of which will be longer or bigger (and better) than they are today. Like several other

commentators, notably Jim Oeppen and James Vaupel (2002), he endorses the view that life

expectancy will continue to increase as it has done in the past, by at least two to three years every

decade. Oeppen and Vaupel calculate that over the last 160 years (which is the span over which

we have data) “record life expectancy,” the highest life expectancy in the world, has increased by

about 0.24 years per year for women and 0.22 years per for men. So that female life expectancy

in the United States will be around a hundred years by 2070. Since this is a period estimate, and

since mortality is projected to fall further, the first cohorts of who can expect to live to be

centenarians will be born much earlier, and among the more privileged groups, may already have

been born, Vaupel and Gowan (1986), Fogel (2005). Fogel notes that these forecasts are much

more optimistic than those currently being used by the Social Security Administration, and

therefore more pessimistic for the solvency of social security and Medicare, at least if the

increased number of years at risk are not offset by later onset and decreased severity of chronic

disease.

  Fogel reminds us that optimism is the right word. That longer life gives us opportunities that

we used not to have, more time to get to know our grandchildren and great-grandchildren, more

time for second careers, for voluntary activities, and all the other components of a good life. But

he is also entirely optimistic about the prospect that we will spend a much larger share of GDP


                                                  12
on healthcare. He argues that as we grow richer we can afford and will want to spend more

money on improving both the quality and length of our lives. “The increasing share of global

income spent on healthcare expenditures is not a calamity; it is a sign of the remarkable

economic and social progress of our age,” page 107 and “Public policy should not be aimed at

suppressing the demand for health care. Expenditures on health care are driven by demand,

which is spurred by income and by advances in biotech that make health interventions

increasingly effective,” page 95. Fogel also argues that large expenditures on health are a boon to

the economy, and that the health care industry will play the role of leading industry, just as in the

past did railroads, automobiles, or computers. If there are difficulties with the funding of

healthcare, or with social security and pension schemes that were predicated on a lower level of

life expectancy, the problems lie only with “clumsy system of financing,” page 77, in particular

the absence of private accounts for social security, and of health saving accounts for health.

  While Fogel is honest enough to insist that contributions to saving accounts would have to be

compulsory, it is unclear that the third of income that would be set aside would be as easily and

as willingly met as he thinks, or that a third would be sufficient if expensive new innovations in

health care continue to appear at their current rate. Nor is Fogel sensitive to the equity

consequences of a system of private accounts, particularly health savings accounts. It is hard to

think of a more effective way of increasing the positive correlation between health and wealth

than health saving accounts that guarantee that people who suffer from chronic illness will enter

retirement, not only with a poorer health histories and lower expectations of remaining life, but

also with retirement saving accounts that are depleted (potentially even below zero) compared

with those whose health histories have been more fortunate.


                                                 13
  Fogel’s enthusiasm for increased spending on health care is doubly curious because, like

McKeown before him, he credits medicine with little of the reduction in mortality, either in the

past, for which his argument is plausible, or in the present, for which it is not. He writes “it is

likely that past public health reform, improvements in nutrition and other living standards, and

the democratization of education, have done much more to increase longevity than has clinical

medicine,” page 102, and goes on a page later to write “The main thing that physicians do is to

make life more bearable: reduce morbidity and tell people how to take care of themselves.” It is

strange to be so sanguine at the prospect of spending a third or more of GDP on something that

brings so limited a benefit, and if we need a leading industry, perhaps we could select one whose

output contributes more to our wellbeing?

  My own view is that, at least since 1970, medicine has been much more effective and

important in prolonging life than Fogel gives it credit for. At the same time, and perhaps

paradoxically, much of medical expenditure is driven by suppliers, not by patient demand, and

carries little or no benefit, “flat of the curve medicine,” or worse, iatrogenic medicine, medicine

that actually hurts people. David Cutler (2004) provides evidence for both the good and the bad

of modern medicine. The rapid declines in mortality after 1970, particularly mortality from

cardiovascular disease, are pretty much what would be expected from new procedures and new

drugs, given the randomized controlled trials prior to their introduction. After successful trials for

diuretics in the late 1960s, physicians began to prescribe them for reducing hypertension, which

quickly started a downward trend in mortality, which was maintained by a whole succession of

subsequent new drugs and new treatments. Cutler also argues that if we use standard numbers for

the value of additional years of life, the total cost of the health care system is more than justified


                                                  14
by its results, a proposition about averages that is entirely consistent with the existence of

enormous waste, flat of the curve medicine and unnecessary supplier-induced demand. Some of

the most compelling evidence for waste comes from the Dartmouth Atlas and the work of John

Wennberg, see for example the October 7th, 2004 issue of Health Affairs, which documents the

extraordinary geographical variation in treatments and expenditures that can neither be explained

by patient needs nor be shown to correspond to patient outcomes.

  Fogel’s position, in contrast to these views, appears to be an amalgam of McKeown (living

standards and nutrition are important, physician-supplied medicine not), and of Chicago

economics (if the market supplies all this health care, then that must be a good thing, even if it

does very little.) I do not believe that either of these positions is useful for thinking about

medicine or healthcare expenditures in any of the rich countries of the world. Yet this (important)

area of disagreement does little to diminish my admiration for Fogel’s work, nor the eagerness

with which I turn to his work. There is no other writer on these matters whose scholarship is

more comprehensive, nor from whom so much can be learned. So that, even if it is impossible to

agree with all of the conclusions that he draws from the immense body of his research, traveling

through the literature with Fogel as guide is an experience that is to be recommended with the

greatest enthusiasm.




List of works cited:–

Barker, David J. P. Mothers, Babies, and Disease in Later Life. London: BMJ Publishing group,
1994.
Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton, “Health and wealth among the poor: India and South Africa


                                                  15
  compared,” American Economic Review, 95(2), May. (Papers and proceedings) May 2005.
Cavelaars, A. E. J. M.; Kunst, A. E.; Geurts, J. J. M.; Crialesi, R.; Grötvedt, L.; Helmert, U.;
  Lahelma, E.; Lundberg, O.; Mielck, A.; Rasmussen, N. Kr., et al. “Persistent Variations in
  Average Height between Countries and between Socio-Economic Groups: An Overview of 10
  European Countries." Annals of Human Biology, 2000, 27(4), pp. 407-21.
Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, Macroeconomics and Health: investing in health
  for economic development. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2001.
Cutler, David M. Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America's Health Care System.
  Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Cutler, David M. and Miller, Grant. “The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health
  Advances.” Demography, 2005, 42(1), pp. 1-22
Doblhammer, Gabriele, “Differences in Lifespan by Month of Birth for the United States: The
  Impact of Early Life Events and Conditions on Late Life Mortality,” Max Planck Institute for
  Demographic Research, Working Paper No. 2002–19 (May.), 2002.
Doblhammer, Gabriele and Vaupel, James W., “Lifespan Depends on Month of Birth,”
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2001, 98, pp. 2934–9.
Duffy, John. The Sanitarians: A History of American Public Health. Urbana: University of
  Illinois University Press, 1990.
Easterlin, Richard A. Growth Triumphant: The Twenty-First Century in Historical Perspective.
  Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996
Easterlin, Richard A., The Reluctant Economist. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Easterly, William. “Life During Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth 4 (1999): 239-76.
Fogel, Robert W. “New Findings on Secular Trends in Nutrition and Mortality: Some
  Implications for Population Theory.” In Handbook of Population and Family Economics,
  edited by Mark Rosenzweig and Oded Stark, 433-81. Amsterdam. Elsevier, 1997.
Fogel, Robert W. The Fourth Great Awakening and the Future of Egalitarianism. Chicago:
  Chicago University Press, 2000.
Fogel, Robert W. “Changes in the Physiology of Aging During the Twentieth Century.” NBER
  Working Paper 11223. Cambridge, Mass, 2005.
Fogel, Robert W., and Dora L. Costa, “A theory of technophsyio evolution, with some
  implications for forecasting population, health care costs, and pension costs,” Demography
  1997, 34(1): 49-66.
Gwatkin, Davidson R. “Indications of Change in Developing Country Mortality Ternds: The End
  of an Era?” Population and Development Review 6, no. 4 (1980): 615-44.
Komlos, John and Baur, Marieluise. “From the Tallest to (One of) the Fattest: The Enigmatic
  Fate of the American Population in the 20th Century.” Economics & Human Biology, 2004,
  2(1), pp. 57-74.
McKeown, Thomas, The modern rise of population, London: Edward Arnold, 1976.
McKeown, Thomas. The Role of Medicine: Dream, Mirage, or Nemesis? Princeton, NJ.:
  Princeton University Press, 1979
Mokyr, Joel. The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy. Princeton, NJ:
  Princeton University Press, 2002.
Oeppen, Jim, and James W. Vaupel. “Broken Limits to Life Expectancy.” Science 296 (2002):


                                              16
   1029-31.
Preston, Samuel H. “The Changing Relation between Mortality and Level of Economic
   Development.” Population Studies 29 (1975): 231-48.
Preston, Samuel H. “Causes and Consequences of Mortality Declines in Less Developed
   Countries During the Twentieth Century.” In Population and Economic Change in Developing
   Countries, edited by Richard A. Easterlin, 289-360. Chicago, IL.: University of Chicago Press
   for National Bureau of Economic Research, 1980.
Preston, Samuel H., American Longevity, Past, Present, and Future. Syracuse, NY. Maxwell
   School Center for Policy Research, Policy Brief No. 7/1996, 1996.
Sen, Amartya K., Development as freedom, New York: Knopf, 1999.
Waaler, Hans Th., “Height, weight, and mortality: the Norwegian experience,” Acta Medica
   Scandinavica, supplement, 1984, 679: 1–51.
Subramanian, Shankar, and Angus Deaton. “The Demand for Food and Calories.” Journal of
   Political Economy 104 (1996): 133-62.
Szreter, Simon. “The Importance of Social Intervention in Britain's Mortality Decline C. 1850-
   1914: A Reinterpretation of the Role of Public Health.” Social History of Medicine, 1988,
   1(1), pp. 1-37.
Tomes, Nancy. The Gospel of Germs: Men, Women, and the Microbe in American Life.
   Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press, 1998
Vaupel, James W., and A. E. Gowan. “Passage to Methuselah: Some Demographic
   Consequences of Continued Progress against Mortality.” American Journal of Public Health
   76 (1986): 420-22.




                                              17
