                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          REAL-TIME PRICE DISCOVERY IN STOCK,
                         BOND AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS

                                          Torben G. Andersen
                                            Tim Bollerslev
                                          Francis X. Diebold
                                              Clara Vega

                                         Working Paper 11312
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11312


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




This work was supported by the National Science Foundation, the Guggenheim Foundation, and the BSI
Gamma Foundation. For useful comments we thank seminar participants at the Bank for International
Settlements, the 2003 BSI Gamma Conference, the 2004 Symposium of the European Central Bank / Center
for Financial Studies Research Network, the October 2004 meeting of the NBER International Finance and
Macroeconomics program, and the 2005 American Economic Association Annual Meeting, as well as Rui
Albuquerque, Annika Alexius, Boragan Aruoba, Anirvan Banerji, Ben Bernanke, Robert Connolly, Jeffrey
Frankel, Lingfeng Li, Richard Lyons, Marco Pagano, Paolo Pasquariello, and Neng Wang. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Torben G. Andersen, Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Clara Vega. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Real-Time Price Discovery in Stock, Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets
Torben G. Andersen, Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Clara Vega
NBER Working Paper No. 11312
May 2005
JEL No. F3, F4, G1, C5

                                            ABSTRACT

We characterize the response of U.S., German and British stock, bond and foreign exchange markets
to real-time U.S. macroeconomic news. Our analysis is based on a unique data set of high-frequency
futures returns for each of the markets. We find that news surprises produce conditional mean jumps;
hence high-frequency stock, bond and exchange rate dynamics are linked to fundamentals. The
details of the linkages are particularly intriguing as regards equity markets. We show that equity
markets react differently to the same news depending on the state of the U.S. economy, with bad
news having a positive impact during expansions and the traditionally-expected negative impact
during recessions. We rationalize this by temporal variation in the competing "cash flow" and
"discount rate" effects for equity valuation. This finding also helps explain the apparent time-varying
correlation between stock and bond returns, and the relatively small equity market news
announcement effect when averaged across expansions and recessions. Hence, while our results
confirm previous unconditional rankings suggesting that bond markets almost uniformly react most
strongly to macroeconomic news, followed by foreign exchange and then equity markets, importantly
when conditioning on the state of the economy the foreign exchange and equity markets appear
equally responsive. Lastly, relying on the pronounced heteroskedasticity in the new high-frequency
data, we also document important contemporaneous linkages across all markets and countries over-
and-above the direct news announcement effects.
Torben G. Andersen                                     Francis X. Diebold
Kellogg School of Management                           Department of Economics
Northwestern University                                University of Pennsylvania
2001 Sheridan Road                                     3718 Locust Walk
Evanston, IL 60208                                     Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER                                               and NBER
t-andersen@kellogg.nwu.edu                             fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu

Tim Bollerslev                                         Clara Vega
Department of Economics                                Department of Finance
Duke University                                        University of Rochester
Box 90097                                              Rochester, NY 14627
Durham, NC 27708-0097                                  vega@simon.rochester.edu
and NBER
boller@econ.duke.edu
1. Introduction
        How do markets arrive at prices? There is perhaps no question more central to economics. This
paper focuses on price formation in financial markets, where the question looms especially large: How, if
at all, is news about macroeconomic fundamentals incorporated into stock prices, bond prices and foreign
exchange rates?
        Unfortunately the process of price discovery in financial markets remains poorly understood.
Traditional “efficient markets” thinking suggests that asset prices should completely and instantaneously
reflect movements in underlying fundamentals. Conversely, several prominent authors have recently
gone so far as to assert that asset prices and fundamentals may be largely and routinely disconnected.
Experiences such as the late 1990s U.S. technology-driven market bubble would seem to support that
view, yet simultaneously it seems clear that financial market participants pay a great deal of attention to
data on underlying economic fundamentals. The notable difficulty of empirically mapping the links
between economic fundamentals and asset prices is indeed striking.
        The central price-discovery question has many dimensions and nuances, including but not limited
to the following. How quickly, and with what patterns, do adjustments to news occur? Does
announcement timing matter? Are the magnitudes of effects similar for “good news” and “bad news,” or,
for example, do markets react more vigorously to bad news than to good news? Quite apart from the
direct effect of news on assets prices, what is its effect on financial market volatility? Do the effects of
news on prices and volatility vary across assets and countries, and what are the links? Are there readily
identifiable herd behavior and/or contagion effects? Do news effects vary over the business cycle?
        Just as the central question of price discovery has many dimensions and nuances, so too does a
full answer. In this paper we progress by characterizing the simultaneous response of foreign exchange
markets as well as the domestic and foreign stock and bond markets to real-time U.S. macroeconomic
news. More precisely, we seek to better understand the links between asset prices and fundamentals by
simultaneously combining: (1) high-quality and ultra-high frequency asset price data across markets and
countries, which allows us to study price movements in (near) continuous time; (2) synchronized survey
data on market participants’ expectations, which allow us to infer “surprises” or “innovations” when news
is announced; and (3) advances in statistical modeling of volatility, which facilitate efficient inference.
By so doing, we can probe the workings of the marketplace in new and powerful ways, focusing on
episodes where the source of price movements is well identified, leading to a high signal-to-noise ratio.
        We proceed as follows. In Section 2 we provide background by situating our paper in the
existing literature. In Section 3 we describe our data, and in Section 4 we present our new empirical


                                                      -1-
findings. We conclude in section 5. In the Appendix we sketch a stylized multi-country monetary model
that provides a simple theoretical benchmark and useful guidance for interpreting our empirical results.


2. Background and Related Literature
         Our work speaks to three related but distinct literatures. The first examines the links between
asset prices and macroeconomic fundamentals as embodied in news announcement effects, the second
examines the links among domestic asset markets, and the third examines the link among various
domestic and foreign asset markets. We set the stage by discussing selected aspects of each.
Asset Prices and Macroeconomic Announcement Effects
         The literature contains many empirical studies seeking to link the effects of macroeconomic
announcements to movements in stock, bond and foreign exchange returns. While the first generation
studies relied on daily, or even weekly or monthly data, the more recent literature has moved toward the
use of more finely-sampled intraday data.1 Typically, however, each market is examined in isolation.
Recent examples include Fleming and Remolona (1997, 1999), Balduzzi, Elton and Green (2001),
Bollerslev, Cai and Song (2000), Green (2004), Hautsch and Hess (2002), Kuttner (2001), Li and Engle
(1998) who study bond markets; Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and Kuttner (2004), Bomfim (2003),
Boyd, Jagannathan and Hu (2005), Goto and Valkanov (2002), and Flannery and Protopapadakis (2002)
who study equity markets; and Andersen and Bollerslev (1998), Andersen, Bollerselev, Diebold and Vega
(henceforth ABDV, 2003), Almeida, Goodhart and Payne (1998), Chaboud, Chernenko, Howorka, Iyer,
Liu and Wright (2004), and Galati and Ho (2003) who study foreign exchange markets.2
         Most theories predict an unambiguous link between macroeconomic fundamentals and the bond
market, with unexpected increases in real activity and inflation raising bond yields (lowering prices).


1
  The first generation of exchange rate “news” studies focused primarily on money supply announcements. For
example, Engel and Frankel (1984), Cornell (1983), Frankel and Hardouvelis (1985) and Tandon and Urich (1987)
all associate positive U.S. money surprises with appreciations of the dollar and increases in nominal interest rates.
Also, Ito and Roley (1987) find that across a set of U.S. and Japanese macroeconomic announcements, U.S. money
announcements have the greatest impact. For a fine survey of this literature, see Frankel and Rose (1995).
Similarly, the first generation of bond market “news” studies was primarily concerned with money supply
announcements; e.g., Grossman (1981), Urich and Wachtel (1981), and Roley and Walsh (1985). The first
generation of equity market “news” studies, as exemplified by Schwert (1981), Pearce and Roley (1985),
Hardouvelis (1987), and Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1989), also report that with the possible exception of money
supply figures, macroeconomic news announcements generally do not affect stock prices.
2
  Two recent notable exceptions to this single market approach are Fair (2003) who examines the joint movements
in stock, bond and foreign exchange markets around big market moves, typically associated with macroeconomic
announcements, and Faust, Rogers, Wang and Wright (2003) who estimate the response of different maturity interest
rates, exchange rates, and deviations from uncovered interest rate parity (UIP) to macroeconomic news.

                                                         -2-
This is also in line with the stylized model sketched in the Appendix. Empirical analyses generally
confirm the theoretical predictions. For example, Balduzzi, Elton and Green (2001) using 1990s data find
that both positive real shocks and positive inflation shocks affect bond prices negatively and, moreover,
that the absolute size of news effects generally increases with the maturity of the instrument.
        The nature of the link between macroeconomic fundamentals and the stock market is less clear.
Stock prices depend on expected cash flows, the discount rate, and the risk premium. Holding the risk
premium constant, a positive macroeconomic shock increases expected cash flows, which increases the
stock price, ceteris paribus, but it also increases the discount rate, which decreases the stock price, ceteris
paribus, so the end result depends on which effect dominates.3 Again, these separate channels are readily
identified within the stylized model in the Appendix.
        Theory concerning news effects on foreign exchange markets generally predicts that good
domestic news (e.g., brisk real activity, low inflation) strengthens the domestic currency, although an
expected deterioration in the future terms of trade could have an opposing effect. As discussed for
example in ABDV (2003), most existing empirical studies support this good news hypothesis, subject to
subtleties such as announcement timing, sign effects and/or asymmetries.
Within-Country Asset Markets Links
        An extensive empirical literature has explored the relationship between stock and bond returns,
but little consensus has emerged. For example, using a dynamic present value model and a long sample
of annual U.S. data, Shiller and Beltratti (1992) report a strong positive correlation between stock and
long-term bond prices, while Campbell and Ammer (1993) on employing a similar variance
decomposition framework document a relatively low average correlation with a shorter and more recent
sample of monthly stock and bond returns.
        While these and many other related studies implicitly assume constancy of the covariance
structures, much of the subsequent literature seeks to relax that constraint.4 Barsky (1989) shows
theoretically, for example, that stock and bond comovement is in general state-dependent. This idea is
supported by further theoretical arguments and related empirical evidence in Connolly, Stivers and Sun
(2005), David and Veronesi (2004), Fleming, Kirby and Ostdiek (1998), Guidolin and Timmermann
(2004, 2005), Li (2002), Ribeiro and Veronesi (2002), Rigobon and Sack (2003b, 2004), and Scruggs and



3
 See also the recent paper by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), which decomposes the movements in daily and
monthly equity prices around the times of FOMC meetings into a cash flow and a discount rate effect.
4
 Many of the recent developments in the burgeoning ARCH/GARCH literature have been explicitly concerned with
modeling temporal dependencies in the correlations of asset returns; see, e.g., the discussion in Engle (2002).

                                                      -3-
Glabadanidis (2003), among others.
        Perhaps most directly related to the empirical results presented below is the recent work of Boyd,
Jagannathan and Hu (2005) who argue for a time-varying stock-market effect of the employment report,
with surprise increases in unemployment serving as “good news” during expansions and “bad news”
during recessions. As previously noted, one explanation, which we subsequently discuss in detail, is that
the cash flow effect dominates during contractions, while the discount rate effect is more important during
expansions, thus resulting in positively correlated stock and bond price changes in expansions and lower,
perhaps even negative, correlations during recessions.5 There are a couple of noteworthy precedents in
the literature. In particular, Orphanides (1992) finds that the stock price response to employment news
depends on the average unemployment rate during the previous year, hinting that the stock market
reaction to employment news is state dependent. In a similar vein, McQueen and Roley (1993) report that
daily stock prices respond asymmetrically to macroeconomic news across the business cycle, with
equities reacting negatively to positive real economic news in good times and not reacting in any
systematic direction to news in bad times. Our work improves on these studies by considering a much
broader set of announcements and many more markets and asset classes. Importantly, the use of high-
frequency intraday data dramatically improves the signal-to-noise ratio, allowing for more powerful tests
and detailed estimation of news reaction functions and their interactions across asset categories.
Cross-Country Asset Market Links
        A number of studies have focused on the transmission of information across international equity
markets. Early empirical papers include Hamao, Masulis and Ng (1990) who examine spillover effects in
the returns and volatilities of daily price changes for the Japanese, U.K., and U.S. equity markets, along
with Lin, Engle and Ito (1994) who employ a similar GARCH-based approach but finer sampled data.
Generally, only weak evidence of transmission from the U.S. to other markets, and none the other way
around, has been found, although “contagion” effects, or increased correlations, have been documented
during periods of financial crises such as the 1987 crash; e.g., King and Wadhwani (1990).6
        More specifically, using a sample of five-years of high-frequency data, Becker, Finnerty and
Friedman (1995) relate the U.S. - U.K. equity market linkages to the reactions of foreign traders to public


5
  In contrast to our state independent bond market reaction to news, Boyd, Jagannathan and Hu (2005) find that the
U.S. bond market reacts significantly and positively to unemployment news during expansions, while the reaction
appears insignificant during recessions.
6
  A recent literature has argued for the existence of even more pronounced “contagion” effects in developed stock
markets during periods of financial crises. However, as forcefully demonstrated by Forbes and Rigobon (2004),
these results need to be carefully interpreted when the overall level of volatility is also changing through time.

                                                        -4-
information originating from the U.S.7 In a related context, Connolly and Wang (2003) analyze U.S.,
U.K. and Japanese equity markets and separate the influence of the foreign markets on domestic markets
into two components: one driven primarily by economic fundamentals and the other, a so-called
contagion factor, by foreign market returns. They conclude that the macro news effect is statistically
significant but too small to account for any sizeable part of the return comovement among these markets.
        Less work has been done on cross-country bond market linkages. However, recent results by
Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2003), who model the degree of interdependence between the U.S. and
European bond markets, suggest that the linkage between the markets has gradually increased, with the
spillover effects from the U.S. to the Euro area being somewhat stronger than in the opposite direction. In
addition, Christie-David, Chaudhry and Khan (2002) and Goldberg and Leonard (2003) demonstrate
significant international bond market movement in response to the release of U.S. macroeconomic news.
        Different exchange rates for the same currency are, of course, naturally linked through their joint
dependence on the same underlying fundamental economic influences. Several papers have studied the
dynamic dependencies in the correlations among exchange rates as well as inter-market dependencies in
the volatilities of different rates within the same day. For instance, Engle, Ito and Lin (1990, 1992) report
strong evidence of volatility spillovers, or “meteor shower” effects, from the U.S. to the Japanese, to the
European, to the U.S. trading areas, but little, or no, evidence of area specific “heat wave” effects.
        Set against this backdrop, we now discuss the data used in our work addressing the questions:
How do U.S. macroeconomic fundamentals affect foreign exchange rates, domestic and foreign bond and
stock prices, and asset return comovements, and do these effects vary across the business cycle?


3. High-Frequency Return and News Announcement Data
        We explore the impact of twenty-five U.S. macroeconomic news announcements using high-
frequency futures returns for foreign exchange, stock and bond markets. We begin by discussing the data
sources and salient features of the returns data.
Futures Market Return Data
        We use futures market data for several reasons. First, futures prices are readily available on a
tick-by-tick basis. Second, most significant U.S. macroeconomic announcements are released at 8:30
Eastern Standard Time (EST) when the futures markets are open, but the equity markets closed. Third,
transaction costs are lower in the futures markets, and the contracts we analyze are very actively traded.


7
  Using high-frequency data from 1995 to 2000, Wongswan (2003) also finds evidence of macroeconomic news
announcements in Japan and the U.S. affecting the Korean and Thai equity markets.

                                                     -5-
Indeed, numerous studies find that futures markets tend to lead cash markets in terms of price discovery.8
This is truly important as we focus on price adjustments measured over very short time intervals.
           Table 1 provides an overview of the specific contracts, the exchanges on which they trade, and
their EST trading hours, along with the average number of contracts traded daily. The S&P500, $/Pound,
$/Yen and $/Euro futures contracts are listed on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME).9 Trading in
the foreign exchange contracts starts at 8:20 EST, while the regular trading hours for S&P500 are 9:30 to
16:15 EST. Starting January 2, 1994, however, GLOBEX has offered automated pre-market trading in
the S&P500 futures contract, and we use transactions data from this market to augment the trading day for
S&P500 to 8:20 EST. Our data for the 30-Year U.S. Treasury Bond futures contract comes from the
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) whose trading hours coincide with those of the CME. The FTSE 100
and the British Long Gilt futures contracts trade on the London International Financial Futures Exchange
(LIFFE). The FTSE 100 index is based on the one-hundred largest U.K. companies, while the Long Gilt
contract is based on the British 10-Year Treasury note. Trading on LIFFE opens at 8:00 GMT, or 3:00
EST. Our last two contracts, the DJ Euro Stoxx 50 (DJE) and the Euro Bobl futures, both trade on the
European Exchange (EUREX). The DJE index is composed of the fifty largest blue-chip market sector
leaders in the Euro-zone countries. The Euro Bobl is based on the German 5-Year Treasury note.
           We obtained raw tick-by-tick transaction prices for all contracts from Tick Data Inc. The sample
for the foreign exchange rates and the U.S. Treasury Bond contracts spans January 2, 1992 through
December 31, 2002. Because of the need for pre-market GLOBEX data to augment the trading day, our
sample for the S&P500 starts two years later on January 2, 1994. Data on the four European contracts are
only available from July 1, 1998 through December 31, 2002.
           All results reported below are based on five-minute local currency continuously compounded
returns,                 , where    denotes the price of the last trade in the t’th five-minute interval.10 If no

trade occurs in a given five-minute interval, we use the price from the previous interval, as long as the
previous price was quoted within the last half-hour. We include only the days where there were at least



8
     See, for example, Hasbrouck (2003).
9
  The returns for the $/Euro are based on the $/DM contract prior to June 1, 1999. Both contracts traded actively
before and after this date, but the liquidity started to switch from the $/DM to the $/Euro around that time.
10
   Five-minute returns strike a reasonable balance between confounding market microstructure effects when
sampling too frequently and blurring the specific price reactions when disaggregating to coarser time intervals; see
e.g., the related discussions in ABDV (2003), Bandi and Russell (2003), Dacorogna et al. (2001), Hansen and Lunde
(2004), and Aït-Sahalia, Mykland and Zhang (2005) among others.

                                                         -6-
one trade every half-hour. We always use the most actively traded nearest-to-maturity contract, switching
to the next-maturity contract five days before expiration.
Basic Description of High-Frequency Returns around Macroeconomic News Announcements
        Table 2 reports summary statistics for the five-minute return series around the announcement
times. Since our news announcement regressions are based on the period ranging from ten minutes
before to one-and-a-half hours after an announcement, we let the sample cover this set of returns only.
Moreover, to provide a meaningful benchmark for the subsequent results based on simultaneous
estimation across all the markets we further restrict the sample for all contracts to the July 1, 1998 to
December 31, 2002, period available for the shortest series, namely the European markets.
        The average five-minute returns for each of the nine markets are, as expected, extremely close to
zero. However, the (absolute) size of the largest five-minute returns is noteworthy, with the extreme
return event being about ten standard deviations or more removed from the sample mean for all markets.
For the S&P500 and the DJE these extreme moves exceed two percent. This immediately suggests that
the macroeconomic announcements do move the markets.11 The summary statistics confirm the usual
rank ordering in terms of volatility, with the stock markets being the most volatile, followed by the
foreign exchange rates, and then the fixed income markets. The only exception to this rule is the U.S. T-
Bond market, for which the unconditional return standard deviation actually exceeds the standard
deviations for the three exchange rates. This is likely a consequence of the fact that the T-Bond market,
as discussed further below, is the market reacting most strongly to macroeconomic announcements.
        To provide a sense of the comovements among the asset markets during announcement times,
Table 3 reports the unconditional sample correlations. All correlations within each of the three asset
classes are positive. For instance, the stock market correlations range from a low of 0.42 between the
S&P500 and the FTSE 100, to a high of 0.54 for the FTSE 100 and the DJE. Similarly, the correlation
between the returns for the U.S. T-Bond and the British Long Gilt is 0.53, while the Gilt and German
Euro Bobl correlation is 0.61. The positive cross bond market correlations during U.S. macroeconomic
announcement times are directly in line with most theoretical predictions including the implications from
the basic Lucas (1982) model discussed in the Appendix. Even if domestic and foreign real activity and
monetary shocks are uncorrelated, the frictionless setting produces a highly integrated bond market in that




11
   This is consistent with Fair (2002), who finds most large moves in high-frequency S&P500 returns to be readily
identified with U.S. macroeconomic news announcements. Similar results for the DM/$ foreign exchange and U.S.
T-Bond markets are reported in Andersen and Bollerslev (1998) and Bollerslev, Cai and Song (2000), respectively.

                                                       -7-
model.12 The positive equity market cross-correlations are also consistent with the model although they
are not directly implied by it as three separate influences determine the equity prices: the risk-free
interest rate, expected future cash flows and the equity risk premium. Stock market prices around the
world would tend to be positively correlated if the discount rate is the dominant effect or if the domestic
and foreign real output and/or monetary shocks are positively correlated.13
         The cross correlations between the different asset types are generally much smaller than the cross
correlations within the same asset category across countries. Given our exchange rate convention, all
quoted in American terms or $/Euro, $/Pound and $/yen, the negative correlations between the S&P500
and the exchange rates imply that U.S. macroeconomic news affect the Dollar and the equity market in
the same direction. Interestingly, a Dollar appreciation also is associated with stock market increases
abroad, even though one may expect the Dollar to depreciate against the Pound (Euro) when the FTSE
100 (DJE) prices are rising. This again suggests that the U.S. macroeconomic fundamentals exert a
dominant effect during the announcement period. It also serves as a warning that it may be important to
explicitly control for the macroeconomic fundamentals when interpreting the asset market correlations.
We attempt to do exactly that within a simultaneous equation setting explored later on.
         One primary question of interest is whether the interactions between the asset categories and their
responses to macroeconomic fundamentals vary systematically across the business cycle. For a
preliminary look at this issue, the bottom panels in Table 3 report the unconditional correlations
separately for the expansion period from July 1998 through February 2001 and the recession period from
March 2001 through December 2002.14 The correlations are generally higher during the recession period.
Most notably, however, there is a distinct change in the stock-bond market correlations. During the
expansion, the stock-bond correlations are positive albeit small, whereas they are strong and negative


12
   The bond market positive correlation is also consistent with the U.S. interest rate effectively serving as the “world
interest rate,” as assumed in numerous theoretical models; see also Blanchard and Summers (1984) and the more
recent discussion in Chinn and Frankel (2003).
13
   Although the high positive contemporaneous correlation across countries may be explained by the common bond
market response to U.S. macroeconomic news, a number of other influences, including market microstructure,
contagion, and cross-market hedging effects, as discussed for example in Fleming, Kirby and Ostdiek (1998), could
also account for the high-frequency correlations. It is generally difficult to identify the effects separately, but in the
empirical analysis below we attempt to identify the impact of news directly by measuring the surprise components.
14
   We define recessions as beginning when there are three consecutive monthly declines in nonfarm payroll
employment, and ending when there are three consecutive monthly increases in nonfarm payroll employment.
Recessionary periods so-determined match closely those designated by the NBER over the postwar period. The
recession dates in our sample, moreover, remain unchanged if we adopt an alternative criterion of three consecutive
monthly declines in industrial production.

                                                            -8-
during the recession. We cannot claim this as a general pattern, as we only have data for one expansion
and one recession. Still, in the context of the stylized framework presented in the Appendix, one possible
explanation is that the discount effect dominates in expansions, whereas the cash flow effect dominates
during recessions. Hence, stock and bond returns will be negatively correlated during recessions, as the
prices respond to news in opposite directions. Similarly, while the correlations between bonds and
exchange rates are positive on average, the correlations are much larger for the recession period. This
may again be explained by time-variation in the impact of changes in macroeconomic fundamentals
across the business cycle. These conjectures are tested more thoroughly in the empirical section below.
News Announcement Data
          We use the International Money Market Services (MMS) real-time data on expected and realized
U.S. macroeconomic fundamentals, defining “news” as the difference between the survey expectations
and the subsequent realizations, or announcements. The MMS sample covers the period from January 1,
1992 through December 31, 2002. Table 4 provides a basic description of the announcement releases,
including the number of observations, the agency reporting the news, and the time of the release.15
          The units of measurement obviously differ across the announcements. Hence, to allow for
meaningful comparisons of the estimated news response coefficients across announcement types and asset
classes, we follow ABDV (2003) and Balduzzi, Elton and Green (2001) in the use of “standardized
news.” Specifically, we divide the surprise by its sample standard deviation, defining the standardized
news associated with indicator k at time t as




where        denotes the announced value of indicator ,         refers to the market’s expectation of indicator

     as distilled in the MMS median forecast, and      is equal to the sample standard deviation of the

surprise component,            . Because      is constant for any indicator k, this standardization affects

neither the statistical significance of the estimated response coefficients nor the fit of the regressions
compared to the results based on the “raw” surprises.
          We now turn to a discussion of our high-frequency estimation results based on the above-
described news announcement indicators.



15
   With the exception of the money supply figures, which are released at 16:30 EST after the futures markets have
closed, the indicators listed in Table 4 include all regularly-scheduled major U.S. macroeconomic announcements.
For a detailed description, including a discussion of the properties of the median expectations, see ABDV (2003).

                                                        -9-
4. Empirical Results
         This section characterizes both the impact and dynamic effects of U.S. macroeconomic
announcements for each of the markets in Table 1. In addition to estimating average responses across the
full sample, we also investigate the magnitude of the effects and the strength of the cross market linkages
separately in expansions and recessions. Finally, we explore the relationships across the markets in a
more structural fashion by casting the system in a simultaneous equation setting that explicitly controls
for the impact of the macroeconomic announcements, thus allowing for an analysis of the linkages over-
and-above the impact driven by the news releases.
Impact Effects of News
         We initially focus directly on the importance of news at the time of the announcements, so we
first estimate the following simple regression model,


                                                                                                            (4.1)


where                          denotes the five-minute futures return corresponding to asset h (h = $/BP,

$/Yen, $/Euro, S&P500, T-Bond, Gilt, Bobl, FTSE, and DJE) from time                   to time       ,    refers to the

standardized news for announcement            (           ) at time , and the estimates are based on only those

observations (          ) where an announcement was made at time t. Full-sample regression results are

reported in Table 5A, while separate estimates for expansion and recession periods are given in Tables 5B
and 5C. Following the discussion in the previous section, we define the expansion period from the
beginning of each sample until February 28, 2001, while the recession period extends from March 1, 2001
until the end of our sample, or December 31, 2002.16
         The results in the first three sets of columns in Table 5A show that many news announcements
exert significant influence over the currency futures returns.17 The point estimates accord well with the



16
  Because high-frequency data for the U.S. markets ($/Pound, $/Yen, $/Euro, T-Bond, and S&P500) are available
over a longer time span, the results and statistical significance of the estimated coefficients for the full and expansion
samples are not directly comparable to those for the European markets (Gilt, Bobl, FTSE 100, and DJE).
17
   Even though many of the response coefficients are highly statistically significant, the explained variation for the
five-minute returns, as measures by the regression R2‘s, remain fairly low, and would obviously be minuscule over
daily or longer horizons. This is, of course, not surprising as the regressions reflect the response to publicly
available information. In contrast, recent intriguing studies pertaining to the predictive content in non-public order
flow information have reported substantially higher R2‘s over longer horizons; see, e.g., Evans and Lyons (2005).

                                                          -10-
earlier findings in ABDV (2003) based on spot currency returns over a different sample period. The
directional effects are generally consistent with the implications of the standard monetary approach to
exchange rate determination as discussed in the Appendix. A comparison of the results in Table 5A to
those of Tables 5B and 5C reveals no qualitative difference between the overall response coefficients for
the exchange rates and those estimated separately for the expansion and contraction samples.
        The next six sets of columns provide results for the domestic and foreign stock and bond markets.
Consider first the bond returns. Consistent with the findings in the existing literature, U.S. T-Bond prices
respond very significantly to U.S. macroeconomic news. Many of the coefficient estimates for the Gilt
and the Bobl are also highly significant and of the same sign as for the T-Bond market. This is again
directly in line with the implications from the simple two-country monetary model in the Appendix.
Comparing the full-sample estimates across the different markets, the effects of news on bond returns
appear noticeably stronger than for any of the other markets. As for currencies, splitting the sample into
expansion and recession does not materially affect the estimated response coefficients.
        Now consider the results for the stock markets. The full-sample estimates in Table 5A suggest
that equity returns are considerably less sensitive to macroeconomic news announcements than bond
returns. Equally noteworthy is the direction of the responses. The S&P500 generally reacts negatively to
positive domestic real shocks (employment and new home sales). The significant impact of innovations
in foreign trade (net exports) or inflation and interest rates (PPI, CPI, fed funds rate) accords better with
standard intuition. The weak stock market reaction to real economic news is, of course, consistent with
the presence of opposing effects across the business cycle, to which we have already alluded.
        Indeed, separating the data into the expansion and recession periods in Tables 5B and 5C reveals
a very different story: for all stock markets, U.S. as well as foreign, the U.S. macroeconomic news
releases have statistically significant and economically important effects. However, the impact switches
sign with the business cycle. Consequently, news effects look weak when averaged across regimes, even
though the within-regime effects are very strong. In particular, “good” news on real activity raises stock
prices during recessions, but lowers prices during expansions; that is “good news” is “bad news” for
stocks in expansions. Hence, the discount rate effect dominates during economic expansions, as the
Federal Reserve is more likely to tighten monetary policy to ward off inflation in response to good news,
while the cash flow effect dominates during economic contractions, when the central bank is less
concerned about inflation and real output may respond more vigorously to demand shocks as capacity
utilization is lower. This interpretation is further supported by the strong and significant negative effect
that inflationary shocks (positive PPI and CPI surprises) have on the stock markets during the expansion
period, while these same inflationary shocks turn insignificant for the recession sample. This, of course,

                                                     -11-
also helps explain why previous studies typically have been unable to detect any strong linkages between
the stock market and macroeconomic fundamentals when estimated over long historical samples.18
Dynamic Effects of News
         In order to analyze the dynamic news effects in more depth, we also estimate a system of
equations using the two five-minute returns directly preceding and the eighteen five-minute returns
following each announcement.19 This requires data to be available for all markets simultaneously, so
these results are based on the shorter common sample from July 1, 1998 through December 31, 2002,
with the expansion and recession periods based on the observations before and after February 28, 2001,
respectively.20 All-in-all, this leaves us with a full sample of T = 15,764 = 544x20 + 40x29 + 98x38
five-minute return observations, reflecting 544 days with only one macroeconomic announcement
released on that day (20 observations per day), 40 days with two announcements, one at 8:30 EST and the
other one at 9:15 EST (29 observations per day), and 98 days with two announcements, one at 8:30 EST
and the other at 10:00 EST (38 observations per day). The expansion sample is comprised of the first
9,301 observations, while the last 6,463 observations constitute the recession sample.
         To allow explicitly for cross-market linkages and dynamic announcement effects, we model the

conditional mean of the five-minute return for asset ,           , as a linear function of I lags of all the returns,

together with J lags of each of the K news announcements; that is,


                                                                                                                (4.2)


where         corresponds to the nine different assets. Because the consumer credit, government budget,
and federal funds rate figures are released in the afternoon, when LIFFE and EUREX are closed, we
“only” have a total of          announcements. Guided by the Schwarz and Akaike information criteria, we
uniformly fix the two lag lengths at         and      , resulting in a total of 107 regression coefficients to be



18
   As mentioned before, McQueen and Roley (1993) is an exception. Our broader coverage of announcements and
asset markets as well as the inherently more powerful tests provided by intraday data strengthen their conclusions,
add several new findings, and show, contrary to McQueen and Roley (1993), that the announcement effects are
highly significant in recessions as well but, of course, with opposite signs relative to the expansion period.
19
   Hence the post-announcement window is one and one-half hours. Some preliminary experimentation revealed
that our chosen pre- and post-event windows were more than adequate to capture the systematic news responses.
20
   As such, the full and expansion sample point estimates for the U.S. markets are not directly comparable to those
reported in Tables 5A and 5B.

                                                        -12-
estimated for each of the nine assets.
           Although ordinary least squares (OLS) would be consistent for the parameters in (4.2), the
disturbance terms for the five-minute return regressions are clearly heteroskedastic. Thus, to enhance the
efficiency of the coefficient estimates, we use a two-step weighted least squares (WLS) procedure. We
first estimate the conditional mean model by OLS. We then use the absolute value of the regression

residuals,        , to estimate a time-varying volatility function, which we then subsequently use to perform

weighted least squares estimation of (4.2). We approximate the temporal variation in the five-minute
return volatility around the announcement times by the relatively simple regression model,


                                                                                                                  (4.3)


The           own lags of the absolute value of the residuals captures serial correlation, or ARCH effects.
The next term involves               dummy variables for each of the five-minute intraday intervals. This term
directly accounts for the well-documented intradaily volatility patterns; see, e.g., the discussion and
references in Andersen and Bollerslev (1998). The last summation reflects dummy variables for each of
the announcement surprises,            , up to a lag length of         . There are only            such dummies as

capital utilization and industrial production, and personal consumption expenditures and personal income
are announced at the same time.21
           Because the model in (4.2) contains so many variables and lags, it is counterproductive to report
all the parameter estimates.22 Instead, in Figures 1A-1C, we present graphically the point estimates for

the news response coefficients,                      , for some key indicators at the time of the news releases

and fifteen-minutes thereafter (dots), along with corresponding robust ninety-percent confidence bands
(dashes). Figure 1A covers the full sample, while the results for the expansion and recession periods
appear in Figures 1B and 1C. All figures contain three panels; the first displays the news responses for



21
   We also experimented with other lag lengths and alternative volatility specifications, directly including the
absolute value of the surprise component,         , instead of the news announcement dummies,      . However, the fit
was generally best for the model in equation (4.3), although the corresponding estimates for the mean parameters in
(4.2) were essentially unchanged. This is consistent with the earlier empirical results for the spot foreign exchange
market in ABDV (2003) that the mere presence of an announcement, quite apart from the size of the corresponding
surprise, tend to boost volatility; see also the discussion in Rich and Tracy (2003).
22
     Details regarding the parameter estimates, including those of equation (4.3), are available upon request.

                                                           -13-
the domestic and foreign bond markets, the second focuses on the foreign exchange markets, and the last
reports the results for the domestic and foreign equity markets.
         Consider first the bond market responses. The immediate reactions are qualitatively similar to
those discussed earlier for the U.S. T-bond market over the longer eleven-year sample. Regardless of the
stage of the business cycle, positive real shocks and inflationary shocks produce lower bond prices, or
higher yields. Not surprisingly, the effects are clearly the strongest in the U.S., but many of the U.S.
macroeconomic fundamentals also significantly impact the foreign bond markets, and in the same
direction. This is, of course, consistent with basic theoretical predictions. It is noteworthy that, almost
invariably, only the simultaneous effect is significant, reflecting a very quick price discovery process.
         The near instantaneous response holds true for all markets. Any systematic effect is almost
exclusively restricted to the five-minute interval following the news release. This helps explain why
previous studies relying on daily, or coarser, observations typically have failed to uncover systematic
linkages between asset market returns and innovations to macroeconomic fundamentals – the responses
occur almost instantaneously and tend to “drown” in the overall day-to-day price movements. Hence, the
only way to assess the connection between the news releases and the asset prices with some degree of
precision is to focus on the high-frequency returns just around the announcement time.
         Turning to the foreign exchange market results, the immediate impact is again directly in line
with the point estimates from the simultaneous regressions reported in Table 5A.23 News about the U.S.
inflation rate do not seem to systematically affect the foreign exchange rates, while positive domestic real
shocks lead to an appreciation of the Dollar, particularly during the recent recession regime.
         The findings for the equity markets are again striking. The full-sample results in Figure 1A
reveal almost no significant responses, but once we split the sample into the expansion and recession
periods, we see that positive real economic shocks are met with a negative response in expansions and a
positive response in recessions. As discussed previously, this pattern, which is identical for the domestic
and foreign markets, is suggestive of positively correlated real economic shocks across the regions along
with pronounced business cycle variation in the importance of the discount factor versus cash flow
components in the markets’ valuation of equities. This is further corroborated by the asymmetric effect of
the PPI shocks over the business cycle. The marked negative impact of inflation surprises during
expansions suggests the presence of stronger anti-inflationary monetary policies, in turn strengthening the
influence of the discount factor component in “good” economic times.


23
   The somewhat weaker statistical significance in Figure 1A is due to the shorter sample size. Although a few
lagged response coefficients are outside the confidence bands in Figure 1A, the effects do not appear systematic.

                                                        -14-
A Closer Look at Stock-Bond Correlations
         The apparent state dependence in the equity markets news reaction function coupled with the
time-invariant reaction of the bond markets naturally translates into state dependent stock-bond market
correlations, with price changes being positively correlated during expansions and negatively correlated
during recessions. Indeed, the unconditional sample correlations for the expansion and recession periods
discussed in Table 3 already point to the existence of time-varying cross-market dependencies. In order
to explore this effect in more detail, we display in Figure 2A the daily realized correlations in each
country computed from the high-frequency stock-bond market returns for the days containing the
arguably most important U.S. macroeconomic announcement, namely the nonfarm payroll employment
release.24 Figure 2B depicts the corresponding realized correlations over the entire month, which aids
assessment of whether the correlation patterns are driven by the macroeconomic news releases or whether
they simply indicate the general relationship among the markets. The computations follow the
methodology described in Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold and Labys (2001, 2003). To facilitate cross
country comparisons, we restrict the calculations to encompass the common trading hours from 8:20 to
12:30 EST, resulting in a total of 51 5-minute intervals per day and approximately 51x22 = 1,122 5-
minute observations per month. Specifically, we define




where J=51 (            ) for the daily (monthly) correlations, and d refers to the corresponding daily
(monthly) index.25
         Turning to the two figures, the time varying stock-bond correlations are remarkably similar across
countries, not only for the nonfarm payroll announcement dates (Figure 2A), but also when calculated for
the full month (Figure 2B). The correlations are generally higher and mostly positive during the
expansion period and smaller and negative during the recession period. Interestingly, there is also an


24
   The nonfarm payroll is among the most significant of the announcements for all of the markets, and it is often
referred to as the “king” of announcements by market participants; see, e.g., Andersen and Bollerslev (1998).
25
 We also tried adjusting for non-synchronous trading effects by including up to three additional leads and lags in a
Newey-West calculation of the correlations, and the results were qualitatively identical.

                                                        -15-
indication that the correlations may evolve smoothly rather and shift somewhat slowly from the values
typical of the expansion to the values more representative of the recession. Moreover, there is a
noticeable drop just around August and September 0f 1998. This corresponds to the Russian debt default
crises and the Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) hedge fund collapse, where the Federal Reserve
actively intervened to avoid spill-overs into the global capital markets. This episode is well known to
have increased credit spreads on risky securities worldwide. The burst of uncertainty regarding the
financial and economic health of the international economy is clearly reflected in our correlation
measures as they take on a pattern otherwise only observed during the recession. Our European series are
somewhat contaminated by this event as they only are observed from July, 1998, and forward. Ignoring
the immediate aftermath of the financial crisis in late 1998, the switch in the sign of the correlations
matches almost perfectly the previously exogenously imposed U.S. business cycle regime.
          The robustness of these results are, of course, limited to the relatively short calender time span
and single U.S. expansion-recession period covered by the high-frequency data.26 Nonetheless, it is
noteworthy that even though the German and British’s business cycles do not necessarily coincide with
the U.S. business cycle,27 it appears as though the relevant state variable for determining the time-varying
impact of the news announcements is the state of the U.S. economy rather than the foreign country.
Indeed, the patterns in the time-varying correlations are entirely consistent with our previous assertion
that the “discount rate” effect dominates the price movements for each of the three stock markets during
U.S. economic expansions, coupled with the U.S. interest rate playing the role of the “world interest rate”
and hence dictating the move of the foreign bond markets.28
          The tentative interpretation of the concurrent stock-bond correlation as a time-varying
(continuously evolving) measure of the phase of the business cycle - as reflected in the behavior of the
financial markets - rather than a simple bivariate variable taking on a constant within-regime value is
purely suggestive given our limited sample period and the presence of only one business cycle.
Nonetheless, it does point to interesting future research directions.


26
   Using daily date over a much longer time span, Connolly, Stivers and Sun (2005) find that U.S. stock-bond return
correlations are inversely related to the level of aggregate stock market volatility as measured by the VIX index.
The VIX may in turn be interpreted as a state variable related to the level of economic uncertainty and the stage of
the business cycle in the sense of David and Veronesi (2004) and Ribeiro and Veronesi (2002). See also the recent
related empirical result in Guidolin and Timmermann (2004, 2005).
27
     The U.K. did not experience a recession from March 2001 to December 2002.
28
  The dominance of the U.S. interests rate is consistent with the recent empirical evidence reported in Chinn and
Frankel (2003).

                                                        -16-
Within-Country and Cross-Country Asset Market Linkages
        We have argued that the movements in asset returns across markets and countries documented
above are driven by the common exposure to exogenous U.S. macroeconomic shocks and the U.S.’s
business cycle. This contrasts with previous studies that also document important spillover effects and
market interdependencies, but little (if any) role for macroeconomic fundamentals in explaining the
comovements between markets. Our positive results can be attributed to our focus on synchronous high-
frequency data around the time of the announcement – all assets are actively traded during announcement
times, so we observe the immediate news reaction of all assets – which mitigates other influences and
potentially important omitted variables biases.
        To further investigate the extent of the cross-market and cross-country linkages in the high-
frequency data over-and-above the direct influence of the macroeconomic news announcement effects, it
is informative to consider the simultaneous equation model,


                                                                                                        (4.4)


Except for the inclusion of the contemporaneous asset returns on the right-hand side, the model is

identical to the reduced form representation in (4.2). As in equation (4.2), the     coefficients directly

capture the U.S. macroeconomic announcement effects, while the          account for any contemporaneous

cross-asset linkages and/or spillover effects that are not explained by the news announcements. This
could include the reaction to other fundamental information, but also incorporates non-fundamental
market microstructure, contagion, and cross-hedging effects. The problem from an econometric
perspective, of course, is that without any additional restrictions or modeling assumptions, the

contemporaneous coefficients in       are not identified.

        To overcome this problem, we follow the approach in the recent series of papers by Rigobon
(2003), Rigobon and Sack (2003a,b, 2004), and Sentana and Fiorentini (2001) of using the conditional
heteroskedasticity in the high-frequency data to identify the contemporaneous coefficients. The idea is
straightforward. Assuming that the “structural” form innovations in (4.4) are conditionally uncorrelated
but heteroskedastic – as indicated by our previous estimation results for (4.3) – the conditional
covariances of the implied reduced-form innovations in (4.2) will then move in proportion to the
conditional heteroskedasticity in the individual structural innovations, with the factors of proportionality



                                                    -17-
determined by the elements in         . This proportionality in turn, allows for the identification and

estimation of the contemporaneous coefficients.29

         Our approach follows Rigobon and Sack (2003b), in estimating the elements of                    by applying

Gaussian quasi-maximum likelihood estimation (QMLE) techniques to the multivariate “structural
GARCH” model implied by the univariate GARCH models for each of the individual equations in (4.4).30
To facilitate the implementation of the multivariate GARCH model, we treat the residuals from the first-
stage estimation of (4.2) as directly observable. Also, for tractability, we estimate the model for three
markets at a time, but the same idea could in principle be applied to any number of assets.
         Focusing first on the trivariate domestic system consisting of U.S. T-Bond, S&P500, and $/Euro
returns, we obtain the following estimates for the contemporaneous linkages among the three markets
based on the 9,301 five-minute announcement period returns spanning the July 1, 1998 through February
28, 2001 expansion time period:




                                                                                                                     (4.5)




                                                                                                                     (4.6)




29
   Formally, consider the matrix representation of (4.4),                 , where the “structural shocks” to each of
the equations, , are assumed to be heteroskedastic, but serially uncorrelated and uncorrelated across equations.
The corresponding reduced-form representation,                         , the uniquely determines the distributional
properties of Rt. Importantly, the non-zero off-diagonal elements of the time-varying conditional covariance matrix
for the reduced form shocks,            , depend directly on   , thus providing identification of the elements in
through the heteroskedasticity in the data.
30
   To economize on the number of parameters, we only include those macroeconomic news announcement dummies
that were statistically significant at the five-percent level in the estimation of equation (4.3). We also employ a more
parsimonious GARCH(1,1) specification,                                                         , as opposed to the
ARCH(9) model implicit in (4.3). Further details of the estimation results are available upon request.

                                                         -18-
                                                                                                                 (4.7)




where the numbers in parentheses refer to robust t-statistics.31 A number of the coefficients are highly
significant and they all have a natural interpretation. For example, an increase in stock prices may be
seen as a signal of a positive real activity or inflationary shock and the point estimate for the S&P500
return coefficient in (4.5) is entirely consistent with the implications of the stylized monetary model. The
impact of the exchange rate returns is clearly less important, but the sign is compatible with exchange rate
changes on balance reflecting real economic shocks. Equation (4.6) is also directly in line with our
aforementioned discussion of the dominance of the “discount” factor component in the evaluation of
stock prices during economic expansions, whereby higher bond prices (lower discount rates) are good for
the stock market in good times. Similarly, Dollar depreciation (interpreted as a negative real activity or
deflationary shock) results in higher stock prices. Notice also that while the unconditional correlation
between bond and stock prices for the expansion period reported in Table 3 is positive, the estimation
method underlying equations (4.5)-(4.7) allows us to disentangle two opposing effects: bond prices affect
stock prices positively, but stock prices affect bond prices negatively.32 Finally, interpreting negative
bond returns and positive stock returns as indicators of real economic strength the associated appreciation
of the Dollar implied by equation (4.7) is as expected.
         Estimating the same set of equations for the 6,463 five-minute announcement period returns over
the March 1, 2001 through December 31, 2002 recession time period produces the following results:




                                                                                                                (4.8)




31
  The reported t-statistics do not formally account for the first-stage conditional mean parameter estimation error,
but this effect is almost surely negligible in the present context.
32
   Our results for the high-frequency data in equations (4.5) and (4.6) agree with the findings reported in Rigobon
and Sack (2003b) based on daily stock and bond market returns from November 1985 to March 2001. Of course,
this is predominantly an expansionary period, so it is not surprising that the directional effects coincide.

                                                         -19-
                                                                                                            (4.9)




                                                                                                          (4.10)




The estimates for equations (4.8) and (4.10) are qualitatively as before, although the linkages among the
interest rate and the other variables appear to have declined. This is consistent with the interest rates
being less sensitive to economic shocks during the recession. In contrast, the difference in the estimates
for the S&P500 returns in equations (4.6) and (4.9) is striking. The contemporaneous linkages between
the stock market and the other markets flips sign between the two periods. As before, “good news”
during expansions is “bad news” for stocks, but “good news” during recessions is good for the stock
market. In summary, the dominant finding is that positive stock returns (positive real or inflationary
shocks), ceteris paribus, always raises interest rates, while positive innovations to interest rates (real or
inflationary shocks) have a strongly regime-dependent impact on stock returns, once again confirming the
differential impacts of the cash-flow and the discount rate effects across the business cycle.
        Finally, we use the same “structural GARCH” approach to estimate the interdependence among
the national stock markets beyond the linkages explained by the U.S. macroeconomic announcements.
As before, dividing the sample in two, we find for the expansion sample:




                                                                                                          (4.11)




                                                                                                          (4.12)




                                                      -20-
                                                                                                              (4.13)




Not surprisingly, all estimated coefficients are positive, indicating important cross-country linkages over-
and-above those explained by the U.S. macroeconomic news releases. Whether these high-frequency
international market linkages are due to common reactions to worldwide fundamental news or reflect
cross-market hedging or other non-fundamental contagion effects is difficult to ascertain.
         Meanwhile, estimating the same relations over the more recent recession period suggests even
stronger contemporaneous cross-country linkages,




                                                                                                              (4.14)




                                                                                                              (4.15)




                                                                                                              (4.16)




These results accord directly with the findings of stronger international stock market cross-correlations in
down markets reported in the recent asset pricing literature.33 Importantly, however, our results help
explain the origins of the linkages, with movements in the DJE and the FTSE both strongly influencing
the U.S. market. This contrasts notably with most previous studies, which typically report significant
spillover effects from the U.S. equity market to foreign markets, but not the other way around. Again, our
use of finely sampled intraday data along with the application of refined statistical procedures are critical


33
   The theoretical model in Ribeiro and Veronesi (2002), in which news is more informative about the true state of
the economy in recessions, resulting in higher cross-market correlations, provides one possible explanation for the
findings.

                                                        -21-
in terms of uncovering such linkages.


5. Concluding Remarks
        We have characterized the real-time interactions among U.S., German and British stock, bond and
foreign exchange markets in the periods surrounding regularly-scheduled U.S. macroeconomic news
announcements. We found that announcement surprises produce conditional mean jumps; hence high-
frequency stock, bond and exchange rate dynamics are linked to fundamentals. Our results are especially
intriguing as regards stock market responses to news, which display distinct state dependence. In
particular, bad macroeconomic news has the traditionally-expected negative equity market impact during
recessions, but a positive impact during expansions. This explains the small stock market news reaction
effect when averaged across expansions and recessions reported in the exiting literature. The asymmetric
responses manifest themselves dramatically in very different stock-bond market correlations across the
business cycle. We verify that these distinct correlation patterns are not limited to the period around
announcements but apply generally for the trading day returns in the expansion vis-a-vis the recession.
We conjecture that such real-time correlation measures will be useful for a more refined classification of
the phase of the business cycle in future work. Finally, we pursue a “structural GARCH” estimation
approach that documents highly significant contemporaneous cross-market and cross-country linkages not
directly explained by the macroeconomic announcement effects. These findings generally strengthen and
robustify the above conclusions while also pointing toward important direct spill-over effects from
foreign to U.S. equity markets that typically are not captured by related existing empirical studies. Our
positive results in these dimensions are attributable to the use of synchronous high-frequency futures data,
which allow us to observe the immediate reaction and interaction of actively traded financial assets in the
period around the announcement times.
        Among the many possible directions for future work, we are particularly intrigued by the idea of
using high-frequency data to quantify the three separate channels of private information, contagion, and
public information that link the markets. Several recent studies have highlighted the role of order flow in
the price formation process, including Brandt and Kavajecz (2004), Cao, Lyons and Evans (2004), Evans
and Lyons (2003, 2005), Pasquariello and Vega (2004), and Underwood (2003). It would be interesting
to exploit the information in order flow and other liquidity measures in concert with the new statistical
procedures and rich high-frequency return and news announcement data employed here to further
advance our understanding of the price discovery process and cross-market linkages.




                                                    -22-
                                                       Appendix
          Prices and Fundamentals in Foreign Exchange, Bond and Stock Markets


           The Lucas (1982) two-country general equilibrium model, in which asset prices are directly
determined by monetary and real shocks, provides a simple convenient framework for discerning the
directional impact of specific macroeconomic news announcements and helps to illuminate the different
cross-market linkages that might be in operation.34 The model consists of a home and a foreign country,
each of which produces a single good. A representative agent in each of the two countries trades in and
consumes each of the two goods, with intertemporal substitution taking place via the local stock and bond
markets. Trades are facilitated and shocks are propagated across the two countries through the foreign
exchange market.
Foreign Exchange
           For concreteness, we refer to the home currency as the Dollar and the foreign currency as the
Euro. The first order equilibrium condition for the nominal Dollar/Euro exchange rate                  may be

expressed as

                                                                                                                  (A.1)


where              and             refer to the derivatives of the representative domestic consumer’s utility

function with respect to the consumption of the home good,               , and the foreign good,      , respectively,

      (   ) refers to the Dollars (Euros) in circulation, and             denotes domestic (foreign) output.

           It follows readily that other things equal, a positive domestic money supply shock,                          ,

depreciates the Dollar. Similarly, a positive foreign money supply shock,                          , depreciates the

Euro. This is also directly in line with the standard monetary approach to exchange rate determination
(e.g., Mark, 2001), as well as competing models involving a central bank reaction function that embodies



34
     Our discussion of the discrete-time Lucas model is adapted from Mark (2001). Our notation slightly differs from
Mark’s in that     (     ) denotes the nominal rather than the real price of home (foreign) equity. A refined
continuous-time version of the model, in which real exchange rates, stock and bond prices are jointly determined has
recently been developed by Pavlova and Rigobon (2003). Our paper is not intended as a “test” of the Lucas model
per se, however. Instead, we merely use the model to provide us with a rough guide as to the likely directional
influences of the different macroeconomic announcements.

                                                           -23-
a preference for low inflation (e.g., Taylor, 1993).
        The effect of real shocks will generally depend upon the exact form of the utility function and the
corresponding cross-country substitution effects. To illustrate, suppose that the utility function for the
representative domestic consumer takes the form,



                                                                                                            (A.2)



where        and       . Solving for the equilibrium,


                                                                                                            (A.3)



Hence a positive domestic real shock may appreciate or depreciate the nominal exchange rate depending
upon the value of the risk aversion parameter,     . In particular, everything else equal, an increase in

domestic output,             , appreciates the Dollar provided that      . Again, this accords directly with

the implications of the standard monetary models and central bank reaction function models.
Domestic Bonds
        Following the standard consumption-based approach to asset pricing, the equilibrium nominal
price of a one-period domestic bond with a one-Dollar payoff is conveniently expressed as


                                                                                                            (A.4)

where

                                                                                                            (A.5)


refers to the stochastic discount factor,   denote the nominal price of domestic output, and      is the

discount rate. The bond price is, of course, inversely related to the nominal risk free rate,                .

        Inflationary shocks trivially lower bond prices and raise interest rates. To ascertain the likely
impact of a real shock, consider again the representative utility function in equation (A.2), in which case
the equilibrium price simplifies to



                                                       -24-
                                                                                                                (A.6)


Thus, in this situation we would expect positive domestic real shocks,                     , to affect bond prices

negatively.35
Domestic Stock Market
         The equilibrium nominal price of equity claims solves the standard recursive asset pricing
equation,
                                                                                                                (A.7)

This highlights the three separate influences determining stock prices: the risk-free interest rate,
                , expected future cash flows,                  , and the equity risk premium,                        .

         As discussed above, a positive real shock,                  , will generally affect bond prices

negatively, implying a decrease in the price of equity coming from the first term. This same real shock,
however, affects the expected rate of growth positively, and hence implies an increase in stock prices
coming from the second term. It is not clear how a positive real shock would affect the covariance, or
risk premium, term. As such, this renders the overall effect on equity prices of real domestic shocks
elusive. Similarly, the inflation rate,          , will affect nominal stock prices in different directions

through the three separate channels, leaving the dominant effect of inflationary shocks an empirical
question.
         There is also the possibility that the relative importance of the different effects, and hence the
impact of macroeconomic announcements, changes over the stage of the business cycle. In particular, as
argued by Boyd, Jagannathan and Hu (2005), information about interest rates (i.e., the first term) may be
dominant during expansions (i.e., positive real shocks are bad news for stocks during good times), while
information about future corporate dividends and/or the equity risk premium (i.e., the second and third
term) may be dominant during contractions. We examine this issue in detail in the empirical analysis.
Foreign Bond and Stock Markets
         The foreign exchange market links the equilibrium nominal price of a one-period nominal foreign


35
   This accords both with the earlier empirical evidence cited in the main text, and with popular financial press
explanations of bond market reactions to news. Quoting from Balduzzi, Elton and Green (2001): “The financial
press explains the reaction of the bond market to economic news mainly in terms of revisions of inflationary
expectations, where, in accord with a Phillips curve view, inflation is perceived to be positively correlated with
economic activity. So procyclical variables and inflationary pressures have a negative impact on bond prices.”

                                                        -25-
bond with a one-Euro payoff to the price of a domestic bond with a one-Dollar payoff,



                                                                                                         (A.8)


The impact of a shock will therefore again depend upon the form of the utility function and the risk
premium implied by the corresponding stochastic discount factor. Assuming that the risk premium stays
approximately constant, however, a shock which appreciates (depreciates) the Dollar should lower
(increase) the price of the foreign bond, increasing (decreasing) the nominal foreign interest rate,

                .

        By direct analogy to the pricing equation for domestic stocks, the equilibrium nominal foreign
equity price satisfies,

                                                                                                         (A.9)

where        denotes the foreign (Euro) price level, and the foreign nominal stochastic discount factor is

defined by

                                                                                                       (A.10)



As discussed above, positive domestic inflationary or real shocks will generally result in lower foreign

bond prices,        . Assuming in addition that domestic and foreign growth are positively correlated, these

same shocks will enhance the expected future nominal payoff,                     . Thus, regardless of the

covariance or risk premium term,                       , the overall directional impact of a U.S. domestic

shock for foreign stock prices remains ambiguous. Moreover, there is again the possibility that the
magnitude of the different effects, and hence the impact of the shocks, will vary with the phase of the
business cycle.




                                                      -26-
                                                References

Aït-Sahalia, Y., Mykland, P.A. and Zhang, L. (2003), “How Often to Sample a Continuous-Time Process in
        the Presence of Market Microstructure Noise,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Almeida, A., Goodhart, C. and Payne, R. (1998), “The Effects of Macroeconomic News on High-Frequency
       Exchange Rate Behaviour,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 33, 383-408.

Andersen, T.G. and Bollerslev, T. (1998), “Deutsche Mark-Dollar Volatility: Intraday Activity Patterns,
       Macroeconomic Announcements, and Longer Run Dependencies,” Journal of Finance, 53, 219-265.

Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X. and Labys, P. (2001), “The Distribution of Realized Exchange
       Rate Volatility,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 96, 42-55.

Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X. and Labys, P. (2003), “Modeling and Forecasting Realized
       Volatility,” Econometrica, 71, 579-626.

Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X. and Vega, C. (2003), “Micro Effects of Macro Announcements:
       Real-Time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange,” American Economic Review, 93, 38-62.

Barsky, R.B. (1989), “Why Don’t the Prices of Stocks and Bonds Move Together?,” American Economic
        Review, 79, 1132-1145.

Balduzzi, P., Elton, E.J. and Green, T.C. (2001), “Economic News and Bond Prices: Evidence From the U.S.
        Treasury Market,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 36, 523-543.

Bandi, F. and Russell, J.R. (2003), “Microstructure Noise, Realized Volatility, and Optimal Sampling,”
        Manuscript, University of Chicago.

Blanchard, O.J. and Summers, L.H. (1984), “Perspectives on High World Real Interest Rates,”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 273-324.

Becker, K. G., Finnerty, J. E. and Friedman, J. (1995) “Economic News and Equity Market Linkages between
        the U.S. and U.K.,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 19, 1191-1210.

Bessembinder, H. (1994), “Bid-Ask Spreads in the Interbank Foreign Exchange Market,” Journal of Financial
       Economics, 35, 317-348.

Bernanke, B. S., and Kuttner, K. N. (2005), “What Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction to Federal Reserve
       Policy,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Bollerslev, T., Cai, J. and Song, F.M. (2000), “Intraday Periodicity, Long Memory Volatility, and
         Macroeconomic Announcement Effects in the U.S. Treasury Bond Market,” Journal of Empirical
         Finance, 7, 37-55.

Bomfim, A.N. (2003), “Pre-Announcement Effects, News Effects, and Volatility: Monetary Policy and the
      Stock Market,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 27, 133-151.

Boyd, J. H., Jagannathan, R. and Hu, J. (2005), “The Stock Market’s Reaction to Unemployment News: Why
        Bad News Is Usually Good For Stocks,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.


                                                    -27-
Brandt, M.W. and Kavajecz, K.A. (2004), “Price Discovery in the U.S. Treasury Market: The Impact of Order
        Flow and Liquidity on the Yield Curve,” Journal of Finance, 59, 2623-2654.

Campbell, J.Y. and Ammer, J. (1993), “What Moves the Stock and Bond Markets? A Variance
      Decomposition for Long-Term Asset Returns,” Journal of Finance, 48, 3-37.

Campbell, J.Y. and Mei, J. (1993), “Where Do Betas Come From? Asset Pricing Dynamics and the Sources of
      Systematic Risk,” Review of Financial Studies, 6, 567-592.

Cao, H.H., Lyons, R. and Evans, M.D.D. (2004), “Inventory Information,” Journal of Business, forthcoming.

Chaboud, A.P., Chernonko, S.V., Howorka, E., Iyer, R.S.K., Liu, D. and Wright, J.H. (2004), “The High-
       Frequency Effects of U.S. Macroeconomic Data Releases on Prices and Trading Activity in the
       Global Interdealer Foreign Exchange Market,” Manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal
       Reserve System, Washington D.C.

Chinn, M. and Frankel, J. (2003), “The Euro Area and World Interest Rates,” Working Paper 1016,
        Department of Economics, University of California, Santa Cruz.

Christie-David, R., Chaudhry, M. and Khan, M. (2002), “News Releases, Market Integration, and Market
         Leadership,” Journal of Financial Research, 25, 223-245.

Connolly, R., Stivers, C. and Sun, L. (2005), “Stock Market Uncertainty and the Stock-Bond Return
       Relation,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Connolly, R. and Wang, A. F. (2003), “International Equity Market Comovements: Economic Fundamentals
       or Contagion?” Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 11, 23-43.

Cornell, B. (1983), “The Money Supply Announcement Puzzle: Review and Interpretation,” American
         Economic Review, 73, 644- 657.

Cutler, D. M., Poterba, J.M. and Summers, L.H. (1989), “What Moves Stock Prices?” Journal of Portfolio
         Management, 4-12.

David, A. and Veronesi, P. (2004), “Inflation and Earnings Uncertainty and Volatility Forecasts,” Manuscript,
        University of Chicago.

Ehrmann, M and Fratzscher, M. (2003), “Interdependence between the Euro Area and the U.S.: What Role for
       EMU,” Manuscript, European Central Bank, Frankfurt.

Engle, R.F. (2002), “Dynamic Conditional Correlation: A Simple Class of Multivariate Generalized
        Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
        20, 339-350.

Engel, C and Frankel, J.A. (1984), “Why Interest Rates React to Money Announcements: An Explanation
        from the Foreign Exchange Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 13, 31-39.

Engle, R.F., Ito, T. and Lin, W.L. (1990), “Meteor-Showers or Heat Waves - Heteroskedastic Intradaily
        Volatility in the Foreign Exchange Market,”Econometrica, 55, 391-407.




                                                    -28-
Engle, R.F., Ito, T. and Lin, W.L. (1992), “Where Does the Meteor Shower Come From? The Role of
        Stochastic Policy and Coordination,”Journal of International Economics, 32, 221-240.

Evans, M.D.D. and Lyons, R. (2003), “How Is Macro News Transmitted to Exchange Rates?” NBER Working
        Paper No.9433, Cambridge, Mass.

Evans, M.D.D. and R.K. Lyons (2005), “Meese-Rogoff Redux: Micro-Based Exchange Rate
        Forecasting,”American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Fair, R. (2002), “Events that Shook the Market,” Journal of Business, 75, 713-732.

Fair, R. (2003), “Shock Effects on Stocks, Bonds and Exchange Rates,” Journal of International Money and
         Finance, 21, 307-341.

Faust, J., Rogers, J.H., Wand, S.Y.B. and Wright, J.H. (2003), “The High-Frequency Response of Exchange
         Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements,” Manuscript, Board of Governors of the
         Federal Reserve System, Washington D.C.

Flannery, M. J. and Protopapadakis, A. (2002), “Macroeconomic Factors do Influence Aggregate Stock
        Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 15, 751-782.

Fleming, M.J. and Remolona, E.M. (1997), “What Moves the Bond Market,” Economic Policy Review,
       Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 3 (December), 31-50.

Fleming, M.J. and Remolona, E.M. (1999), “Price Formation and Liquidity in the U.S. Treasury Market: The
       Response to Public Information,” Journal of Finance, 54, 1901-1915.

Fleming, J., Kirby, C. and Ostdiek, B. (1998), “Information and Volatility Linkages in the Stock, Bond and
       Money Market,” Journal of Financial Economics, 49, 111-137.

Forbes, K.J. and Rigobon, R. (2002), “No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring Stock Market Co-
        Movements,” Journal of Finance, 57, 2223-2261.

Frankel, J. A. and Hardouvelis, G. (1985), “Commodity Prices, Money Surprises, and Fed Credibility,”
        Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 17, 427-438.

Frankel, J. A. and Rose, A.K. (1995), “A Survey of Empirical Research on Nominal Exchange Rates,” in G.
        Grossman and K. Rogoff (eds.), Handbook of International Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Galati, G. and Ho, C. (2003), “Macroeconomic News and the Euro/Dollar Exchange Rate,” Economic Notes,
         32, 371-398.

Goldberg, L. and Leonard, D. (2003), “What Moves Sovereign Bond Markets? The Effects of Economic News
       on U.S. and German Yields,” Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Federal Reserve Bank of
       New York, 9, 1-7.

Goto, S. and Valkanov, R (2002), “The Fed’s Effect on Excess Returns and Inflation is Bigger Than you
        Think,” Manuscript, UCLA.

Green, C.T. (2004), “Economic News and the Impact of Trading on Bond Prices,” Journal of Finance, 59,
        1201-1233.

                                                    -29-
Grossman, J. (1981), “The Rationality of Money Supply Expectations and the Short-Run Response of Interest
       Rates to Monetary Surprises,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 13, 409-424.

Guidolin, M. and Timmermann, A. (2004), “Strategic Asset Allocation under Multivariate Regime
        Switching,” Manuscript, University of California San Diego.

Guidolin, M. and Timmermann, A. (2005), “An Econometric Model of Nonlinear Dynamics in the Joint
        Distribution of Stock and Bond Returns,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, forthcoming.

Hamao, Y., Masulis, R.W. and Ng, V. (1990), “Correlations in Price Changes and Volatility Across
       International Stock Markets,” Review of Financial Studies, 3, 281-307.

Hansen, P.R. and Lunde, A. (2004), “An Unbiased Measure of Realized Variance,” Manuscript, Brown
        University.

Hardouvelis, G. A. (1987), “Macroeconomic Information and Stock Prices,” Journal of Economics and
       Business, 39, 131-140.

Hardouvelis, G. A. (1988), “Economic News, Exchange Rates and Interest Rates,” Journal of International
       Money and Finance, 7, 23-35.

Harvey, C.R. and Huang, R.D. (2002), “The Impact of the Federal Reserve Bank’s Open Market Operations,”
        Journal of Financial Markets, 5, 223-257.

Hasbrouck, J. (1999), “Security Bid/Ask Dynamics with Discreteness and Clustering: Simple Strategies for
       Modeling and Estimation,” Journal of Financial Markets, 2, 1-28.

Hasbrouck, J. (2003), “Intraday Price Formation in U.S. Equity Index Markets,” Journal of Finance, 58, 2375-
       2400.

Hautsch, N. and Hess, D. (2002), “The Processing of Non-Anticipated Information in Financial Markets:
        Analyzing the Impact of the Surprises in the Employment Report,” European Finance Review, 6, 133-
        161.

Ito, T. and Roley, V. (1987), “News from the U.S. and Japan: Which Moves the Yen/Dollar Exchange Rate,”
         Journal of Monetary Economics, 19, 255-277.

King, M.A. and Wadhwani, S. (1990), “Transmission of Volatility between Stock Markets,” Review of
       Financial Studies, 3, 5-33.

Kuttner, K.N. (2001), “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the Fed Funds Futures
        Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 47, 523-544.

Li, L. (2002), “The Correlation of Stock and Bond Returns,” Yale University, ICF Working Paper No. 02-46.

Li, L. and Engle, R.F. (1998), “Macroeconomic Announcements and Volatility of Treasury Futures,”
         Manuscript, University of California, San Diego.

Lucas, R. (1982), “Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country World,” Journal of Monetary
        Economics, 10, 335-359.


                                                   -30-
Mark, N.C. (2001). International Macroeconomics and Finance: Theory and Empirical Methods. Blackwell
       Publishers, Oxford, U.K..

McQueen, G. and Roley, V.V. (1993), “Stock Prices, News, and Business Conditions,” Review of Financial
      Studies, 6, 683-707.

Orphanides, A. (1992), “When Good News is Bad News: Macroeconomic News and the Stock Market,”
       Working Paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Pasquariello, P. and Vega, C. (2004), “Informed and Strategic Order Flow in the Bond Markets,” Manuscript,
        University of Michigan and University of Rochester.

Pavlova, A. and Rigobon, R. (2003), “Asset Prices and Exchange Rates,” Manuscript, Massachusetts Institute
        of Technology.

Pearce, D. and Roley, V.V. (1985), “Stock Prices and Economic News,” Journal of Business, 58, 49-67.

Roley, V. V. and Walsh, C.E. (1985), “Monetary Policy Regimes, Expected Inflation and the Response of
        Interest Rates to Money Announcements,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100, 1011-1039.

Ribeiro, R. and Veronesi, P. (2002), “Excess Comovement of International Stock Markets in Bad Times: A
         Rational Expectations Equilibrium Model,” Manuscript, University of Chicago.

Rich, R. and Tracy, J. (2003), “Modeling Uncertainty: Predictive Accuracy as a Proxy for Predictive
        Confidence,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Reports No.161.

Rigobon, R. (2003), “Identification Through Heteroskedasticity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85,
       777-792.

Rigobon, R. and Sack, B. (2004), “The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices,” Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 51, 1553-1573.

Rigobon, R. and Sack, B. (2003a), “Measuring the Reaction of Monetary Policy to the Stock Market,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 639-669.

Rigobon, R. and Sack, B. (2003b), “Spillovers Across U.S. Financial Markets,” NBER Working Paper No.
       9640, Cambridge, Mass.

Rudebusch, G.D. (1998), “Do Measures of Monetary Policy in a VAR Make Sense?,” International Economic
       Review, 39, 907-931.

Sentana, E., and Fiorentini, G. (2001), “Identification, Estimation and Testing of Conditional Heteroskedastic
        Factor Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 102, 143-164.

Shiller, R. J. and Beltratti, A.E. (1992), “Stock Prices and Bond Yields,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 30,
         25-46.

Schwert, G.W. (1981), “The Adjustment of Stock Prices to Information About Inflation,” Journal of Finance,
        36, 15-29.




                                                     -31-
Scruggs, J. T. and Glabadanidis, P. (2003), “Risk Premia and the Dynamic Covariance Between Stock and
        Bond Returns,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 38, 295-316.

Tandon, K. and Urich, T. (1987), “International Market Response to Announcements of U.S. Macroeconomic
       Data,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 6, 71-83.

Taylor, J.B. (1993), “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
         Public Policy, 39, 195-214.

Underwood, S. (2003), “Cross-Market Informational Effects of Stock and Bond Order Flow,” Manuscript,
      University of Pennsylvania.

Urich, T. and Wachtel, P. (1981), “Market Response to the Weekly Money Supply Announcements in the
        1970s,” Journal of Finance, 36, 1063-1072.

Wongswan, J. (2003), “Transmission of Information Across International Equity Markets,” International
      Finance Discussion Paper 759, Federal Reserve Board.

Zarnowitz, V. and Lambros, L.A. (1987), “Consensus and Uncertainty in Economic Prediction,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 95, 591-621.




                                                    -32-
                                                 Table 1
                                            Futures Contracts

        Futures Contract1              Exchange2             Trading           Sample4         Liquidity5
                                                             Hours3
$/Pound                            CME                     8:20-15:00        01/92-12/02         160.73

$/Yen                              CME                     8:20-15:00        01/92-12/02         202.26

$/Euro6                            CME                     8:20-15:00        01/92-12/02         216.01

S&P 500                            CME/GLOBEX              8:20-16:157       01/94-12/02         231.10

30-Year U.S. Treasury Bond         CBOT                    8:20-15:00        01/92-12/02         228.27

British Long Gilt8                 LIFFE                   3:00-13:00        07/98-12/02         200.59

Euro Bobl9                         EUREX                   2:00-13:00        07/98-12/02         234.97

FTSE 10010                         LIFFE                   3:00-12:30        07/98-12/02         235.65

DJ Euro Stoxx 5011                 EUREX                  3:00-14:0012       07/98-12/02         169.20


  Footnotes to Table 1:

  1. The delivery months for all of the contracts are March, June, September and December. We always
           use the contract closest to expiration - which is generally the most actively traded - switching to
           the next-maturity contract five days before expiration.
  2. Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), London International
           Financial Futures Exchange (LIFFE), European Exchange (EUREX).
  3. Open auction regular trading hours, Eastern Standard Time.
  4. Starting and ending dates of our data sample.
  5. Average number of daily transactions in the common sample 07/98 to 12/02, 8:20 to 12:30 EST.
  6. Prior to June 1, 1999, we use $/DM futures.
  7. The S&P500 data from 8:20 to 9:30 comes from GLOBEX.
  8. The British Long Gilt contract is based on the British 10-Year Treasury Note.
  9. The Euro Bobl contract is based on the German 5-Year Treasury Note.
  10. The FTSE 100 index is constructed from the 100 largest U.K. companies.
  11. The DJ Euro Stoxx 50 index is composed of the 50 largest blue-chip market sector leaders in
           continental Europe. In July 2003 the index was composed of one Belgian, twelve German, five
           Spanish, one Finish, seventeen French, seven Italian and seven Dutch companies.
  12. EUREX extended the DJ Euro Stoxx 50 trading hours from 4:00-11:00 EST to 3:00-11:00 EST on
           October 18, 1999, again from 3:00-11:00 EST to 3:00-11:30 EST on January 24, 2000, and yet
           again from 3:00-11:30 EST to 3:00-14:00 EST on January 2, 2002.
                                               Table 2
                  Summary Statistics for Five-Minute Stock, Bond and Forex Returns

                                      Mean       Maximum       Minimum       Std. Dev.     Skewness      Kurtosis
$/Pound                             0.00063       0.535         -0.460        0.048          0.025        7.499
$/Yen                               0.00022       0.615         -1.111        0.067         -0.464       19.443
$/Euro                              -0.00043      0.824         -0.587        0.066         -0.055       11.018
S&P 500                             -0.00131      2.103         -2.437        0.171         -0.183       26.115
FTSE 100                            -0.00187      1.785         -1.516        0.138          0.284       25.745
DJ Euro Stoxx 50                    -0.00118      2.203         -2.037        0.175         -0.081       17.507
30-Year Treasury Bond                0.00063      1.319         -0.917        0.081          0.141       15.583
British Long Gilt                    0.00005      0.470         -0.366        0.040          0.087       11.217
German Euro Bobl                     0.00010      0.261         -0.257        0.023         -0.168       13.258

Notes to Table 2: See the footnotes to Table 1 for a description of the different contracts. The summary statistics for
each of the different contracts are based on the 15,764 five-minute returns ten minutes before and one-and-a-half
hours after the release of each of the U.S. macroeconomic announcements described in Table 4. The full common
sample for all of the contracts used in the calculations spans July 1, 1998 through December 31, 2002.
                                                       Table 3
                   Unconditional Correlation Matrix for Five-Minute Stock, Bond and Forex Returns

                        $/Pound $/Yen $/Euro S&P 500 FTSE 100            DJ Euro         30-Year        British Long German Euro
                                                                         Stoxx 50     Treasury Bond          Gilt       Bobl
                                                            Full Sample
$/Pound                  1.000    0.267 0.582      -0.152     -0.166    -0.181            0.101            0.087          0.135
$/Yen                             1.000 0.367      -0.123     -0.124    -0.149            0.052            0.040          0.061
$/Euro                                  1.000      -0.227     -0.215    -0.253            0.127            0.114          0.187
S&P 500                                             1.000      0.420    0.502             -0.129           -0.119         -0.178
FTSE 100                                                       1.000     0.544            -0.123           -0.127         -0.182
DJ Euro Stoxx 50                                                         1.000            -0.174           -0.169         -0.250
30-Year Treasury Bond                                                                     1.000            0.526          0.583
British Long Gilt                                                                                          1.000          0.614
German Euro Bobl                                                                                                          1.000
                                                        Expansion Sample
$/Pound                  1.000    0.230 0.547      -0.124    -0.107    -0.118             0.024            0.021          0.049
$/Yen                             1.000 0.326      -0.101    -0.077    -0.114             -0.014           -0.009         -0.011
$/Euro                                  1.000      -0.218    -0.151    -0.182             0.020            0.029          0.085
S&P 500                                             1.000     0.439    0.518              0.071            0.023          0.003
FTSE 100                                                      1.000     0.407              0.056            0.015          0.004
DJ Euro Stoxx 50                                                        1.000              0.063           0.022          0.019
30-Year Treasury Bond                                                                     1.000            0.505          0.555
British Long Gilt                                                                                          1.000          0.575
German Euro Bobl                                                                                                          1.000
                                                        Recession Sample
$/Pound                  1.000    0.345 0.637      -0.184    -0.249    -0.251             0.196            0.204          0.237
$/Yen                             1.000 0.453      -0.166    -0.214    -0.212             0.161            0.154          0.175
$/Euro                                  1.000      -0.248    -0.313    -0.342             0.272            0.277          0.319
S&P 500                                             1.000     0.417     0.492             -0.300           -0.303         -0.324
FTSE 100                                                      1.000     0.698             -0.345           -0.379         -0.399
DJ Euro Stoxx 50                                                        1.000             -0.393           -0.431         -0.483
30-Year Treasury Bond                                                                     1.000            0.578          0.612
British Long Gilt                                                                                          1.000          0.703
German Euro Bobl                                                                                                          1.000

   Notes to Table 3: See the footnotes to Table 1 for a description of the different contracts. The unconditional cross correlations
   are based on the 15,764 five-minute returns ten minutes before and one-and-a-half hours after the release of each of the U.S.
   macroeconomic announcements described in Table 4. The full common sample spans July 1, 1998 through December 31, 2002.
   The expansion covers July 1, 1998 through February 28, 2001, for a total of 9,301 five-minute returns. The recession period
   spans March 1, 2001 to December 31, 2002, for a total of 6,463 five-minute returns.
                                                   Table 4
                                          U.S. News Announcements

Announcement                               Obs.1   Source2  Dates3            Announcement Time4
                                          Quarterly Announcements
1- GDP Advance                             51       BEA     01/92-12/02       8:30
2- GDP Preliminary                         50       BEA     01/92-12/02       8:30
3- GDP Final                               51       BEA     01/92-12/02       8:30
                                          Monthly Announcements
Real Activity
4- Nonfarm Payroll Employment              194     BLS       01/92-12/02 5    8:30
5- Retail Sales                            193     BC        01/92-12/02      8:30
6- Industrial Production                   193     FRB       01/92-12/02      9:15
7- Capacity Utilization                    177     FRB       01/92-12/02      9:15
8- Personal Income                         192     BEA       01/92-12/02 6    10:00/8:30 7
9- Consumer Credit                         178     FRB       01/92-12/02      15:008
Consumption
10- New Home Sales                         167     BC        01/92-12/02      10:00
11- Personal Consumption Expenditures      192     BEA       01/92-12/02 9    10:00/8:3010
Investment
12- Durable Goods Orders                   237     BC        01/92-12/02 11   8:30/9:00/10:0012
13- Factory Orders                         178     BC        01/92-12/02 13   10:00
14- Construction Spending                  177     BC        01/92-12/02 14   10:00
15- Business Inventories                   177     BC        01/92-12/02      10:00/8:3015
Government Purchases
16- Government Budget                      175     FMS       01/92-12/02 16   14:00
Net Exports
17- Trade Balance                          192     BEA       01/92-12/02      8:30
Prices
18- Producer Price Index                   193     BLS       01/92-12/02      8:30
19- Consumer Price Index                   275     BLS       01/92-12/02      8:30
Forward-Looking
20- Consumer Confidence Index               138    CB       01/92-12/02       10:00
21- NAPM Index                              156    NAPM     01/92-12/02       10:00
22- Housing Starts                          269    BC       01/92-12/02       8:30
23- Index of Leading Indicators             275    CB       01/92-12/02       8:30
                                        Six-Week Announcements
FOMC
24- Target Federal Funds Rate              175     FRB     01/92-12/02        14:1517
                                           Weekly Announcements
25- Initial Unemployment Claims            600     ETA     01/92-12/02        8:30
Notes to Table 4: We partition the U.S. monthly news announcements into seven groups: real activity, GDP constituents
(consumption, investment, government purchases and net exports), prices, and forward-looking. Within each group, we list
U.S. news announcements in chronological order of their release.

Footnotes to Table 4:
1. Total number of observations in our announcements and expectations data sample.
2. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), Bureau of the Census (BC), Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), Federal Reserve
         Board (FRB), National Association of Purchasing Managers (NAPM), Conference Board (CB), Financial
         Management Office (FMO), Employment and Training Administration (ETA).
3. Starting and ending dates of our announcements and expectations data sample.
4. Eastern Standard Time. Daylight savings time starts on the first Sunday of April and ends on the last Sunday of October.
5. 10/98 is a missing observation.
6. 11/95, 2/96 and 03/97 are missing observations.
7. In 01/94, the personal income announcement time moved from 10:00 EST to 8:30 EST.
8. Beginning in 01/96, consumer credit was released regularly at 15:00 EST. Prior to this date the release times varied.
9. 11/95 and 2/96 are missing observations.
10. In 12/93, the personal consumption expenditures announcement time moved from 10:00 EST to 8:30 EST.
11. 03/96 is a missing observation.
12. Whenever GDP is released on the same day as durable goods orders, the durable goods orders announcement is moved to
         10:00 EST. On 07/96 the durable goods orders announcement was released at 9:00 EST.
13. 10/98 is a missing observation.
14. 01/96 is a missing observation.
15. In 01/97, the business inventory announcement was moved from 10:00 EST to 8:30 EST.
16. 05/88, 06/88, 11/98, 12/89 and 01/96 are missing observations.
17. Beginning in 3/28/94, the fed funds rate was released regularly at 14:15 EST. Prior to this date the release times varied.
                                                   Table 5A
                                   Contemporaneous News Response Coefficients
                                           U.S. Markets, Full Sample

                                         $/Pound             $/Yen              $/Euro            S&P 500        30-Year Treasury
                                                                                                                      Bond
Announcement

                                                    Quarterly Announcements
1- GDP Advance                       -0.054**   0.220    -0.048** 0.154    -0.119**   0.418   0.118      0.063   -0.095**   0.097
2- GDP Preliminary                   -0.022     0.035    -0.026*   0.074   -0.050**   0.118   -0.029     0.024   -0.030     0.030
3- GDP Final                         -0.011     0.018    -0.014    0.034   -0.010     0.012   0.005      0.002   -0.017     0.031
                                                      Monthly Announcements
Real Activity
4- Nonfarm Payroll Employment        -0.098**   0.160   -0.078**   0.177   -0.153**   0.218   -0.151**   0.075   -0.325**   0.360
5- Retail Sales                      -0.042**   0.152   -0.026**   0.086   -0.056**   0.134   0.004      0.000   -0.097**   0.110
6- Industrial Production             -0.022**   0.060   -0.016**   0.045   -0.032**   0.094   -0.002     0.001   -0.062**   0.194
7- Capacity Utilization              -0.014     0.024   -0.011     0.020   -0.025**   0.058    0.006     0.004   -0.076**   0.281
8- Personal Income                   -0.016**   0.053   -0.005     0.005   -0.014     0.024    0.000     0.000   -0.017     0.013
9- Consumer Credit                    0.000     0.000    0.000     0.001    0.001     0.011    0.018     0.025   -0.002     0.009
Consumption
10- New Home Sales                   -0.011     0.022   -0.015**   0.038   -0.014     0.018   -0.031*    0.027   -0.077**   0.244
11- Personal Consumption Expend.     -0.002     0.001   -0.003     0.002   -0.009     0.009   -0.031     0.040   -0.009     0.004
Investment
12- Durable Goods Orders             -0.038**   0.167   -0.028**   0.099   -0.070**   0.264   -0.019     0.007   -0.098**   0.210
13- Factory Orders                   -0.018**   0.056   -0.014**   0.029   -0.028**   0.053    0.023     0.009   -0.015     0.005
14- Construction Spending            -0.015*    0.043   -0.002     0.001   -0.016     0.024   0.013      0.005   -0.029**   0.061
15- Business Inventories              0.006     0.007   -0.002     0.001   -0.004     0.002   -0.020     0.007    0.022     0.013
Government Purchases
16- Government Budget                -0.006**   0.032   -0.005     0.021   -0.009**   0.064   0.010      0.010   0.006      0.011
Trade Balance
17- Net Exports                      -0.049**   0.164   -0.059**   0.111   -0.078**   0.196   0.040**    0.099   0.018*     0.026
Prices
18- Producer Price Index             0.002      0.000    0.012     0.017   0.004      0.001   -0.094**   0.100   -0.115**   0.154
19- Consumer Price Index             -0.014     0.031    0.003     0.002   -0.017*    0.025   -0.110**   0.139   -0.110**   0.166
Forward Looking
20- Consumer Confidence Index        -0.044**   0.189    -0.036** 0.203    -0.077**   0.277    0.034     0.020   -0.088**   0.361
21- NAPM Index                       -0.035**   0.201    -0.017** 0.045    -0.049**   0.140   -0.011     0.002   -0.153**   0.388
22- Housing Starts                   -0.011     0.020    -0.009*  0.020    -0.015*    0.023   -0.014     0.011   -0.064**   0.193
23- Index of Leading Indicators      -0.004     0.002     0.003   0.001    -0.006     0.003   -0.006     0.006   -0.005     0.001
                                                     Six-Week Announcements
24- Target Federal Funds Rate        -0.033*    0.116    -0.019*  0.024    -0.026*    0.037   -0.174*    0.131   -0.025*    0.048
                                                      Weekly Announcements
25- Initial Unemployment Claims      0.017**    0.036     0.013** 0.021     0.026**   0.047   0.002      0.000   0.048**    0.074
                                                Table 5A (continued)
                                      Contemporaneous News Response Coefficients
                                            European Markets, Full Sample

                                             British Long Gilt               Euro Bobl           FTSE 100           DJ Euro Stoxx 50
Announcement

                                                                  Quarterly Announcements
1- GDP Advance                              -0.042**    0.159        -0.034**   0.225     0.072         0.054      0.332**    0.306
2- GDP Preliminary                          -0.031**    0.262        -0.017         0.196    -0.034     0.033      0.091      0.042
3- GDP Final                                -0.024      0.171        -0.007         0.068    0.018      0.033      -0.015     0.007
                                                                  Monthly Announcements
Real Activity
4- Nonfarm Payroll Employment               -0.071**    0.142        -0.032**       0.138    -0.117**   0.086      -0.030     0.001
5- Retail Sales                             -0.029**    0.165        -0.032**       0.346    -0.007     0.001      0.087**    0.100
6- Industrial Production                    -0.021**    0.293        -0.018**       0.390    0.051      0.035      0.063      0.086
7- Capacity Utilization                     -0.023**    0.247        -0.019**       0.370    0.007      0.001      0.063      0.056
8- Personal Income                          -0.006      0.019        -0.002         0.005    0.005      0.001      -0.027     0.027
Consumption
10- New Home Sales                          -0.013*     0.087        -0.012**       0.147     -0.022*   0.026      -0.017     0.007
11- Personal Consumption Expend.            -0.001      0.000        -0.002         0.006    -0.016     0.017      -0.017     0.017
Investment
12- Durable Goods Orders                    -0.029**    0.323        -0.021**       0.285    0.015      0.007      0.091      0.084
13- Construction Spending                   -0.010      0.011        -0.007         0.017    0.023      0.013      0.096*     0.057
14- Factory Orders                          -0.016**    0.074        -0.007**       0.049    0.008      0.001      0.070**    0.051
15- Business Inventories                    0.008       0.013            0.002      0.001    -0.026     0.017      -0.012     0.001
Trade Balance
17- Net Exports                             0.001       0.000            0.003      0.015    0.037**    0.087      0.045      0.075
Prices
18- Producer Price Index                    -0.028**    0.160        -0.017**       0.148    -0.092**   0.135      -0.034     0.013
19- Consumer Price Index                    -0.029*     0.111        -0.010*        0.060    -0.084**   0.185      -0.139**   0.223
Forward Looking
20- Consumer Confidence Index               -0.032**    0.253        -0.026**       0.283    0.029      0.019      0.162**    0.097
21- NAPM Index                              -0.069**    0.450        -0.043**       0.439    -0.025     0.013      0.143*     0.102
22- Housing Starts                          -0.004      0.002        -0.009**       0.083    -0.015     0.018      0.012      0.003
23- Index of Leading Indicators             0.000       0.000        0.001          0.001     0.006     0.004      -0.009     0.006
                                                                   Weekly Announcements
25- Initial Unemployment Claims             0.010**     0.037        0.008**   0.060    0.003           0.000      -0.032**   0.018


  Notes to Table 5A: We report        and       from the contemporaneous news response regression,
  where        denotes the five-minute return from     to        , and      refers to the standardized news announcement, for nine
  asset returns, h, and twenty-five news announcements, . The model is estimated using only those observations (                     )
  such that an announcement was made at time . Two asterisks denote statistical significance at the five-percent level, and
  one asterisk denotes statistical significance at the ten-percent level, where we assess significance with asymptotic t-
  statistics constructed using heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors. The sample for the exchange
  rates and the U.S. Treasury bond goes from January 2, 1992 through December 31, 2002. The results for the S&P500 are
  based on the slightly shorter sample starting January 2, 1994. Data for the European stock and bond contracts are only
  available from July 1, 1998 through December 31, 2002. We do not estimate the consumer credit, government budget and
  federal funds rate responses (announcements 9, 16 and 24) for the European markets, because LIFFE and EUREX are not
  open after 14:00 EST when the announcements are made.
                                                   Table 5B
                                   Contemporaneous News Response Coefficients
                                        U.S. Markets, Expansion Sample


                                       $/Pound             $/Yen              $/Euro            S&P 500            30-Year
                                                                                                                Treasury Bond
Announcement

                                                Quarterly Announcements
1- GDP Advance                      -0.054** 0.217   -0.048** 0.142  -0.118** 0.405          0.049    0.010     -0.089** 0.072
2- GDP Preliminary                  -0.017   0.019   -0.026* 0.074   -0.050* 0.112           -0.064** 0.166     -0.017   0.009
3- GDP Final                        -0.017   0.048 -0.017     0.046  -0.013   0.021          -0.009   0.011     -0.010   0.013
                                                Monthly Announcements
Real Activity
4- Nonfarm Payroll Employment       -0.098**   0.162   -0.077**   0.180   -0.148**   0.220   -0.220**   0.200   -0.330**   0.372
5- Retail Sales                     -0.076**   0.188   -0.023     0.029   -0.089**   0.135   -0.131**   0.069   -0.213**   0.218
6- Industrial Production            -0.025**   0.062   -0.022**   0.067   -0.034**   0.087   -0.001     0.000   -0.068**   0.187
7- Capacity Utilization             -0.016     0.026   -0.014     0.028   -0.027**   0.060   0.009      0.005   -0.083**   0.297
8- Personal Income                  -0.020**   0.085   -0.007     0.014   -0.018     0.038    0.000     0.000   -0.018     0.014
9- Consumer Credit                   0.000     0.000   -0.001     0.001    0.002     0.018   -0.009     0.006   -0.003     0.015
Consumption
10- New Home Sales                  -0.010     0.020   -0.011     0.031   -0.013     0.016   -0.042** 0.055     -0.082** 0.263
11- Personal Consumption Expend.    -0.006     0.006   -0.006     0.009   -0.013     0.015   -0.033   0.033     -0.024   0.017
Investment
12- Durable Goods Orders            -0.047**   0.201   -0.028**   0.085   -0.077**   0.261   -0.090**   0.181   -0.117**   0.237
13- Factory Orders                  -0.016**   0.051   -0.012**   0.029   -0.029**   0.063   -0.001     0.000   -0.009     0.002
14- Construction Spending           -0.015*    0.044   0.000      0.000   -0.016     0.030   -0.011     0.004    -0.026*   0.047
15- Business Inventories             0.005     0.003   -0.001     0.000   -0.006     0.003   -0.020     0.006    0.009     0.002
Government Purchases
16- Government Budget               -0.007** 0.034     -0.006     0.018   -0.005     0.019   0.004      0.001   0.004      0.005
Trade Balance
17- Net Exports                     -0.063** 0.210     -0.076*    0.142   -0.100** 0.246     0.033*     0.046   0.019      0.025
Prices
18- Producer Price Index            0.000      0.000   0.016      0.022   0.004      0.000   -0.165** 0.204     -0.174** 0.234
19- Consumer Price Index            -0.017     0.039   0.005      0.004   -0.015     0.017   -0.140** 0.177     -0.135** 0.215
Forward Looking
20- Consumer Confidence Index       -0.043**0.160 -0.029** 0.129   -0.066** 0.219            -0.035**   0.047   -0.076**   0.301
21- NAPM Index                      -0.030**0.160   -0.014* 0.033  -0.040** 0.104            -0.076**   0.097   -0.159**   0.405
22- Housing Starts                  -0.010  0.014 -0.010     0.019 -0.016     0.022          -0.027**   0.040   -0.072**   0.216
23- Index of Leading Indicators     -0.007  0.004   0.001    0.000 -0.019     0.013          -0.010     0.012   -0.011     0.003
                                               Six-Week Announcements
24- Target Federal Funds Rate      -0.075** 0.245    -0.083* 0.168   -0.078** 0.148          -0.130* 0.054      -0.080** 0.189
                                                Weekly Announcements
25- Initial Unemployment Claims     0.018** 0.034   0.014** 0.018   0.027** 0.041            0.018*     0.008   0.054** 0.072
                                                 Table 5B (continued)
                                       Contemporaneous News Response Coefficients
                                          European Markets, Expansion Sample

                                               British Long Gilt          Euro Bobl            FTSE 100         DJ Euro Stoxx 50
Announcement

                                                                   Quarterly Announcements
1- GDP Advance                                -0.017      0.026       -0.012     0.058     0.029      0.009     0.173*     0.156
2- GDP Preliminary                            -0.040      0.280       -0.004     0.018     -0.050**   0.116    -0.141**    0.161
3- GDP Final                                  -0.022      0.088       -0.008     0.082     0.002      0.000     -0.09*     0.261
                                                                   Monthly Announcements
Real Activity
4- Nonfarm Payroll Employment                 -0.060**    0.122       -0.028**   0.180     -0.156**   0.174    -0.178      0.052
5- Retail Sales                               -0.078**    0.179       -0.038**   0.169     -0.095**   0.095    -0.215*     0.176
6- Industrial Production                      -0.017**    0.214       -0.013**   0.337     0.028      0.009    -0.034*     0.070
7- Capacity Utilization                       -0.025**    0.246       -0.015**   0.404     -0.019     0.005    -0.086**    0.244
8- Personal Income                            -0.007      0.033       -0.004     0.032     0.007      0.004    -0.039**    0.070
Consumption
10- New Home Sales                            -0.010      0.072       -0.008**   0.097     -0.028**   0.049    -0.052**    0.117
11- Personal Consumption Expend.              -0.003      0.004       -0.001     0.002     -0.014     0.011    -0.085**    0.171
Investment
12- Durable Goods Orders                      -0.036**    0.470       -0.020**   0.317     -0.045**   0.098    -0.073**    0.250
13- Construction Spending                     -0.007      0.005       -0.004     0.008     0.006      0.001     0.034      0.019
14- Factory Orders                            -0.020**    0.087       -0.006     0.042     -0.023     0.015     0.008      0.002
15- Business Inventories                      0.001       0.000       -0.007     0.015     -0.027     0.015    -0.006      0.000
Trade Balance
17- Net Exports                               -0.002      0.003       0.001      0.003      0.040*    0.084     0.099**    0.154
Prices
18- Producer Price Index                      -0.057**    0.285       -0.028**   0.256     -0.155**   0.280    -0.191**    0.253
19- Consumer Price Index                      -0.048*     0.213       -0.013     0.088     -0.098**   0.224    -0.208**    0.346
Forward Looking
20- Consumer Confidence Index                 -0.025**    0.254       -0.013**   0.270     -0.024**   0.035    -0.044      0.021
21- NAPM Index                                -0.081**    0.444       -0.041**   0.457     -0.076**   0.142    -0.131**    0.163
22- Housing Starts                            0.002       0.000       -0.006     0.033     -0.033**   0.079    -0.015      0.004
23- Index of Leading Indicators               0.001       0.001       -0.003     0.030     0.014      0.020    -0.006      0.003
                                                                    Weekly Announcements
25- Initial Unemployment Claims               0.007       0.011       0.007**   0.039    0.016**      0.008    -0.011      0.002

   Notes to Table 5B: See the notes to Table 5A. The expansion sample for the U.S. markets covers January 2, 1992 through
   February 28, 2001, except for the S&P500 results which are based on the slightly shorter sample starting January 2, 1994. The
   expansion data for the European markets spans July 1, 1998 through February 28, 2001.
                                                   Table 5C
                                   Contemporaneous News Response Coefficients
                                         U.S. Markets, Recession Sample


                                      $/Pound             $/Yen               $/Euro            S&P 500            30-Year
                                                                                                                Treasury Bond
Announcement

                                               Quarterly Announcements
1- GDP Advance                     -0.060** 0.325   -0.046   0.269 -0.128** 0.584            0.388** 0.814      -0.131** 0.850
2- GDP Preliminary                 -0.044   0.309   -0.020   0.068 -0.052   0.174            0.088   0.142      -0.084* 0.296
3- GDP Final                       0.041    0.232    0.013   0.058   0.025  0.102            0.080   0.162      -0.059   0.169
                                                Monthly Announcements
Real Activity
4- Nonfarm Payroll Employment      -0.107**   0.136   -0.072**    0.099   -0.209**   0.202    0.415**   0.180   -0.298**   0.247
5- Retail Sales                    -0.023**   0.323   -0.027**    0.322   -0.038**   0.275    0.056*    0.134   -0.031     0.046
6- Industrial Production           -0.014     0.091   -0.008      0.035   -0.028**   0.186   -0.010     0.015   -0.044**   0.242
7- Capacity Utilization            -0.007     0.018   -0.004      0.006   -0.017     0.058    0.013     0.028   -0.044**   0.216
8- Personal Income                  0.033*    0.161    0.020      0.026   0.029      0.059    0.006     0.001   -0.006     0.002
9- Consumer Credit                  0.000     0.000    0.000      0.000   0.000      0.000    0.063**   0.441    0.000     0.000
Consumption
10- New Home Sales                 -0.020     0.052   -0.051** 0.126      -0.024     0.040   0.038      0.025   -0.042     0.112
11- Personal Consumption Expend.    0.004     0.014   0.004    0.005      0.001      0.000   -0.028*    0.127   0.020      0.076
Investment
12- Durable Goods Orders           -0.015     0.088   -0.027      0.152   -0.052*    0.328    0.116*    0.197   -0.053     0.163
13- Factory Orders                 -0.030*    0.093   -0.022      0.034   -0.020     0.016    0.199**   0.213    -0.062*   0.047
14- Construction Spending          -0.022     0.070   -0.008      0.018   -0.023     0.040    0.106**   0.152    -0.042*   0.131
15- Business Inventories           0.008      0.088   -0.006      0.017   -0.001     0.001   -0.024     0.076    0.056     0.217
Government Purchases
16- Government Budget              -0.002     0.007   -0.004      0.022   -0.015** 0.218     0.018** 0.050      0.011      0.053
Trade Balance
17- Net Exports                    -0.013     0.050   -0.011      0.029   -0.018     0.057   0.052** 0.358      0.010      0.021
Prices
18- Producer Price Index           0.003      0.005    0.006      0.014   0.004    0.004     -0.020     0.024   -0.022     0.030
19- Consumer Price Index           -0.001     0.001   -0.006      0.030   -0.026** 0.270     -0.022     0.046   -0.004     0.001
Forward Looking
20- Consumer Confidence Index      -0.046**0.286   -0.059** 0.492 -0.107**           0.435    0.208**   0.322   -0.121**   0.509
21- NAPM Index                     -0.048**0.350   -0.025* 0.071 -0.071**            0.276    0.248**   0.471   -0.131**   0.317
22- Housing Starts                 -0.016* 0.126   -0.010   0.034 -0.015             0.056   0.034      0.096   -0.030     0.094
23- Index of Leading Indicators    0.001   0.002   0.005    0.016   0.009            0.038   -0.006     0.006   -0.002     0.001
                                              Six-Week Announcements
24- Target Federal Funds Rate      -0.011  0.039    0.009   0.036 -0.006             0.004   -0.203     0.183   -0.008     0.009
                                               Weekly Announcements
25- Initial Unemployment Claims    0.012** 0.066    0.011** 0.049   0.022**          0.105   -0.023     0.023   0.036** 0.110
                                              Table 5C (continued)
                                    Contemporaneous News Response Coefficients
                                       European Markets, Recession Sample

                                         British Long Gilt          Euro Bobl            FTSE 100        DJ Euro Stoxx 50
Announcement

                                                             Quarterly Announcements
1- GDP Advance                          -0.095**    0.763       -0.099**   0.881     0.278**   0.839    0.683**    0.683
2- GDP Preliminary                      -0.025      0.258       -0.030**   0.485     0.222     0.206    0.238*     0.237
3- GDP Final                            -0.027**    0.537       -0.004     0.023     0.114**   0.513    0.068      0.184
                                                             Monthly Announcements
Real Activity
4- Nonfarm Payroll Employment           -0.121**    0.261       -0.068**   0.170     0.274**   0.181    0.386**    0.102
5- Retail Sales                         -0.024**    0.239       -0.031**   0.442     0.040     0.116    0.115*     0.234
6- Industrial Production                -0.026**    0.417       -0.028**   0.527     0.146**   0.455    0.222**    0.502
7- Capacity Utilization                 -0.022**    0.248       -0.025**   0.386     0.111**   0.233    0.212**    0.406
8- Personal Income                      0.002       0.001       0.005      0.023     -0.009    0.002    0.016      0.005
Consumption
10- New Home Sales                      -0.016      0.105       -0.021**   0.265     0.047**   0.056    0.055      0.038
11- Personal Consumption Expend.        0.001       0.001       -0.002     0.014     -0.018    0.037    0.005      0.003
Investment
12- Durable Goods Orders                -0.022      0.190       -0.021     0.250     0.159*    0.441    0.281**    0.424
13- Construction Spending               -0.020      0.039       -0.018**   0.047     0.147*    0.198    0.271**    0.180
14- Factory Orders                      -0.012*     0.065       -0.012*    0.093     0.122**   0.199    0.152**    0.142
15- Business Inventories                0.014       0.158       0.011      0.121     -0.026*   0.138    -0.019     0.024
Trade Balance
17- Net Exports                         0.002       0.019       0.002      0.019     0.029*    0.159    0.020      0.035
Prices
18- Producer Price Index                -0.008      0.050       -0.004     0.019     0.003     0.001    0.031      0.016
19- Consumer Price Index                0.000       0.000       -0.005     0.019     -0.028    0.059    -0.035     0.054
Forward Looking
20- Consumer Confidence Index           -0.035**    0.253       -0.038**   0.344     0.190**   0.259    0.286**    0.213
21- NAPM Index                          -0.060**    0.464       -0.046**   0.420     0.174**   0.399    0.380**    0.498
22- Housing Starts                      -0.01*      0.100       -0.013**   0.262     0.057**   0.230    0.048      0.074
23- Index of Leading Indicators         0.000       0.000       0.002      0.015     -0.007    0.008    -0.015     0.015
                                                              Weekly Announcements
25- Initial Unemployment Claims         0.011**     0.082       0.008**   0.086    -0.023*     0.029    -0.043**   0.038

   Notes to Table 5C: See the notes to Table 5A. The recession sample for all of the markets goes from March 1, 2001
   through December 31, 2002.
                                                          Figure 1A
                                      Bond Market News Announcement Responses, Full Sample

                                                                                Nonfarm Payroll Employment
                         30-Year Treasury Bond                                               British Long Gilt                                               Euro Bobl
           .2                                                          .2                                                                 .2

           .1                                                          .1                                                                 .1

           .0                                                          .0                                                                 .0
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                               Response
           -.1                                                         -.1                                                                -.1

           -.2                                                         -.2                                                                -.2

           -.3                                                         -.3                                                                -.3
              -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16                 -12    -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                              Time                                                         Time

                                                                                      Durable Goods Orders
                         30-Year Treasury Bond                                               British Long Gilt                                               Euro Bobl
           .2                                                          .2                                                                 .2

           .1                                                          .1                                                                 .1

           .0                                                          .0                                                                 .0
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                               Response
           -.1                                                         -.1                                                                -.1

           -.2                                                         -.2                                                                -.2

           -.3                                                         -.3                                                                -.3
              -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16                 -12    -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                              Time                                                         Time

                                                                                       Producer Price Index
                         30-Year Treasury Bond                                               British Long Gilt                                               Euro Bobl
           .2                                                          .2                                                                 .2

           .1                                                          .1                                                                 .1

           .0                                                          .0                                                                 .0
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                               Response




           -.1                                                         -.1                                                                -.1

           -.2                                                         -.2                                                                -.2

           -.3                                                         -.3                                                                -.3
              -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16                 -12    -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                              Time                                                         Time

                                                                                 Initial Unemployment Claims
                         30-Year Treasury Bond                                               British Long Gilt                                               Euro Bobl
           .2                                                          .2                                                                 .2

           .1                                                          .1                                                                 .1

           .0                                                          .0                                                                 .0
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                               Response




           -.1                                                         -.1                                                                -.1

           -.2                                                         -.2                                                                -.2

           -.3                                                         -.3                                                                -.3
              -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16                 -12    -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                              Time                                                         Time
                                               Figure 1A (continued)
                          Foreign Exchange Market News Announcement Responses, Full Sample

                                                                             Nonfarm Payroll Employment
                                   $/BP                                                  $/Yen                                                    $/Euro
           .10                                                     .10                                                        .10

           .05                                                     .05                                                        .05

           .00                                                     .00                                                        .00
Response




                                                        Response




                                                                                                                   Response
           -.05                                                    -.05                                                       -.05

           -.10                                                    -.10                                                       -.10

           -.15                                                    -.15                                                       -.15
               -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16                  -12   -8     -4   0       4   8   12   16                  -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                   Time                                                        Time

                                                                                  Durable Goods Orders
                                   $/BP                                                  $/Yen                                                    $/Euro
           .10                                                     .10                                                        .10

           .05                                                     .05                                                        .05

           .00                                                     .00                                                        .00
Response




                                                        Response




                                                                                                                   Response
           -.05                                                    -.05                                                       -.05

           -.10                                                    -.10                                                       -.10

           -.15                                                    -.15                                                       -.15
               -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16                  -12   -8     -4   0       4   8   12   16                  -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                   Time                                                        Time

                                                                                   Producer Price Index
                                   $/BP                                                  $/Yen                                                    $/Euro
           .10                                                     .10                                                        .10

           .05                                                     .05                                                        .05

           .00                                                     .00                                                        .00
Response




                                                        Response




                                                                                                                   Response




           -.05                                                    -.05                                                       -.05

           -.10                                                    -.10                                                       -.10

           -.15                                                    -.15                                                       -.15
               -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16                  -12   -8     -4   0       4   8   12   16                  -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                   Time                                                        Time
                                                                             Initial Unemployment Claims
                                   $/BP                                                  $/Yen                                                    $/Euro
           .10                                                     .10                                                        .10

           .05                                                     .05                                                        .05

           .00                                                     .00                                                        .00
Response




                                                        Response




                                                                                                                   Response




           -.05                                                    -.05                                                       -.05

           -.10                                                    -.10                                                       -.10

           -.15                                                    -.15                                                       -.15
               -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16                  -12   -8     -4   0       4   8   12   16                  -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                   Time                                                        Time
                                                    Figure 1A (continued)
                                    Stock Market News Announcement Responses, Full Sample

                                                                               Nonfarm Payroll Employment
                              S&P 500                                                     FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
           .4                                                         .4                                                          .4
           .3                                                         .3                                                          .3
           .2                                                         .2                                                          .2
Response




                                                           Response




                                                                                                                       Response
           .1                                                         .1                                                          .1
           .0                                                         .0                                                          .0
           -.1                                                        -.1                                                         -.1
           -.2                                                        -.2                                                         -.2
           -.3                                                        -.3                                                         -.3
              -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8    -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                        Time                                                       Time

                                                                                    Durable Goods Orders
                              S&P 500                                                     FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
           .4                                                         .4                                                          .4
           .3                                                         .3                                                          .3
           .2                                                         .2                                                          .2
Response




                                                           Response




                                                                                                                       Response
           .1                                                         .1                                                          .1
           .0                                                         .0                                                          .0
           -.1                                                        -.1                                                         -.1
           -.2                                                        -.2                                                         -.2
           -.3                                                        -.3                                                         -.3
              -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8    -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                        Time                                                       Time

                                                                                    Producer Price Index
                              S&P 500                                                     FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
           .4                                                         .4                                                          .4
           .3                                                         .3                                                          .3
           .2                                                         .2                                                          .2
Response




                                                           Response




                                                                                                                       Response




           .1                                                         .1                                                          .1
           .0                                                         .0                                                          .0
           -.1                                                        -.1                                                         -.1
           -.2                                                        -.2                                                         -.2
           -.3                                                        -.3                                                         -.3
              -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8    -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                        Time                                                       Time

                                                                               Initial Unemployment Claims
                              S&P 500                                                     FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
           .4                                                         .4                                                          .4
           .3                                                         .3                                                          .3
           .2                                                         .2                                                          .2
Response




                                                           Response




                                                                                                                       Response




           .1                                                         .1                                                          .1
           .0                                                         .0                                                          .0
           -.1                                                        -.1                                                         -.1
           -.2                                                        -.2                                                         -.2
           -.3                                                        -.3                                                         -.3
              -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8    -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                        Time                                                       Time
                                                      Figure 1B
                               Bond Market News Announcement Responses, Expansion Sample

                                                                                 Nonfarm Payroll Employment
                          30-Year Treasury Bond                                               British Long Gilt                                                Euro Bobl
           .15                                                         .15                                                                 .15
           .10                                                         .10                                                                 .10
           .05                                                         .05                                                                 .05
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                                Response
           .00                                                         .00                                                                 .00
           -.05                                                        -.05                                                                -.05
           -.10                                                        -.10                                                                -.10
           -.15                                                        -.15                                                                -.15
           -.20                                                        -.20                                                                -.20
               -12   -8   -4    0      4    8     12   16                  -12    -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                  -12   -8   -4    0      4   8   12   16

                                    Time                                                              Time                                                          Time

                                                                                       Durable Goods Orders
                          30-Year Treasury Bond                                               British Long Gilt                                                Euro Bobl
           .15                                                         .15                                                                 .15
           .10                                                         .10                                                                 .10
           .05                                                         .05                                                                 .05
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                                Response
           .00                                                         .00                                                                 .00
           -.05                                                        -.05                                                                -.05
           -.10                                                        -.10                                                                -.10
           -.15                                                        -.15                                                                -.15
           -.20                                                        -.20                                                                -.20
               -12   -8   -4    0      4    8     12   16                  -12    -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                  -12   -8   -4    0      4   8   12   16

                                    Time                                                              Time                                                          Time

                                                                                       Producer Price Index
                          30-Year Treasury Bond                                               British Long Gilt                                                Euro Bobl
           .15                                                         .15                                                                 .15
           .10                                                         .10                                                                 .10
           .05                                                         .05                                                                 .05
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                                Response




           .00                                                         .00                                                                 .00
           -.05                                                        -.05                                                                -.05
           -.10                                                        -.10                                                                -.10
           -.15                                                        -.15                                                                -.15
           -.20                                                        -.20                                                                -.20
               -12   -8   -4    0      4    8     12   16                  -12    -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                  -12   -8   -4    0      4   8   12   16

                                    Time                                                              Time                                                          Time

                                                                                 Initial Unemployment Claims
                          30-Year Treasury Bond                                               British Long Gilt                                                Euro Bobl
           .15                                                         .15                                                                 .15
           .10                                                         .10                                                                 .10
           .05                                                         .05                                                                 .05
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                                Response




           .00                                                         .00                                                                 .00
           -.05                                                        -.05                                                                -.05
           -.10                                                        -.10                                                                -.10
           -.15                                                        -.15                                                                -.15
           -.20                                                        -.20                                                                -.20
               -12   -8   -4    0      4    8     12   16                  -12    -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                  -12   -8   -4    0      4   8   12   16

                                    Time                                                              Time                                                          Time
                                             Figure 1B (continued)
                    Foreign Exchange Market News Announcement Responses, Expansion Sample

                                                                           Nonfarm Payroll Employment
                                  $/BP                                                  $/Yen                                                   $/Euro

           .08                                                    .08                                                        .08

           .04                                                    .04                                                        .04
Response




                                                       Response




                                                                                                                  Response
           .00                                                    .00                                                        .00

           -.04                                                   -.04                                                       -.04

           -.08                                                   -.08                                                       -.08

              -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16                 -12    -8     -4   0      4   8    12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                      Time                                                    Time
                                                                                 Durable Goods Orders
                                  $/BP                                                  $/Yen                                                   $/Euro

           .08                                                    .08                                                        .08

           .04                                                    .04                                                        .04
Response




                                                       Response




                                                                                                                  Response
           .00                                                    .00                                                        .00

           -.04                                                   -.04                                                       -.04

           -.08                                                   -.08                                                       -.08

              -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16                 -12    -8     -4   0      4   8    12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                      Time                                                    Time

                                                                                 Producer Price Index
                                  $/BP                                                  $/Yen                                                   $/Euro

           .08                                                    .08                                                        .08

           .04                                                    .04                                                        .04
Response




                                                       Response




                                                                                                                  Response




           .00                                                    .00                                                        .00

           -.04                                                   -.04                                                       -.04

           -.08                                                   -.08                                                       -.08

              -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16                 -12    -8     -4   0      4   8    12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                      Time                                                    Time

                                                                           Initial Unemployment Claims
                                  $/BP                                                  $/Yen                                                   $/Euro

           .08                                                    .08                                                        .08

           .04                                                    .04                                                        .04
Response




                                                       Response




                                                                                                                  Response




           .00                                                    .00                                                        .00

           -.04                                                   -.04                                                       -.04

           -.08                                                   -.08                                                       -.08

              -12   -8   -4   0      4   8   12   16                 -12    -8     -4   0      4   8    12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                      Time                                                    Time
                                                 Figure 1B (continued)
                              Stock Market News Announcement Responses, Expansion Sample

                                                                               Nonfarm Payroll Employment
                              S&P 500                                                      FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
           .3                                                         .3                                                           .3

           .2                                                         .2                                                           .2

           .1                                                         .1                                                           .1
Response




                                                           Response




                                                                                                                        Response
           .0                                                         .0                                                           .0

           -.1                                                        -.1                                                          -.1

           -.2                                                        -.2                                                          -.2

           -.3                                                        -.3                                                          -.3
              -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                         Time                                                       Time

                                                                                    Durable Goods Orders
                              S&P 500                                                      FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
           .3                                                         .3                                                           .3

           .2                                                         .2                                                           .2

           .1                                                         .1                                                           .1
Response




                                                           Response




                                                                                                                        Response
           .0                                                         .0                                                           .0

           -.1                                                        -.1                                                          -.1

           -.2                                                        -.2                                                          -.2

           -.3                                                        -.3                                                          -.3
              -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                         Time                                                       Time

                                                                                     Producer Price Index
                              S&P 500                                                      FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
           .3                                                         .3                                                           .3

           .2                                                         .2                                                           .2

           .1                                                         .1                                                           .1
Response




                                                           Response




                                                                                                                        Response




           .0                                                         .0                                                           .0

           -.1                                                        -.1                                                          -.1

           -.2                                                        -.2                                                          -.2

           -.3                                                        -.3                                                          -.3
              -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                         Time                                                       Time

                                                                               Initial Unemployment Claims
                              S&P 500                                                      FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
           .3                                                         .3                                                           .3

           .2                                                         .2                                                           .2

           .1                                                         .1                                                           .1
Response




                                                           Response




                                                                                                                        Response




           .0                                                         .0                                                           .0

           -.1                                                        -.1                                                          -.1

           -.2                                                        -.2                                                          -.2

           -.3                                                        -.3                                                          -.3
              -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                  Time                                                         Time                                                       Time
                                                      Figure 1C
                               Bond Market News Announcement Responses, Recession Sample

                                                                                 Nonfarm Payroll Employment
                         30-Year Treasury Bond                                              British Long Gilt                                               Euro Bobl
           .2                                                          .2                                                                .2

           .1                                                          .1                                                                .1

           .0                                                          .0                                                                .0
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                              Response
           -.1                                                         -.1                                                               -.1

           -.2                                                         -.2                                                               -.2

           -.3                                                         -.3                                                               -.3
              -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                             Time                                                         Time

                                                                                     Durable Goods Orders
                         30-Year Treasury Bond                                              British Long Gilt                                               Euro Bobl
           .2                                                          .2                                                                .2

           .1                                                          .1                                                                .1

           .0                                                          .0                                                                .0
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                              Response
           -.1                                                         -.1                                                               -.1

           -.2                                                         -.2                                                               -.2

           -.3                                                         -.3                                                               -.3
              -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                             Time                                                         Time

                                                                                     Producer Price Index
                         30-Year Treasury Bond                                              British Long Gilt                                               Euro Bobl
           .2                                                          .2                                                                .2

           .1                                                          .1                                                                .1

           .0                                                          .0                                                                .0
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                              Response




           -.1                                                         -.1                                                               -.1

           -.2                                                         -.2                                                               -.2

           -.3                                                         -.3                                                               -.3
              -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                             Time                                                         Time

                                                                                Initial Unemployment Claims
                         30-Year Treasury Bond                                              British Long Gilt                                               Euro Bobl
           .2                                                          .2                                                                .2

           .1                                                          .1                                                                .1

           .0                                                          .0                                                                .0
Response




                                                            Response




                                                                                                                              Response




           -.1                                                         -.1                                                               -.1

           -.2                                                         -.2                                                               -.2

           -.3                                                         -.3                                                               -.3
              -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8     -4       0          4    8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4    0          4   8   12   16

                                   Time                                                             Time                                                         Time
                                             Figure 1C (continued)
                    Foreign Exchange Market News Announcement Responses, Recession Sample

                                                                             Nonfarm Payroll Employment
                                 $/BP                                                    $/Yen                                                     $/Euro

           .1                                                        .1                                                          .1


           .0                                                        .0                                                          .0
Response




                                                          Response




                                                                                                                      Response
           -.1                                                       -.1                                                         -.1


           -.2                                                       -.2                                                         -.2

             -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                -12   -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                 Time                                                        Time                                                      Time

                                                                                  Durable Goods Orders
                                 $/BP                                                    $/Yen                                                     $/Euro


           .1                                                        .1                                                          .1


           .0                                                        .0                                                          .0
Response




                                                          Response




                                                                                                                      Response
           -.1                                                       -.1                                                         -.1


           -.2                                                       -.2                                                         -.2

             -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                -12   -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                 Time                                                        Time                                                      Time

                                                                                  Producer Price Index
                                 $/BP                                                    $/Yen                                                     $/Euro


           .1                                                        .1                                                          .1


           .0                                                        .0                                                          .0
Response




                                                          Response




                                                                                                                      Response




           -.1                                                       -.1                                                         -.1


           -.2                                                       -.2                                                         -.2

             -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                -12   -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                 Time                                                        Time                                                      Time

                                                                             Initial Unemployment Claims
                                 $/BP                                                    $/Yen                                                     $/Euro


           .1                                                        .1                                                          .1


           .0                                                        .0                                                          .0
Response




                                                          Response




                                                                                                                      Response




           -.1                                                       -.1                                                         -.1


           -.2                                                       -.2                                                         -.2

             -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                -12   -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                 Time                                                        Time                                                      Time
                                                          Figure 1C (continued)
                                       Stock Market News Announcement Responses, Recession Sample

                                                                                        Nonfarm Payroll Employment
                                       S&P 500                                                        FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
                    .4                                                         .4                                                             .4
                    .3                                                         .3                                                             .3
                    .2                                                         .2                                                             .2
         Response




                                                                    Response




                                                                                                                                   Response
                    .1                                                         .1                                                             .1
                    .0                                                         .0                                                             .0
                    -.1                                                        -.1                                                            -.1
                    -.2                                                        -.2                                                            -.2
                    -.3                                                        -.3                                                            -.3
                       -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12     -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                           Time                                                           Time                                                       Time

                                                                                               Durable Goods Orders
                                       S&P 500                                                        FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
                    .4                                                         .4                                                             .4
                    .3                                                         .3                                                             .3
                    .2                                                         .2                                                             .2
         Response




                                                                    Response




                                                                                                                                   Response
                    .1                                                         .1                                                             .1
                    .0                                                         .0                                                             .0
                    -.1                                                        -.1                                                            -.1
                    -.2                                                        -.2                                                            -.2
                    -.3                                                        -.3                                                            -.3
                       -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12     -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                           Time                                                           Time                                                       Time

                                                                                                Producer Price Index
                                       S&P 500                                                        FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
                    .4                                                         .4                                                             .4
                    .3                                                         .3                                                             .3
                    .2                                                         .2                                                             .2
         Response




                                                                    Response




                                                                                                                                   Response




                    .1                                                         .1                                                             .1
                    .0                                                         .0                                                             .0
                    -.1                                                        -.1                                                            -.1
                    -.2                                                        -.2                                                            -.2
                    -.3                                                        -.3                                                            -.3
                       -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12     -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                           Time                                                           Time                                                       Time

                                                                                        Initial Unemployment Claims
                                       S&P 500                                                        FTSE 100                                               DJ Euro Stoxx 50
                    .4                                                         .4                                                             .4
                    .3                                                         .3                                                             .3
                    .2                                                         .2                                                             .2
         Response




                                                                    Response




                                                                                                                                   Response




                    .1                                                         .1                                                             .1
                    .0                                                         .0                                                             .0
                    -.1                                                        -.1                                                            -.1
                    -.2                                                        -.2                                                            -.2
                    -.3                                                        -.3                                                            -.3
                       -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12     -8     -4   0          4   8   12   16                 -12   -8   -4   0          4   8   12   16

                                           Time                                                           Time                                                       Time




Notes to Figures 1A, 1B and 1C: We graph the news announcement response coefficients from the weighted least squares estimation
of equation (4.2), corresponding to the responses at the announcement time, and five-, ten-, and fifteen-minutes after the
announcement. We also show two heteroskedasticity consistent standard error bands under the null hypothesis of a zero response.
The common full sample goes from July 1, 1998 through December 31, 2002. The expansion sample spans July 1, 1998 to February
28, 2001. The recession sample covers the period from March 1, 2001 to December 31, 2002.
                                                                  Figure 2A
                                                          Daily Realized Correlations
                                                    on Nonfarm Payroll Announcement Days

                                                                US Stock-Bond Realized Correlation

                                                     0.8

                                                     0.4
                                      Correlation
                                                     0.0

                                                     -0.4

                                                     -0.8

                                                            1992   1994    1996    1998    2000      2002

                                                                               Year
                                                              British Stock-Bond Realized Correlation

                                                     0.8

                                                     0.4
                                      Correlation




                                                     0.0

                                                     -0.4

                                                     -0.8

                                                            1992   1994    1996    1998    2000      2002

                                                                               Year
                                                              German Stock-Bond Realized Correlation

                                                     0.8

                                                     0.4
                                      Correlation




                                                     0.0

                                                     -0.4

                                                     -0.8

                                                            1992   1994    1996    1998    2000      2002

                                                                               Year



Notes to Figure 2A: We graph the daily U.S., British and German stock-bond realized correlations, as detailed in the main text, for
Nonfarm Payroll announcement days from January 1, 1992 through December 31, 2002. The shaded area corresponds to the U.S.
recession sample from March 1, 2001 to December 31, 2002.
                                                                   Figure 2B
                                                          Monthly Realized Correlations

                                                              US Stock-Bond Realized Correlation

                                                   0.8

                                                   0.4

                                     Correlation   0.0

                                                   -0.4

                                                   -0.8

                                                          1992   1994   1996    1998    2000    2002

                                                                             Year
                                                            British Stock-Bond Realized Correlation

                                                   0.8

                                                   0.4
                                     Correlation




                                                   0.0

                                                   -0.4

                                                   -0.8

                                                          1992   1994   1996    1998    2000    2002

                                                                             Year
                                                            German Stock-Bond Realized Correlation

                                                   0.8

                                                   0.4
                                     Correlation




                                                   0.0

                                                   -0.4

                                                   -0.8

                                                          1992   1994   1996    1998    2000    2002

                                                                             Year


Notes to Figure 2B: We graph the monthly U.S., British and German stock-bond realized correlations, as detailed in the main
text, from January 1, 1992 through December 31, 2002. The shaded area corresponds to the U.S. recession sample from March
1, 2001 to December 31, 2002.
