                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM INCIDENCE
                               OF ENVIRONMENTAL TAXES

                                             Don Fullerton
                                             Garth Heutel

                                         Working Paper 11311
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11311


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




We are grateful for funding from the AERE, the University of Texas, the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship Program, and Japan’s Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI). For
helpful suggestions, we thank John List, Gib Metcalf, Ian Parry, Kerry Smith, Chris Timmins, Rob Williams,
and seminar participants at the University of Texas at Austin, the 2004 AERE Workshop in Estes Park, CO,
and Camp Resources XII in Wilmington, NC. This paper is part of the NBER’s research program in Public
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the AERE, UT, the NSF, ESRI,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Don Fullerton and Garth Heutel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The General Equilibrium Incidence of Environmental Taxes
Don Fullerton and Garth Heutel
NBER Working Paper No. 11311
May 2005
JEL No. H23, Q52

                                             ABSTRACT

We study the distributional effects of a pollution tax in general equilibrium, with general forms of

substitution where pollution might be a relative complement or substitute for labor or for capital in

production. We find closed form solutions for pollution, output prices, and factor prices. Various

special cases help clarify the impact of differential factor intensities, substitution effects, and output

effects. Intuitively, the pollution tax might place disproportionate burdens on capital if the polluting

sector is capital intensive, or if labor is a better substitute for pollution than is capital; however,

conditions are found where these intuitive results do not hold. We show exact conditions for the

wage to rise relative to the capital return. Plausible values are then assigned to all the parameters,

and we find that variations over the possible range of factor intensities have less impact than

variations over the possible range of elasticities.

Don Fullerton
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
dfullert@eco.utexas.edu

Garth Heutel
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
heutel@eco.utexas.edu
        Policy makers need to know the distributional effects of environmental taxes.
Previous studies that find environmental taxes to be regressive have focused on the uses
side of income, that is, how low-income consumers use a relatively high fraction of their
income to buy gasoline, electricity, and other products that involve burning fossil fuel.
Yet these studies ignore the sources side of income. Environmental policies can have
important effects on firms’ demands for capital and labor inputs, which can impact the
returns to owners of capital and labor in a general equilibrium setting.
        The literature in public economics contains much work on general equilibrium tax
incidence, but the literature on environmental taxation has focused mostly on efficiency
effects. As reviewed below, neither literature yet has studied the general equilibrium
incidence of a pollution tax in a model with general forms of substitution. Environmental
tax incidence has been studied only in partial equilibrium models, in computational
general equilibrium (CGE) models, or in analytical general equilibrium models with
limited forms of substitution. This paper provides a theoretical general equilibrium
model of the incidence of an environmental tax that allows for differential factor
intensities and fully general forms of substitution among inputs of labor, capital, and
pollution. We show incidence on the sources side as well as the uses side.
        Many empirical studies provide partial equilibrium analyses of the incidence of an
environmental tax. For example, Robison (1985) examines the distribution of the costs
of pollution abatement from 1973-1977 and finds regressive burdens equal to 1.09% of
the income of the lowest income class and only 0.22% of income for the highest income
class. Using CGE models, Mayeres (1998) and Metcalf (1999) look at various ways to
return the revenue from an environmental tax, showing that these distributional effects
can more than offset the incidence of the environmental tax itself. Morgenstern et al
(2002) discuss four CGE studies that examine various distributional effects of carbon
policy, but none derive analytical results and none show effects on factor prices.1
        Previous theoretical work on environmental tax incidence by Rapanos (1992,
1995) models pollution in one sector as a negative externality that affects production in
the other sector. The model is somewhat restrictive in two respects. First, the externality
has a specific effect on production in the other sector, which affects incidence. Second,
Rapanos assumes that that pollution bears a fixed relation to output (or to capital input) of
the polluting sector, so a tax on pollution has the same incidence as a tax on output (or on
capital input). In contrast, this paper models pollution as a variable input to the dirty
sector’s production function. In response to any price change, the producer can change
the mix of labor, capital, and pollution. In particular, pollution can be a relative
complement or substitute for labor or capital, so that a pollution tax can change the
relative demands for those other two factors and affect their relative returns.
        Bovenberg and Goulder (1997) examine the efficiency costs of a revenue-neutral
environmental tax swap and also solve for the change in the wage rate. Their analytical
model considers variable pollution, but the production function has a single elasticity of
substitution among the three inputs (capital, labor, and pollution). This formulation does
not allow for relative complementarity of inputs in production, a possibility that drives

1
  Also, West and Williams (2002) use micro data to model demand equations and empirically estimate the
distribution of burdens of environmental policy. Parry (2004) examines the distribution of the scarcity
rents created by grandfathered emissions permits. In a model with unemployment, Wagner (2005) shows
that an emissions tax can help labor to the extent that it stimulates employment in the abatement sector.
                                                    -2-


significant results below. 2 Chua (2003) presents a model where pollution is a scalar
multiple of output, but it can be lowered by paying an abatement sector that also uses
labor and capital. Because the effect on factor prices depends on use of factors in the
abatement sector, this model effectively makes some restrictions on the ways that firms
can substitute out of pollution and into other factors such as labor and capital.3
        Our model does not fix pollution as a scalar multiple of output, nor of capital, nor
does it posit a third sector for abatement. Rather, pollution is modeled as an input along
with capital and labor. Minimal restrictions are placed on that production function, so
that the model is free to consider that any pair of inputs may be complements or
substitutes. We then solve the model in the style of Harberger (1962) to find closed form
solutions for the general equilibrium responses to a change in the tax on pollution, in the
presence of other taxes. The model allows for analyses of a wide variety of policies.
        Some of the general results are complex and ambiguous, so special cases are used
to provide intuition. In the case where the two sectors have equal capital-labor ratios, for
example, an increase in the pollution tax unambiguously raises the price of the dirty good
relative to the clean good. We then show specific conditions for the pollution tax to raise
or lower the equilibrium wage-rental ratio. Most of these results are intuitive, but some
are surprising. One might think that the pollution tax raises the relative return of the
factor that is the better substitute for pollution, but a surprising result is that the opposite
holds if labor and capital are highly complementary. Then the better substitute for
pollution bears proportionally more of the burden of the pollution tax.
         Another special case allows for differential factor intensities but abstracts from
differential substitutability for pollution. Normally the pollution tax then lowers the
relative return of the factor that is intensively used in the dirty sector, but a second
surprising result is that the opposite holds if the dirty sector can substitute among its
inputs more easily than consumers can substitute between outputs. Then the factor that is
intensively used in the dirty sector bears proportionately less of the burden of the
pollution tax. A final unusual result is that even though the tax withdraws resources from
the private economy, one of the factors could actually gain in real terms. We provide
explanations for these counterintuitive results.
        The next section presents the model and uses it to derive a system of equations.
Then the second section offers a general solution and simplifies it in several cases to
interpret the results. While the main contributions here are the propositions about
incidence, the third section proceeds to insert plausible values for parameters and to
calculate examples of the incidence of environmental policy. It shows that varying the
factor intensities over their plausible range has less impact on incidence than varying
substitution elasticities over their plausible range. The fourth section thus concludes that
it is important next to estimate substitution elasticities. This concluding section also

2
  DeMooij and Bovenberg (1998) allow for complementarity of inputs, and they derive the change in the
wage rate, but their model is primarily used to examine the efficiency of revenue-neutral tax swaps. To the
extent that they examine incidence, their results are somewhat limited by the fact that capital either has an
exogenous price or is supplied inelastically in the polluting industry.
3
  McAusland (2003) develops a theoretical model to examine the role of inequality in endogenous
environmental policy choice, and Aidt (1998) explores how heterogeneous agents may influence
environmental policy through political processes. While both models are concerned with inequality,
neither is strictly an examination of the incidence of environmental policy. Likewise, Bovenberg, Goulder
and Gurney (2005) consider the efficiency costs of environmental taxation under a distributional constraint.
                                                     -3-


notes caveats. Indeed, our model could be extended in many of the same ways that the
original Harberger (1962) model was extended over the following decades.4
I. Model
        The simple model developed here is used to solve for all changes in prices and
quantities that result from an exogenous change in the pollution tax. No government
revenue neutrality is imposed, however, so an increase in one tax need not be offset by a
decrease in another tax. Instead, as in Harberger (1962) and others, the government is
assumed to use the increased revenue to purchase the two private goods in the same
proportion as do households. Thus, the transfer from the private sector to the public
sector has no effect on relative demands or on prices. We consider a competitive two-
sector economy using two factors of production, capital and labor. Both factors are
mobile and can be used by either sector. A third variable input is pollution, Z, necessary
to produce one of the outputs. The constant returns to scale production functions are:
                                              X = X(KX,LX)
                                             Y= Y(KY,LY,Z),
where X is the "clean" good, Y is the "dirty" good, KX and KY are the capital inputs in
each sector, and LX and LY are the labor inputs in each sector. 5 The resource
constraints are:
                                              K X + KY = K ,

                                              L X + LY = L ,
where K and L are the fixed total amounts of capital and labor in the economy.
Totally differentiating these two constraints yields:
                                          Kˆ X λ KX + Kˆ Y λ KY = 0 ,                                (1)

                                          Lˆ X λ LX + LˆY λ LY = 0 .                                 (2)

where a hat denotes a proportional change ( Kˆ X ≡ dK X / K X ) and ij denotes sector j’s
share of factor i (e.g. λKX ≡ K X / K ). Notice that Z has no equivalent resource
constraint. The amount of Z used by the dirty sector depends only on that sector’s
decision, with no upper limit. To ensure finite use of pollution in the initial equilibrium,
we start with a pre-existing positive tax on pollution.6
        Producers of X can substitute between labor and capital in response to changes in
the gross-of-tax factor prices they face, pL and pK, according to their elasticity of
substitution in production X. The definition of X is differentiated and rearranged to
obtain the firm’s response to a change in prices, Kˆ X − Lˆ X = σ X ( pˆ L − pˆ K ) , where X is
defined to be positive. The firm’s cost of capital can be written as pK = r(1+ K), where

4
    See McLure (1975) and Fullerton and Metcalf (2002) for summaries of these extensions.
5
 As is typical in environmental models, the second production function includes pollution as an input.
This is simply a rearrangement of a production function where both Y and Z are functions of KY and LY.
6
 This problem could also be solved by introducing a private cost of pollution, separate from the tax (see
Fullerton and Metcalf, 2001). Here, we merely assume that the initial tax is positive and hence examine a
change in the pollution tax rate rather than the introduction of a pollution tax.
                                                        -4-


r is the net return to capital and K is the ad valorem rate of tax on capital. Similarly,
pL = w(1+ L), where w is the net wage and L is the labor tax. Differentiating these
equations in the same manner yields pˆ K = rˆ + τˆK and pˆ L = wˆ + τˆL , where all variables
                                              dτ K                dτ L
are defined analogously, except that τˆK ≡           and τˆL ≡           . Then substitution
                                             1+τ K               1+τ L
into the X expression yields the production decision:
                                     Kˆ X − Lˆ X = σ X ( wˆ + τˆL − rˆ − τˆK ) .                               (3)
           The choice of inputs in sector Y is more complicated, since it has three inputs.
First, note that firms face no market price for pollution except for a tax, so pZ = Z (and
 pˆ Z = τˆZ , where τˆZ = dτ Z / τ Z ). This tax per unit of pollution is a specific tax rather
than an ad valorem tax. We then follow Mieszkowski (1972) in modeling this choice of
inputs. As shown in the Appendix, the resulting equations are:
       Kˆ Y − Zˆ = θ YK (e KK − e ZK )(rˆ + τˆK ) + θ YL (e KL − e ZL )( wˆ + τˆL ) + θ YZ (e KZ − eZZ )τˆZ    (4)

       LˆY − Zˆ = θ YK (e LK − eZK )(rˆ + τˆK ) + θ YL (e LL − e ZL )( wˆ + τˆL ) + θ YZ (e LZ − e ZZ )τˆZ ,   (5)
where Yj is the share of factor j in sector Y’s production, and eij is the Allen elasticity
of substitution between inputs i and j (Allen 1938). This elasticity is positive when the
two inputs are substitutes and is negative when they are complements. Note that eij = eji,
that eii < 0, and that at least two of the three cross-price elasticities must be positive.
        In a sense, we could avoid saying that pollution is an “input” to the production
function Y=Y(KY, LY, Z) and instead just specify equations (4)-(5). In that case, the
Allen elasticities of substitution are a direct way to model the choices of firms. A higher
tax on pollution leads firms to pollute less (eZZ < 0), holding output constant, and it may
raise or lower use of labor or capital in ways that depend on the signs and magnitudes of
eLZ and eKZ. The point is just that these reactions affect the incidence of the tax.
        The Appendix also shows how assumptions of perfect competition and constant
returns to scale are used to derive the following two equations:
                           pˆ X + Xˆ = θ XK (rˆ + τˆK + Kˆ X ) + θ XL ( wˆ +τˆ L+ Lˆ X ) ,                     (6)

                  pˆ Y + Yˆ = θ YK (rˆ + τˆK + Kˆ Y ) + θ YL ( wˆ +τˆ L+ LˆY ) + θ YZ ( Zˆ + τˆZ ) ,           (7)
                                              r (1 + τ K ) K X
where pX and pY are output prices, θ XK ≡                      is the share of sales revenue of
                                                   pX X
sector X that is paid to capital, and other shares are defined similarly ( XL, YK, and
                       τZZ
 YL). Note that θ YZ ≡       is the share of revenue of sector Y that is paid for pollution,
                       pY Y
through taxes. Also note that XK + XL = 1 and YK + YL + YZ = 1.
       Totally differentiate each sector’s production function and substitute in the
conditions from the perfect competition assumption shown in the Appendix to yield:
                                           Xˆ = θ XK Kˆ X + θ XL Lˆ X .                                        (8)

                                       Yˆ = θ YK Kˆ Y + θ YL LˆY + θ YZ Zˆ .                                   (9)
                                                             -5-


Finally, consumer preferences for the two goods can be modeled using u, the elasticity
of substitution between goods X and Y in utility.7 Differentiate the definition of u to
get the equation for consumer demand response to a change in prices:
                                          Xˆ − Yˆ = σ u ( pˆ Y + τˆY − pˆ X − τˆ X ) ,                           (10)
                  dτ X
where τˆ X ≡           is the change in the tax on X (and similarly for                       Y).
                 1+τ X

              Equations (1) – (10) are ten equations in eleven unknowns ( Kˆ X , Kˆ Y , Lˆ X , LˆY ,
 wˆ , rˆ, pˆ X , Xˆ , pˆ Y , Yˆ , Zˆ ). Good X is chosen as numeraire, so pˆ X = 0 , and this system of
ten equations provides solutions to all ten unknown endogenous changes as functions of
parameters and of an exogenous change in any of the tax rates.8 This paper focuses on
the effects of an exogenous increase in the pollution tax (τˆZ >0).
        Our primary purpose is to solve for incidence results, that is, the effects on output
prices and factor prices. Thus, to make the solution more manageable, we omit equations
for the proportional changes in quantities Kˆ X , Kˆ Y , Lˆ X , LˆY , Xˆ , and Yˆ . We keep the
proportional change in pollution, Ẑ , since that result is of interest as well, though it is a
quantity and not a price.
II. Results and Interpretations
      As just mentioned, we solve for effects of an increase in the pollution tax rate, Z ,
where τˆ X = τˆY = τˆK = τˆL = 0 .9 As shown in the Appendix, the general solutions are:10
              (θ YLθ XK − θ YK θ XL )θ YZ
     pˆ Y =                               [ A(eZZ − e KZ ) − B (eZZ − e LZ ) + (γ K − γ L )σ u ]τˆZ + θ YZ τˆZ
                         D
                                                                                                         …(11a)
                            θ XK θ YZ
                     wˆ =               [ A(eZZ − e KZ ) − B (e ZZ − e LZ ) + (γ K − γ L )σ u ]τˆZ ,        (11b)
                                D
                            θ XLθ YZ
                     rˆ =               [ A(e KZ − eZZ ) − B (e LZ − e ZZ ) − (γ K − γ L )σ u ]τˆZ ,         (11c)
                               D

7
 This formulation does not preclude household disutility from pollution. Rather, the utility function is
assumed to be separable in pollution (or environmental quality). See Carbone and Smith (2004) for an
analysis of the impact of non-separability of air quality and leisure in utility.
8
  Harberger (1962) chose w as numeraire and interpreted the expression for dr as the change in the return
to capital relative to labor. In this model, we provide expressions for both ŵ and r̂ . These results can be
compared to those of Harberger by considering the value of rˆ − wˆ .
9
  All of the results have the same magnitude and opposite sign if the pollution tax is reduced. The other
taxes do not change, but they are still in the model since firms and consumers in the initial equilibrium are
responding to net-of-tax prices. If the levels of those tax rates appear in the solution for a price change, it
means that the effect of τZ on that price depends on the level of existing tax rates. The model here could
be solved in a way that allows these other taxes to change. Thus it could be used with a revenue-neutrality
constraint, so that an increase in the pollution tax is offset by a decrease in some other tax.
10
  If solely in terms of exogenous parameters, the expression for Ẑ would be long. The three preceding
equations can be substituted into the fourth to get that closed-form solution, as done in special cases below.
                                                      -6-



                               1
                       Zˆ = − [θ YK ( β K (e KK − eZK ) + β L (e LK − eZK ) + σ u )rˆ
                              C
                            + θ YL ( β K (e KL − e ZL ) + β L (e LL − eZL ) + σ u ) wˆ                   (11d)
                          + θ YZ ( β K (e KZ − e ZZ ) + β L (e LZ − eZZ ) + σ u )τˆZ ]
           λ KY K Y               λ     L
where γ K ≡     =      and γ L ≡ LY = Y . Also, for convenience, this solution
           λ KX K X               λ LX L X
combines notation into definitions where β K ≡ θ XK γ K + θ YK , β L ≡ θ XL γ L + θ YL , A ≡
 L K + K( L+ YZ), B ≡ K L + L( K+ YZ), and C ≡ K+ L+ YZ . It is readily apparent
that A>0, B>0, and C>0. The denominator is D ≡ C X + A[ XK YL(eKL-eLZ) -
 XL YK(eKK-eKZ)] - B[ XK YL(eLL-eLZ) - XL YK(eKL-eKZ)] - ( K- L) u( XK YL- XL YK).

        While the interpretation of this general solution is limited by its complexity, some
basic effects can be identified. For example, the last term in equation (11b) or (11c) is
the “output effect” of Mieszkowski (1967): a tax on emissions is a tax only in the dirty
sector and therefore reduces output (in a way that depends on consumer demand via u).
Less output means less demand for all inputs, but particularly the input used intensively
in that sector. The term ( K – L) is positive when the dirty sector is capital-intensive.
Then, assuming D>0, the output effect places relatively more burden on capital.
Whether this intuitive results holds depends on the sign of the denominator D, however,
and this complicated expression cannot be signed in this general solution.
        Furthermore, the first two terms in equation (11b) or (11c) represent “substitution
effects”. As pollution become more costly, the dirty sector seeks to adjust its demand for
all three inputs. How it does so is determined by the Allen elastiticies of substitution,
which figure prominently in those first two terms. The constants A and B also come
into play, weighing the impact of the elasticities on the incidence results. These constants
can be signed, but their magnitudes are complicated functions of the factor share
parameters, making an interpretation difficult from these general solutions alone.
        Thus, while several effects are at work, their combination and interactions are
quite difficult to analyze in these equations. We therefore isolate each effect by assuming
away the other effects in a series of special cases. Although A>0, B>0, and C>0, the
denominator D cannot be signed, and so nothing definitive can be said yet about the
effect of the pollution tax on the output price (11a), factor prices (11b,c), or even on the
amount of pollution (11d). In fact, an increase in the pollution tax might increase
pollution.11 Thus the following special cases are also useful to seek definitive results.
       Before proceeding, consider implications for who bears the burden of this tax. On
the sources side, the interpretation of wˆ = rˆ = 0 is not that factors bear no burden, but


11
    DeMooij and Bovenberg (1998) obtain the same perverse result. In our model, it is possible with certain
extreme parameter values. For an example that satisfies all of the restrictions from Allen (1938), suppose
 KX = 0.2, LX = 0.1,    XK = 0.9, YK = 0.72,    YZ = 0.1, eKL = 2, eKZ = -1, eLZ = 5, eZZ = -1.8, and       u =
  X  = 1.  Capital and pollution  are complements,   while  labor and  pollution are  strong  substitutes.  The
increase in pZ has a “direct effect” that reduces pollution (since eZZ = -1.8) but a larger indirect effect that
raises pollution. The 10% higher pZ decreases demand for capital (eKZ = -1) and decreases its return ( r̂ =
-.0025). This reduction in r serves to increase demand for labor (eKL = 2). This labor is hard to get from
the other sector X, which is capital-intensive and small, so w rises steeply ( ŵ =.0223). This big increase
in w has a big positive effect on emissions (eZL = 5). The net result is 0.197% more emissions.
                                                                -7-


that their burdens are in proportion to their shares of national income (both w and r fall
in real terms when pX is numeraire and pY rises). Thus, any ŵ >0 just means that
labor’s burden is less than its share of income. For labor to gain, the wage must rise by
more than the overall price index p ≡ pX + (1 – )pY , where             is the share of total
expenditure on X. If wˆ = pˆ , then labor bears no burden, and all of the burden must be on
capital. And this discussion presumes that both factors spend similarly on the two goods;
on the uses side, if pY rises, the pollution tax places more burden on anybody who
spends more than the average fraction of their income on the polluting good.
Case 1: Equal Factor Intensities
        First, consider the case where both industries have the same factor intensities, that
is, both are equally capital (and labor) intensive. This amounts to setting L and K
equal to each other. Let their common value be , and note that this condition implies
that LY/LX = KY/KX. In this case, the solution to the system of equations is:
                                                          pˆ Y = θ YZ τˆZ                                             (12a)
                                                     − θ XK θ YZ γ (e KZ − e LZ )
                                             wˆ =                                 τˆZ                                 (12b)
                                                                  D1
                                                     θ XLθ YZ γ (e KZ − e LZ )
                                              rˆ =                               τˆZ                                  (12c)
                                                                 D1
                                   − σ uθ YZ − θ YZ ( β K (e KZ − e ZZ ) + β L (e LZ − eZZ ))
                            Zˆ =                                                                τˆZ
                                                              γ +1
    [θ XLθ YK ( β K (e KZ   − e KK ) + β L (e KZ − e KL ) + β K (e KL − e LZ ) + β L (e LL − e LZ ))]γθ YZ (e LZ − e KZ )
−                                                                                                                         τˆ Z
                                                          D1 (γ + 1)
                                                                                                                 …(12d)
where D1 ≡ σ X − θ XLθ YK γ (e KK − e KL ) − θ XK θ YL γ (e LL − e KL ) .
        One of the most striking observations from this solution is how the general
expression for p̂Y in (11a) reduces to such a simple expression in (12a). In this special
case, then, we can provide a definite sign:
Proposition 1A: In Case 1, pˆ Y > 0 . Proof: Since τˆZ > 0 , Equation (12a) implies p̂Y >0.
        Furthermore, the increase in the pollution tax affects this relative price only
through the share that pollution constitutes of output, YZ. The fact that equation (11a) of
the general solution is more complicated implies that the capital and labor intensities of
production also effect pY in the general case. Here, those effects have been assumed
away, and the uses side of the incidence of an environmental tax is clear: consumers of
the dirty good bear a cost of the tax increase.
        To interpret the incidence on the sources side, or the effect of a change in the
pollution tax on returns to inputs, we must know something about the sign of the
denominator D1. Note that it can be written as:
                    D1 = (σ X − θ XLθ YK γe KK − θ XK θ YL γe LL ) + γ (θ XLθ YK + θ XK θ YL )e KL .
                                                    -8-



                                           − σ X + θ XLθ YK γe KK + θ XK θ YL γe LL
Therefore, D1 > 0 if and only if e KL >                                             . Call this last
                                                 γ (θ XLθ YK + θ XK θ YL )
inequality “Condition 1”. The expression to the right of the inequality sign is strictly
negative, so eKL > 0 is sufficient but not necessary for Condition 1. Remember that eij
is positive whenever inputs i and j are substitutes, and negative for complements. To
make the denominator D1 > 0, it is not necessary that capital and labor are substitutes in
production of Y (eKL > 0), but only that they are not too complementary (Condition 1).
        With that condition, we can interpret the effect of a change in the pollution tax
rate on the returns to factors of production.
Proposition 1B: In Case 1, under Condition 1, wˆ > 0 and rˆ < 0 if and only if eLZ > eKZ.
Proof: Since D1 > 0 under Condition 1, Equations (12b) and (12c) imply this result.
        A special case of 1B is where labor and pollution are substitutes in sector Y,
while capital and pollution are complements (that is, eLZ > 0 and eKZ < 0). In this case,
the condition eLZ > eKZ of Proposition 1B holds, and Z raises the wage.12 It is not
necessary, however, for these terms to have opposite signs. Even if both capital and labor
are substitutes for pollution, the relative price of labor still rises from an increase in the
pollution tax as long as labor is a better substitute for pollution than is capital.
       It is also of interest and quite counterintuitive to note when the above proposition
does not hold. If the value of D1 is negative, then the results are exactly the opposite.
Proposition 1C: In Case 1, but where Condition 1 does not hold, wˆ > 0 and rˆ < 0 if and
only if eLZ < eKZ . Proof: D1 < 0, and Equations (12b) and (12c).
        Normally with eLZ < eKZ, we would say that capital is a better substitute for
pollution, so the pollution tax would tend to increase demand for capital and hence to
increase r. This effect is more than offset, however, when eLK is sufficiently negative
(Condition 1 does not hold). Capital and labor are complementary inputs, and the
increased demand for capital also leads to an increased demand for labor. With a
sufficiently high degree of complementarity, this effect dominates, and w increases
relative to r. While we would not necessarily expect this case to be common, it
demonstrates a perverse possibility: even when both sectors have equal factor intensities,
the better substitute for pollution can bear more of the burden of a tax on pollution.
Case 2: Equal Factor Intensities and eKZ = eLZ
       On the border between those two propositions, when capital and labor are equally
good substitutes for pollution, then neither bears a disproportionate burden of the tax. In
addition to K = L = , suppose that eLZ = eKZ, and call this Case 2.13



12
  Note that the change in the wage rate always has the opposite sign as the change in the rental rate. This
follows directly from the choice of X as numeraire and the zero-profit equation (6). This relationship need
not hold for other choices of numeraire. Only the relative change in the returns to capital and labor is of
interest here, and this value is independent of the choice of numeraire.
13
  For an even simpler model, one could also assume eKL = X = 0. These additional conditions are
sufficient to think of the clean inputs L and K in fixed proportions and therefore as a single composite
input. Sector X uses only this input with no ability to substitute. Sector Y has effectively only two inputs
between which it can substitute: one is pollution and the other is this clean input. The results with these
assumptions are identical to the results in Case 2, however, so we do not need these additional assumptions.
                                                        -9-



Proposition 2A: In Case 2, wˆ = 0 , rˆ = 0 , pˆ Y = θ YZ τˆZ , and
                                   − σ u − ( β K + β L )(e LZ − eZZ )
                              Zˆ =                                    θ YZ τˆZ .                     (13)
                                                 γ +1
Proof: Equations (12a-d), substituting in eKZ = eLZ.
        For factor prices, as in Case 1, equal factor intensities eliminates the output effect
of Mieszkowski (1967). The additional assumption of equal substitution elasticities in
Case 2 eliminates his substitution effect. Without either of these effects, the change in
the pollution tax has no effect on the relative prices of capital and labor. Then the effect
on the price of the dirty good is the same as in Case 1. More interesting in this case is
that we can finally sign the effect of a change in the pollution tax on pollution.
Proposition 2B: In Case 2, Zˆ < 0 . Proof: In equation (13), note that eZZ is negative,
but that all of the other parameters are positive.14
        The purpose of this example is to reduce the general model to the simple case
where the tax on pollution is said to have two effects that both reduce pollution. The
“substitution effect” is the second term in the numerator of (13), where τZ increases the
relative price of pollution, which reduces pollution per unit output. The “output effect” is
the first term in (13), where τZ increases the price of output, which reduces total
demand.15 Thus, pollution is definitely reduced by the imposition of the tax on pollution.
Somewhat surprisingly, this intuitive result cannot be proven in the more general case.
Case 3: Fixed Input Proportions (eij=0)
        By eliminating factor intensity differences, the special cases above concentrate on
the signs of input demand elasticities. Now we eliminate the differential effects of input
demand elasticities in order to concentrate on relative factor intensities, ( K – L). If this
value is positive, then industry Y is capital-intensive.
       In this narrow special case, the production of Y requires inputs in fixed
proportions. We then expect no substitution effect, but only the output effect arising
from the implicit tax on Y associated with an increase in the tax on pollution. This
absence of a substitution effect is precisely what materializes in the solution: 16
                                                       Cσ X θ YZ
                                              pˆ Y =             τˆZ                               (14a)
                                                         D3
                                             (γ K − γ L )θ XK θ YZ σ u
                                     wˆ =                              τˆZ                         (14b)
                                                       D3
                                            − (γ K − γ L )θ XLθ YZ σ u
                                     rˆ =                              τˆZ                         (14c)
                                                      D3

14
  In the more general case, eLZ could be positive or negative, but here where eLZ = eKZ, the fact that eZZ
must be negative implies that eLZ = eKZ must be positive.
15
  This terminology appears in pollution models. Everywhere else in this paper, we use Mieskowski'
                                                                                                s
(1967) terminology where output and substitution effects refer to effects on factor prices.
16
  The expression for Ẑ can be evaluated using the other three expressions, but it is not included here
because it does not prove illuminating.
                                                          -10-


where D3 = C X – ( K – L) u( XK YL – XL YK). It can be shown that ( K – L) and
( XK YL – XL YK) always have opposite sign, so D3 > 0. Just as in cases above, the price
of the dirty good relative to the clean good increases unambiguously in response to an
increase in the tax on pollution ( p̂Y >0) .
        More interesting is the effect on the relative return to labor and capital. The sign
of each of those two changes is based only on the relative factor intensities of the two
industries, K – L. We can write this conclusion as the following:
Proposition 3: In Case 3, if Y is capital-intensive, then ŵ > 0 and r̂ < 0. Proof:
Equations (14b,c), since D3 > 0, and Y being capital-intensive means K – L > 0.
        The interpretation is solely in terms of the output effect for sector Y. Because of
fixed input proportions (eij=0), a pollution tax increase is equivalent to a tax on output Y
and leads to decreased output of that good. Therefore, sector Y demands less labor and
less capital. If Y is capital-intensive, then the fall in demand for capital exceeds the fall
in demand for labor, and hence r falls relative to w. This simple case helps establish the
presumption for the more surprising result of the next section.
Case 4: Equal Elasticities of Factor Demand
       To abstract from differential input demand elasticities, it is not necessary to
suppose that all are zero. A less restrictive way to do this is to suppose that all of the
own-price Allen elasticities eii are equal to a negative constant a1, and that all of the
cross-price elasticities, eij for i j, are equal to a positive constant a2.17 Furthermore,
define      (a2 – a1 ) > 0. The solution to the system then is:
               θ YZ
      pˆ Y =          {θ YZ α (θ YK θ XL − θ YLθ XK )(γ K − γ L ) + Cσ X + α ( Aθ XLθ YK + Bθ YLθ XK )}τˆZ
               D4
                                                                                                       …(15a)
                                            (γ K − γ L )θ XK θ YZ (σ u − θ YZ α )
                                    wˆ =                                          τˆZ                        (15b)
                                                            D4
                                           − (γ K − γ L )θ XLθ YZ (σ u − θ YZ α )
                                    rˆ =                                          τˆZ                        (15c)
                                                            D4
where D4 = C X + (A XL YK + B YL XK) – ( K – L) u( XK YL – XL YK). In this case, the
denominator D4 is definitely positive. The second term is positive, since > 0, A > 0,
and B > 0. And the remaining terms are the same as in D3 > 0. Thus D4 > 0.
        As in the other special cases, the sign of the change in the price of the dirty good
relative to the price of the clean good is unambiguous.
Proposition 4A: In Case 4, pˆ Y > 0 . Proof: since ( YK XL – YL XK) has the same sign as
( K – L), and D4 > 0, the coefficient in equation (15a) is positive.
        We can now interpret the changes in factor prices in terms of an output effect and
substitution effect in the polluting industry. The sign of the change in factor prices in
(15b,c) is dependent on the signs of ( K – L) and ( u – YZ ). The former is positive

17
  Our Appendix discusses restrictions demonstrated by Allen (1938). Since eii must be negative, Case 4
assumes that the matrix of eij has a1 < 0 down the diagonal and a2 > 0 everywhere else.
                                              -11-


when Y is capital-intensive. In the latter,      is a measure of the overall ability of firms
in sector Y to substitute among inputs. It is equal to eij – eii, so a larger  means easier
substitution away from the more costly input (eii < 0) and into the other inputs (eij > 0).
Also, u represents the ability of consumers to substitute between X and Y. Thus, in
combination, the expression ( u – YZ ) represents whether it is relatively easier for
consumers to substitute between goods X and Y than for producers of Y to substitute
among their three inputs K, L, and Z. This interpretation leads to the following
proposition about an increase in the pollution tax Z:
Proposition 4B: In Case 4, when sector Y is capital intensive, then ŵ > 0 and r̂ < 0
whenever u > YZ . When sector Y is labor intensive, then ŵ < 0 and r̂ > 0 whenever
 u > YZ . Proof: equations (15b) and (15c), since D4 > 0.

        To explain, τˆZ >0 induces a substitution effect for producers of Y that increases
demand for K and could be expected to increase r. In addition, however, the output
effect raises the price of Y and reduces production. When Y is capital intensive, this
output effect reduces overall demand for capital and would tend to decrease r. These
two effects work in opposite directions. If u > YZ , then the output effect dominates
the substitution effect and less capital is demanded by sector Y. When sector Y is
capital-intensive, its reduced demand for capital outweighs sector X’s increased use, and
the economy-wide r/w falls. Hence the result in Proposition 4B.
        This proposition includes both the intuitive result above and the reverse
counterintuitive result: abstracting from different cross-price elasticities, capital intensity
in the dirty industry can lead to a disproportionately high burden of the pollution tax on
labor rather than on capital. Again, capital intensity of Y has two opposite effects. On
the one hand, it reduces r through the output effect, since consumers demand less of the
capital-intensive good. However, u < YZ means that effect is relatively small. The
larger substitution effect means that firms are trying to substitute out of Z and into both
K and L. The firms in Y want to increase both factors in proportion to their own use,
which is capital-intensive, but they must get that capital from X, which is labor intensive.
They can only get that extra capital by bidding up its price.
Case 5: All Equal Cross-Price Substitution Elasticities
         A final special case can help with intuition and relate our model to other models
in the literature. Here, we impose no constraints on factor intensities but suppose that all
cross-price substitution elasticities have the same value (σu = eKL = eKZ = eLZ = c, some
constant). We then have the following proposition:
Proposition 5A: In Case 5, regardless of factor intensities, then ŵ = 0,                 r̂ = 0,
pˆ Y = θ YZ τˆZ , and Zˆ = −cτˆZ . Proof: Substitute c into all of equations (11).
        It is interesting that these results are similar to those of case 2 even though case 2
employs different assumptions (equal factor intensities and eKZ = eLZ). Instead, this case
with equal substitution elastiticies is almost Cobb-Douglas, but a smaller elasticity c<1
implies that the tax τZ has less effect on pollution. It can be shown that Cobb-Douglas
production in the Y sector means, eKL = eKZ = eLZ = 1 and eii = ( Yi – 1)/ Yi for each
input i. Cobb-Douglas utility means σu = 1. Then, with these assumptions, we have:
Proposition 5B: If utility and production of Y are Cobb-Douglas, then ŵ = 0, r̂ = 0,
pˆ Y = θ YZ τˆZ , and Zˆ = −τˆZ . Proof: Substitute the elasticity values into all equations (11).
                                                     -12-


       This Cobb-Douglas case is worth stating explicitly because of its clear intuition.
Consumers spend a constant fraction of income on Y, and the firms in Y spend a
constant fraction of sales revenue to pay for pollution. Thus, total spending τZZ is
constant. Then any increase in the pollution tax implies the same percent fall in pollution
and no effect on any other factor of production. In fact, the price pY rises by the same
percentage that the quantity Y falls.
III. Numerical Analysis
        To explore the likely size of these effects, we now assign plausible values to
parameters. The goal here is not to calculate a point estimate for effects of a pollution tax
on pollution and factor prices, as this model is too simple for that purpose. Rather, the
goal is to put numerical magnitudes on the theoretical effects derived above, to see how
much these outcomes might be affected by changes in key parameters. We therefore vary
the factor intensities and substitution elasticities. Other parameters are chosen to approxi-
mate the current U.S. economy or to match estimates in the available literature. Though
many of these parameters have not been estimated in the form required here, other
structural models may be similar enough to use their parameter values in our model.
        For a definition of the “dirty” sector, we use the top thirteen polluting industries
from the EPA’s Toxic Release Inventory for 2002. 18 All other industries are deemed
“clean” for present purposes. We then use industry-level data on labor and capital
employed in the U.S., from Jorgenson and Stiroh (2000). 19 When we add labor and
capital across industries within each sector, we find that the 13 most polluting industries
represent about 20% of factor income. Therefore, our first “stylized fact” is that the clean
sector is 80% of income. Using the same data, we find that the capital share of factor
income is .3985 in the clean sector and .4105 in the dirty sector. 20 Thus the dirty sector
is slightly capital-intensive, as consistent with prior findings (e.g. Antweiler et al, 2001,
p. 879). The difference is quite small, however, and we wish to avoid the perception that
we are trying to calculate incidence with such precision. Appropriate rounding suggests
that the capital share in both sectors is about 40%, and so that is the second stylized fact
used here (as a starting point, before sensitivity analysis).21
        In the clean sector, the implication is that XK is 0.40, and XL is 0.60 (so K/L
is 2/3). In the dirty sector, however, these data on labor and capital do not help determine
the fraction of output attributed to the value of pollution ( YZ). This parameter is not in
available data, since most industries do not pay an explicit price for pollution. For most

18
   The top 13 polluters are those with at least 120,000,000 pounds of on- and off-site reported releases of all
chemicals monitored by the TRI (nearly 650 listed at http://www.epa.gov/tri/chemical/index.htm). These
industries are metal mining, electric utilities, chemicals, primary metals, food, paper, plastics,
transportation equipment, petroleum, fabricated metals, stone/clay/glass, lumber, and electrical equipment.
These data are publicly available at http://www.epa.gov/triexplorer/industry.htm.
19
     Available online at http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/jorgenson/data/35klem.html.
20
  These values are also consistent with other literature. The capital share is similar across studies, though
again no study considers clean industries only. Griliches and Mairesse (1998) conclude that the capital
share is approximately 0.4, and Blundell and Bond (1998) use GMM to yield an estimate of approximately
0.3, which rises to 0.45 when constant returns to scale is imposed.
21
   Other definitions of the dirty sector might yield more divergent factor intensities. If it includes only
utilities and chemicals, for example, then capital is 55% of factor income. Also, however, that dirty sector
is only 8% of the economy. In that case we found very small changes in w and r, and so those results are
not so interesting. A general equilibrium model is not necessary when the taxed sector is small.
                                                    -13-


pollutants in most industries, this value is implicit – a shadow value, or scarcity rent.
Therefore, somewhat arbitrarily, we set YZ to 0.25, and so our third stylized fact is that
the dirty industry spends 25% of its sales revenue on the pollution input. 22 For the
remaining 75% to have the same K/L ratio as the clean sector, YK must be 0.30, and
 YL must be 0.45. In fact, given various equations of the model, the three stylized facts
are enough to determine all of the remaining parameters shown in Table 1.23

                       Table 1: Data and parameters for the case with
                         equal factor intensities (where θYZ =.25)
                         KY = 0.0800                    LY = 0.1200
                         KX = 0.3200                    LX = 0.4800
                          KY = 0.2000                    LY = 0.2000
                          KX = 0.8000                    LX = 0.8000
                          YK = 0.3000                    YL = 0.4500
                          XK = 0.4000                    XL = 0.6000

        No empirical estimates of substitution parameters are available specifically for
our definition of the dirty sector. The clean sector is 80% of factor income, however, so
an economy-wide estimate represents a decent approximation of X for the clean sector.
Lovell (1973) and Corbo and Meller (1982) estimate the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor for all manufacturing industries. They find an elasticity of unity, which
we employ for X.24 We also use unity for the elasticity of substitution in consumption
between the clean and dirty goods, u.25
         The only further parameters needed are the eij input demand elasticities in the
dirty sector. The model includes six of these parameters, but only three can be set
independently. 26 Therefore, we vary only the three cross-price elasticities, which
effectively sets the other parameters. To the best of our knowledge, these cross-price
elasticities have never been estimated with inputs defined as labor, capital, and
pollution.27 We therefore allow them to take alternative values of -1, -½, 0, ½, and 1.
As these parameters vary, we consider the implications for the results ( pˆ Y , wˆ , rˆ, Zˆ ).

22
  This parameter would be under-estimated using data from an emissions permit market such as the one in
place for sulfur dioxide of electric utilities, since most pollutants are restricted by mandates rather than
permits or taxes. If shareholders own the right to emit a restricted amount of any pollutant, then they earn a
scarcity rent that we would characterize as the return pZZ. In available data, this return might appear as
part of the normal return to capital of the shareholders. In effect, then, we suppose that existing pollution
restrictions and shadow prices are first converted to their equivalent explicit tax rates Z. We then evaluate
marginal effects of environmental policy by calculating the effects of a small increase in that pollution tax.
23
  We define a unit of any input or output such that all initial prices are one ( pX = pY = pK = pL = pZ = 1).
Then zero profit conditions imply X = KX + LX and Y = KY + LY + Z. We consider an economy with total
factor income equal to one (which could be in billions or trillions). Then KX + KY + LX + LY = 1, and
factor shares in each industry are enough to determine all ’s and ’s.
24
 In a more recent paper estimating this parameter, Claro (2003) finds elasticities of approximately 0.8,
which is close to one. Babiker et al (2003) also use X = 1 in their computational model.
25
  This is the same initial value used by Fullerton and Metcalf (2001). Little evidence exists on the
substitution in utility between goods produced using pollution and those produced otherwise.
26
  The Appendix defines aij = Yjeij, where the parameters must satisfy aiL + aiK + aiZ = 0 for all i. These
restrictions together effectively determine all six Allen elasticities from only three.
27
  Humphrey and Moroney (1975) estimate Allen elasticities using capital, labor, and natural resource
products. Bovenberg and Goulder (1997) use estimates of elasticities between labor, capital, energy, and
                                                     -14-


         In performing these calculations, we always use a 10% increase in the pollution
tax. Table 2 allows the Allen elasticities eKZ and eLZ to vary, holding constant the
factor intensities.28 Notice first that the change in pollution in the last column is always
negative, but the magnitude of the change varies drastically in a way that depends on the
two varied parameters. The smallest change in pollution occurs when both of those
parameters are zero ( Ẑ = -.0200 in row 2), but it is also small whenever the two are of
opposite signs (e.g. row 1 or 5). The change in pollution is larger when both are positive,
and it is largest in the Cobb-Douglas case where all three cross-price Allen elasticities are
equal to one (row 12). As consistent with proposition 5B, this row shows Zˆ = −τˆZ .

                    Table 2: Effects of a 10% increase in the pollution tax,
                  equal factor intensities and varying substitution elasticities
                           (where θYZ =.25 and σX = eKL = σu = 1)
                 Row eKZ eLZ             ŵ         r̂         p̂Y         Ẑ
                   1    1.0 -0.5 -0.00335 0.00503 0.02500 -0.02559
                   2    0.0 0.0 0.00000 0.00000 0.02500 -0.02000
                   3    0.5 0.0 -0.00112 0.00169 0.02500 -0.03573
                   4    1.0 0.0 -0.00221 0.00331 0.02500 -0.05094
                   5   -0.5 0.5 0.00230 -0.00345 0.02500 -0.02690
                   6    0.0 0.5 0.00113 -0.00169 0.02500 -0.04373
                   7    0.5 0.5 0.00000 0.00000 0.02500 -0.06000
                   8    1.0 0.5 -0.00109 0.00164 0.02500 -0.07574
                   9   -0.5 1.0 0.00341 -0.00511 0.02500 -0.04955
                  10    0.0 1.0 0.00223 -0.00335 0.02500 -0.06693
                  11    0.5 1.0 0.00110 -0.00165 0.02500 -0.08374
                  12    1.0 1.0 0.00000 0.00000 0.02500 -0.10000
        The changes in the wage rate and capital rental rate in Table 2 are always small,
no more than about a half of a percent in either direction. The increase in output price is
more substantial in Table 2, always 2.5%. This result is no coincidence. With equal
factor intensities, the simple result of Case 1 and equation (12a) is pˆ Y = θ YZ τˆZ . Thus, the
10% increase in Z always raises the output price by 2.5%.
         The primary purpose of Table 2 is to illustrate the effects of different cross-price
elasticities, as in Case 1 where both sectors have the same factor intensities. Indeed,
since eKL = 1 satisfies Condition 1, the table reflects Proposition 1B where the pollution
tax always imposes more burden on the relative complement to pollution, whether it be
capital (eKZ < eLZ) or labor (eKZ > eLZ). When neither is a relative complement (eKZ =
eLZ), both are burdened equally as in Proposition 2A (rows 2, 7, and 12).


materials. They interpret energy to be a proxy for pollution, strictly valid only if pollution is fixed per unit
of energy. DeMooij and Bovenberg (1998) review such estimates and find that eKL = 0.5, eKZ = 0.5, and
eLZ = 0.3 best summarize the existing literature. These figures suggest that capital might be a slightly better
substitute for energy than is labor, but the difference is not precisely estimated. Their estimates are taken
from data on Western European countries.
28
  The table does not contain every permutation of eKZ and eLZ between -1 and 1, because not all
permutations are possible. Both cannot be negative, since we know that at most one of the three cross-price
elasticities is negative. Furthermore, we omit combinations that result in a positive value for any eii.
Finally, Table 2 always uses eKL = 1.
                                                    -15-


        Since we know those directions from the theory, Table 2 only tells us about
magnitudes. How much of the burden on the sources side is shifted from one factor to
the other? For labor to bear no burden or to gain from raising this tax, the wage must rise
by at least the overall price index p ≡ pX + (1– )pY, where          = 0.75 is the share of
expenditure on X. When p̂Y = 0.025, the change in this price index is p̂ =.00625. Thus
 ŵ = 0.00625 would mean that labor is held harmless, and capital bears the whole burden
of the pollution tax.29 In Table 2, the largest ŵ is 0.00341 (in row 9). In other words,
labor can avoid “most” of the burden when the pollution tax induces the firm to use more
labor (eLZ = 1) and less capital (eKZ = -.5).
         In the next table, we consider the impact of changes in factor intensities (with
unchanging elasticities). We cannot just set the cross-price elasticities equal to each
other, however, because then Proposition 5A says we get no effects on factor prices.
Instead, all rows of Table 3 assume eLZ =1 and eKZ = -.5 (as in row 9 of Table 2, with
the largest effects on factor prices). Then, with those elasticities fixed, we vary the factor
intensities. The first column shows K– L, which is positive if the dirty sector is capital
intensive. We vary this value from -0.25 to 0.25, which effectively changes the “data” of
the initial economy. We then calculate new parameters λ and θ that are consistent with
each other (and with a fixed overall size of each sector X and Y and fixed resource
quantities K and L ). The second column shows corresponding increases in YK from
0.15 to 0.44 (and row 6 shows prior results with YK =0.30 and XK =0.40).

           Table 3: Effects of a 10% increase in the pollution tax, varying factor
            intensity (with eLZ =1, eKZ = -0.5 , θYZ =.25, and σX = eKL = σu = 1)
                      a
       Row        K- L       YK      XK       ŵ         r̂        p̂Y         Ẑ
         1       -0.25 0.1515 0.4495 0.0018 -0.0022 0.0258                  -0.0750
         2       -0.20 0.1818 0.4394 0.0022 -0.0028 0.0257                  -0.0699
         3       -0.15 0.2118 0.4294 0.0025 -0.0033 0.0256                  -0.0648
         4       -0.10 0.2416 0.4195 0.0028 -0.0039 0.0255                  -0.0597
         5       -0.05 0.2710 0.4097 0.0031 -0.0045 0.0253                  -0.0546
          b
        6        0.00     0.3000 0.4000 0.0034 -0.0051 0.0250               -0.0496
         7       0.05     0.3286 0.3905 0.0037 -0.0057 0.0247               -0.0445
         8       0.10     0.3566 0.3811 0.0039 -0.0064 0.0243               -0.0395
         9       0.15     0.3841 0.3720 0.0041 -0.0070 0.0238               -0.0346
        10       0.20     0.4110 0.3630 0.0044 -0.0076 0.0233               -0.0297
        11       0.25     0.4373 0.3542 0.0045 -0.0083 0.0228               -0.0248
       a
           Note that K - L = KY /KX - LY /LX .
       b
           Results in row 6 match those in Table 2, row 9.
        The first five rows of Table 3 illustrate how labor can bear less than its share of
the burden, even though the dirty sector is labor intensive, because labor is a better
substitute for pollution. As the polluting sector is changed from labor intensive to capital
intensive, the pollution tax burden is shown to shift even more onto capital. The fall in
the rental rate enlarges from 0.22% to 0.83%. The change in the wage is always positive,

29
  This threshold can be reached when the elasticities differ by greater amounts. Suppose eKZ = -1 and eLZ
= 3, so that capital and pollution are complements, while labor and pollution are strong substitutes. Then
ŵ = .0082 > .00625, and labor gains.
                                              -16-


because labor is the better substitute for pollution, but ŵ rises from 0.0018 to 0.0045 as
the dirty sector becomes more capital-intensive. In this last row labor avoids “most” of
the burden, relative to the threshold where ŵ =0.00625, but labor still cannot avoid all of
the burden – even in this combination where labor is a better substitute for pollution and
the dirty sector is very capital intensive.
        In general, the factor intensities of the two industries are better estimated than are
the Allen elasticities of substitution. In Table 3, the factor intensities are varied over a
range that is much wider than the range of possible estimates, and still the proportional
change in the wage rate varies by only 0.0027 (from 0.0018 to 0.0045). In contrast,
Table 2 varies the cross-price Allen elasticities only from -0.5 to 1.0, a range that is less
wide than the range of possible estimates, and ŵ varies by more than twice as much (by
0.0068, from -0.0034 to +0.0034). Thus, for the incidence of the pollution tax, we
conclude that the impact of factor intensities over the plausible range is less important
than the impact of the elasticities of substitution between pollution and capital or labor.
IV. Conclusion
        Using a simple general equilibrium model of production with pollution, this paper
has found the incidence of a pollution tax on the prices of outputs and on the returns to
inputs. We present the system of equations that can be solved for the incidence of any
tax on capital, labor, output, or pollution. A small increase in the pollution tax rate alters
the return to labor relative to capital in a way that depends on the substitutability of labor
for pollution, the substitutability of capital for pollution, and the relative factor intensities
of the two sectors. When both sectors are equally capital-intensive and capital is a better
substitute for pollution than is labor, then intuitively we expect the return to capital to rise
relative to the wage. If labor and capital are highly complementary, however, then this
intuitive result does not hold.
        Another surprising result is in the case where both factors are equally
substitutable for pollution. In that case, the pollution tax can increase the return to capital
even when the polluting sector is more capital-intensive than the other sector, if
consumers are less able to substitute among goods than producers of the dirty good are
able to substitute among their inputs.
        Numerically, it is shown that the elasticities of substitution in production between
capital and pollution and between labor and pollution have an important effect on the
incidence of a pollution tax. The impact of the uncertainty about substitution elasticities
outweighs the impact of the uncertainty about factor intensities.
        These results provide evidence that the substitutability of capital, labor, and
emissions has very important consequences for environmental policy, and that more work
needs to be done in estimating these parameters and analyzing their effects. Not only do
these elasticities affect tax incidence, as shown in the main results of this paper, they
affect the impact of environmental policy on the environment itself. For alternative
parameter values used here, a 10% increase in the pollution tax rate reduces pollution
anywhere from 2% to 10%. For extreme parameter values, it can lead to more pollution.
       Further research could extend in many directions. First, any of the simplifying
assumptions of our model could be relaxed to see how results are affected by alternative
assumptions such as: imperfect factor mobility, adjustment costs, imperfect competition,
non-constant returns to scale, international trade in goods or factors, tax evasion, or
uncertainty. In many cases, the results of such extensions can be predicted from the
                                             -17-


literature that followed the original article by Harberger (1962). In a model with perfect
international capital mobility, for example, the net return to capital is fixed by world
capital markets, and so the pollution tax cannot place a burden on capital – in contrast to
the results here for effects on the wage and capital return in a closed economy.
        Another direction for further research is to calculate the effects of these price
changes on different income groups (or regions, or racial groups). With data on the labor
and capital income of each group, our results for ŵ and r̂ could be used to calculate
the effect of a pollution tax on the sources of income for each group. With additional
data on the expenditures, our results for p̂Y could be used to calculate the effect on the
uses side. Finally, our analytical model could be extended to a computational general
equilibrium (CGE) model with more factors, sectors, and groups.
        Still, the model in this paper provides the first theoretical analysis of the incidence
and distributional effects of environmental policy that allows for fully general forms of
substitution among factors and that solves for all general equilibrium effects of the
pollution tax. The analytical model is used to derive general propositions that do not
depend upon the particular parameter values that must be used in a CGE model. Our
model also is used to identify the crucial parameters. In particular, we show how
differential substitution between factors can greatly affect the burdens of a pollution tax.


References
Aidt, Toke S. “Political Internalization of Economic Externalities and Environmental
     Policy.” Journal of Public Economics. Vol. 69, No. 1 (July 1998), 1-16.
Allen, R.G.D. Mathematical Analysis for Economists. St. Martin’s, New York (1938).
Antweiler, Werner, Brian R. Copeland, and M. Scott Taylor. “Is Free Trade Good for the
    Environment?” American Economic Review. Vol. 91, No. 4 (September 2001), 877-
    908.
Babiker, Mustafa H., Gilbert E. Metcalf, and John Reilly. “Tax Distortions and Global
     Climate Policy.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. Vol. 46,
     No. 2 (September 2003), 269-287.
Blundell, Richard, and Steve Bond. “GMM Estimation with Persistent Panel Data: An
     Application to Production Functions.” The Institute for Fiscal Studies Working
     Paper Series No. 99/4 (1998).
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder. “Costs of Environmentally Motivated
    Taxes in the Presence of Other Taxes: General Equilibrium Analyses.” National
    Tax Journal. Vol. 50, No. 1 (March 1997), 59-87.
______, ______, and Derek J. Gurney. “Efficiency Costs of Meeting Industry-
     Distributional Constraints Under Environmental Permits and Taxes.” RAND
    Journal of Economics (forthcoming, 2005).
Carbone, Jared and Kerry Smith. “Average Substitution and Non-Market Effects in
     Second-Best Policies.” CEnREP Working Paper, July 2004.
Chua, Swee. “Does Tighter Environmental Policy Lead to a Comparative Advantage in
     Less Polluting Goods?” Oxford Economic Papers. Vol. 55, No. 1 (January 2003),
     25-35.
                                          -18-


Claro, Sebastian. “A Cross-Country Estimation of the Elasticity of Substitution Between
     Labor and Capital in Manufacturing Industries.” Cuadernos de Economia. Vol. 40,
     No. 120 (August 2003), 239-257.
Corbo, P. and V. Meller. “The Substitution of Labor, Skill, and Capital: Its Implications
    for Trade and Employment.” In Trade and Employment in Developing Countries.
    Anne Krueger, ed., The University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1982).
DeMooij, Ruud A., and A. Lans Bovenberg. “Environmental Taxes, International Capital
   Mobility and Inefficient Tax Systems: Tax Burden vs. Tax Shifting.” International
   Tax and Public Finance. Vol. 5, No. 1 (February 1998), 7-39.
Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. “Environmental Controls, Scarcity Rents, and
      Pre-existing Distortions.” Journal of Public Economics. Vol. 80, No. 2 (May 2001),
      249-267.
______ and ______. “Tax Incidence”, in Handbook of Public Economics, A. Auerbach
    and M. Feldstein, eds., North Holland, Amsterdam (2002).
Griliches, Zvi, and Jacques Mairesse. “Production Functions: The Search for
      Indentification.” In Econometrics and Economic Theory in the Twentieth Century:
      The Ragnar Frisch Centennial Symposium. Steinar Strom, ed., Cambridge
      University Press, Cambridge (1998).
Harberger, Arnold C. “The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax.” Journal of
     Political Economy. Vol. 70, No. 3 (June 1962), 215-240.
Humphrey, David Burras, and J. R. Moroney. “Substitution Among Capital, Labor and
    Natural Resource Products in American Manufacturing.” Journal of Political
    Economy. Vol. 83, No. 1 (February 1975), 57-82.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Kevin J. Stiroh. “U.S. Economic Growth at the Industry Level.”
     American Economic Review. Vol. 90, No. 2 (May 2000), 161-167.
Lovell, C. A. Knox. “CES and VES Production Functions in a Cross-Section Context.”
     Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 81, No. 3 (May-June 1973), 705-720.
Mayeres, Inge. “The Distributional Impacts of Policies for the Control of Transport
    Externalities: An Applied General Equilibrium Model.” Fondazione Eni Enrico
    Mattei Note di Lavoro (1998).
McAusland, Carol. “Voting for Pollution Policy: the Importance of Income Inequality
   and Openness to Trade.” Journal of International Economics. Vol. 61, No. 2
   (December 2003), 425-451.
McLure, Charles E. Jr. “General Equilibrium Incidence Analysis: The Harberger Model
    after Ten Years.” Journal of Public Economics. Vol. 4 (February 1975), 125-161.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. “A Distributional Analysis of Green Tax Reforms.” National Tax
     Journal. Vol. 52, No. 4 (December 1999), 655-681.
Mieszkowski, Peter. “On the Theory of Tax Incidence.” Journal of Political Economy.
     Vol. 75, No. 3 (June 1967), 250-262.
Mieszkowski, Peter. “The Property Tax: An Excise Tax or a Profits Tax?” Journal of
     Public Economics. Vol. 1, No. 1 (April 1972), 73-96.
                                                      -19-


Morgenstern, Richard D. et al. “The Distributional Impacts of Carbon Mitigation
    Policies.” Resources for the Future, Issue Brief 02-03 (February 2002).
Parry, Ian W.H. “Are Emissions Permits Regressive?” Journal of Environmental
     Economics and Management. Vol. 47, No. 2 (March 2004), 364-387.
Rapanos, Vassilis T. “A Note on Externalities and Taxation.” Canadian Journal of
    Economics. Vol. 25, No. 1 (February 1992), 226-232.
______. “The Effects of Environmental Taxes on Income Distribution.” European
    Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 11, No. 3 (September 1995), 487-501.
Robison, H. David. “Who Pays for Industrial Pollution Abatement?” Review of
     Economics and Statistics. Vol. 67, No. 4 (November 1985), 702-706.
Wagner, Thomas. “Environmental Policy and the Equilibrium Rate of Unemployment.”
    Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. Vol. 49, No. 1 (January
    2005), 132-156.
West, Sarah E. and Roberton C. Williams III. “Estimates from a Consumer Demand
     System: Implications for the Incidence of Environmental Taxes.” Journal of
     Environmental Economics and Management. Vol. 47, No. 3 (May 2004), 535-558.


Appendix
Deriving Equations (4) – (7)
Given a set of input prices pK, pL, and pZ, and output decision Y, the solution to the
dirty sector’s cost-minimization problem consists of three input demand functions:
                                          KY = KY(pK, pL, pZ, Y)
                                           LY = LY(pK, pL, pZ, Y)
                                            Z = Z(pK, pL, pZ, Y)
Totally differentiating and dividing through by the appropriate input level yields:
                                 Kˆ Y = a KK pˆ K + a KL pˆ L + a KZ pˆ Z + Yˆ ,

                                  LˆY = a LK pˆ K + a LL pˆ L + a LZ pˆ Z + Yˆ ,

                                   Zˆ = a ZK pˆ K + a ZL pˆ L + a ZZ pˆ Z + Yˆ ,
where aij is the firm’s elasticity of demand for input i with respect to the price of input
j. As Mieszkowski (1972) notes, this aij equals eij Yj. Note that eij = eji, even though
aij aji in general. Also note that both eii and aii must be negative. Allen (1938) also
shows that aiK + aiL + aiZ = 0. Thus at least one of the two cross-price elasticities must
be positive.30
       The three input demand functions are not independent, since the production
function gives the relationship between the three inputs and output Y. Hence we can use
any two of these functions. Again following Mieszkowski, we subtract the third equation

30
  Moreover, given symmetry (eij = eji) this result means either that all three cross-price elasticicities (eKL,
eKZ, and eLZ ) are positive or that one is negative and the other two are positive.
                                                          -20-


from each of the first two equations so that the system of the two remaining equations
contains all of the Allen elasticities of substitution. When we substitute in the
expressions for aij and the price changes, we get equations (4) and (5) in the text.31
        Assuming perfect competition, each input to production must be paid a price
equal to its marginal product:
                                            pXXK = r(1 +        K)   = pYYK ,
                                            pXXL = w(1 + L) = pYYL,
                                                   pYYZ = pZ = Z.
where XK, XL, YK, YL, and YZ are the derivatives of the production functions with
respect to each input. Perfect competition and constant returns to scale assure that the
value of output must equal the sum of factor payments:
                                      pXX = r(1 +        K)KX    + w(1 + L)LX,
                                  pYY = r(1 +       K)KY    + w(1 + L)LY + ZZ.
Totally differentiate these equations, divide through by sales revenue (pXX or pYY), and
rearrange terms to obtain equations (6) and (7) in the text.
General Solution to the System
       First, to eliminate X̂ and Yˆ , subtract equation (8) from equation (6) and
equation (9) from equation (7):
                                        pˆ X = θ XK (τˆK + rˆ) + θ XL (τˆL + wˆ )                                 (A1)
                                   pˆ Y = θ YK (τˆK + rˆ) + θ YL (τˆL + wˆ ) + θ YZ τˆZ .                         (A2)
Equations (A1-2) tell us how changes in net-of-tax factor prices are passed on to output
prices, according to the factor shares in each industry. Substituting equations (8) and (9)
into equation (10) yields
                θ XK Kˆ X + θ XL Lˆ X − θ YK Kˆ Y − θ YL LˆY − θ YZ Zˆ = σ u ( pˆ Y + τˆY − pˆ X − τˆ X ) .       (A3)

Solving equations (1) and (2) for K̂ X and L̂ X , respectively, and substituting these
expressions in to equations (3) and (A3) gives us
                                  − γ K Kˆ Y + γ L Lˆ X = σ X ( wˆ + τˆL − rˆ − τˆK ) ,                           (A4)

             − (θ XK γ K + θ YK ) Kˆ Y − (θ XL γ L + θ YL ) LˆY − θ YZ Zˆ = σ u ( pˆ Y + τˆY − pˆ X − τˆ X ) .    (A5)

Finally, to eliminate K̂ Y and L̂Y , we use equations (4) and (5) to solve for them and then
substitute the resulting expressions into (A4) and (A5). After some rearrangement, these
equations become:
        − σ X (wˆ + τˆL − rˆ − τˆK ) = (γ L − γ K )Zˆ + θ YK [γ L (eLK − eZK ) − γ K (eKK − eZK )](rˆ + τˆK )
        + θ YL [γ L (eLL − eZL ) − γ K (eKL − eZL )](wˆ + τˆL ) + θ YZ [γ L (eLZ − eZZ ) − γ K (eKZ − eZZ )]τˆZ
                                                                                                                 ...(A6)


31
     DeMooij and Bovenberg (1998) derive analogous expressions with a fixed input factor or price.
                                                      -21-



     − σ u ( pˆ Y + τˆY − pˆ X − τˆ X ) = CZˆ + θ YK [ β K (e KK − eZK ) + β L (e LK − eZK )](rˆ + τˆK )
     + θ YL [ β K (e KL − e ZL ) + β L (e LL − eZL )](wˆ + τˆL ) + θ YZ [ β K (e KZ − eZZ ) + β L (e LZ − e ZZ )]τˆZ
                                                                                                           ...(A7)
At this point we reduce the generality of the system, allowing for a more interpretable
solution. Let τˆ X = τˆY = τˆK = τˆL = 0 , so that the only tax changing is the pollution tax.
Also, set good X as the numeraire, so that pˆ X = 0 . Then, plugging equation (A2) into
(A7) to eliminate p̂Y yields, after some rearrangement:

                        CZˆ = −θ YK [ β K (e KK − eZK ) + β L (e LK − eZK ) + σ u ]rˆ
                           − θ YL [ β K (e KL − eZL ) + β L (e LL − e ZL ) + σ u ]wˆ                         (A8)
                           − θ YZ [ β K (e KZ − eZZ ) + β L (e LZ − e ZZ ) + σ u ]τˆZ

Solve (A3) and (A8) for Ẑ , equate, and rearrange, to get:
                [θ YK (− A(e KK − eZK ) + B(e LK − e ZK ) + (γ K − γ L )σ u ) + Cσ X ]rˆ
                + [θ YL (− A(e KL − eZL ) + B(e LL − eZL ) + (γ K − γ L )σ u ) − Cσ X ]wˆ                    (A9)
                 = θ YZ [− A(e ZZ − e KZ ) + B(e ZZ − e LZ ) + (γ L − γ K )σ u ]τˆZ
Now equations (A1) and (A9) are two equations in only two unknowns, r̂ and ŵ . Use
(A1) to solve for ŵ in terms of r̂ , substitute into (A9), and simplify, to reach equation
(11b) in the text. Substitute this back into previous equations to obtain the equations for
r̂ , Ẑ , and p̂Y (11a, c, d).
