                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       MEASURING THE IMPACT OF CRACK COCAINE

                                          Roland G. Fryer, Jr.
                                            Paul S. Heaton
                                           Steven D. Levitt
                                           Kevin M. Murphy

                                         Working Paper 11318
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11318


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




We would like to thank Jonathan Caulkins, John Donohue, Lawrence Katz, Glenn Loury, Derek Neal, Bruce
Sacerdote, Sudhir Venkatesh, and Ebonya Washington for helpful discussions on this topic. Elizabeth Coston
and Rachel Tay provided exceptional research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support
of Sherman Shapiro, the American Bar Foundation, and the National Science Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Roland G. Fryer, Paul S. Heaton, Steven D. Levitt, and Kevin M. Murphy. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Impact of Crack Cocaine
Roland G. Fryer, Paul S. Heaton, Steven D. Levitt, and Kevin M. Murphy
NBER Working Paper No. 11318
May 2005
JEL No. J00

                                           ABSTRACT

A wide range of social indicators turned sharply negative for Blacks in the late 1980s and began to

rebound roughly a decade later. We explore whether the rise and fall of crack cocaine can explain

these patterns. Absent a direct measure of crack cocaine’s prevalence, we construct an index based

on a range of indirect proxies (cocaine arrests, cocaine-related emergency room visits, cocaine-

induced drug deaths, crack mentions in newspapers, and DEA drug busts). The crack index we

construct reproduces many of the spatial and temporal patterns described in ethnographic and

popular accounts of the crack epidemic. We find that our measure of crack can explain much of the

rise in Black youth homicides, as well as more moderate increases in a wide range of adverse birth

outcomes for Blacks in the 1980s. Although our crack index remains high through the 1990s, the

deleterious social impact of crack fades. One interpretation of this result is that changes over time

in behavior, crack markets, and the crack using population mitigated the damaging impacts of crack.

Our analysis suggests that the greatest social costs of crack have been associated with the

prohibition-related violence, rather than drug use per se.

Roland G. Fryer, Jr.                                  Steven D. Levitt
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Harvard University                                    University of Chicago
Littauer Center, M-7                                  1126 East 59th Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                              and NBER
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu                                slevitt@uchicago.edu

Paul S. Heaton                                        Kevin M. Murphy
Department of Economics                               Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago                                 The University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street                                 1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                                     Chicago, IL 60637
psheaton@uchicago.edu                                 and NBER
                                                      kevin.murphy@gsb.uchicago.edu
I. Introduction

        Between 1984 and 1994, the homicide rate for Black males aged 14-17 more than

doubled and homicide rates for Black males aged 18-24 increased almost as much, as shown in

Figure 1. In stark contrast, homicide rates for Black males 25 and older were essentially flat

over the same period. By the year 2000, homicide rates had fallen back below their initial levels

of the early 1980s for almost all age groups.1

          Homicide was not the only outcome that exhibited sharp fluctuations over this time

period in the Black community. Figure 2 presents national time series data by race for fetal

death rates, low birth weight babies, weapons arrests, and the fraction of children in foster care.2

All of these time series exhibit noticeable increases for Blacks--typically followed by offsetting

declines—starting in the late 1980s or early 1990s. The fraction of Black children in foster care

more than doubled, fetal death rates and weapons arrests of Blacks rose more than 25 percent,

and Black low birth weight babies increased five percent.3 Among Whites, there is little

evidence of parallel adverse shocks. The poor performance of Blacks relative to Whites

represents a break from decades of convergence between Blacks and Whites on many of these

measures.4

        The concurrent rises and declines in outcomes as disparate as youth homicide, low birth

weight babies, and foster care rates presents a puzzle, especially when many standard economic
1
  Homicide rates for young white males (with Hispanics included as whites) followed a similar pattern, although the
fluctuations were far more muted. Homicide rates for white males over age 25 have steadily fallen since 1985.
2
  We describe the data sources, definitions, sample availability, and precise construction of these variables and
others used in the paper in the data appendix.
3
  Neal (2004) provides further evidence of a downturn in black educational outcomes.
4
  Over the past thirty years, for instance, the black-white ratio of median earnings for male full-time workers
increased from .5 to .73 (Welch 2003), the black infant mortality rate fell by two-thirds (Almond, Chay, and
Greenstone 2003), the fraction of blacks between the ages of 25-29 with four-year college degrees has increased
nearly 3 fold (Blank 2001), and Black academic achievement (as measured by NAEP scores) has increased 0.6
standard deviations relative to whites (Grissmer, Flanagan, and Williamson 1998). The number of black
entrepreneurs has more than doubled (Boston 2001). The number of blacks in congress has increased five-fold.4
Similar advances have been made among high-level executives, professors and administrators at elite colleges and
universities, and the fraction of blacks living in middle class neighborhoods.


                                                         3
and labor market measures for Blacks show no obvious deviations from trend over the same

period (Blank 2001). In this paper, we examine the extent to which one single underlying factor

– crack cocaine – can account for the fluctuations in all these outcomes.5

        Crack cocaine is a smoked version of cocaine that provides a short, but extremely intense,

high. The invention of crack represented a technological innovation that dramatically widened

the availability and use of cocaine in inner cities. Virtually unheard of prior to the mid-1980s,

crack spread quickly across the country, particularly within Black and Hispanic communities

(Bourgois 1996, Chitwood, et al. 1996, Johnson 1991). Many commentators have attributed the

spike in Black youth homicide to the crack epidemic’s rise and ebb (Blumstein 1998, Cook and

Laub 1998, Cork 1999, and Grogger and Willis 2000). Sold in small quantities in relatively

anonymous street markets, crack provided a lucrative market for drug sellers and street gangs

(Bourgois 1996, Jacobs 1999). Much of the violence is attributed to attempts to establish

property rights not enforceable through legal means (Bourgois 1996, Chitwood, et al. 1996).

With respect to other outcomes, the physiological evidence regarding the damage that crack

cocaine does to unborn babies suggests that crack usage might explain the patterns in fetal death

and low birth weight babies (Frank et. al. 2001, Datta-Bhutatad 1998), although there is no

consensus (Zuckerman 2002). The highly addictive nature of crack, combined with relatively

high crack usage rates by women (Bourgois 1996, Chitwood, et al. 1996), could contribute to

dysfunctional home environments leading to placement of children into foster care.

        In spite of the general appreciation of the potential role that crack may have played in

driving the patterns observed in the data (e.g., Bennett et al. 1996, Wilson 1990), especially with

respect to the Black youth homicide spike (Cook and Laub 1998, Blumstein and Rosenfeld 1998,

5
 Other competing explanations have also been proposed. Ferguson (2001) argues that the rise in popularity of hip-
hop music is to blame for the divergence in black-white test score gaps in 1988. McWhorter (2003) makes a similar
argument.


                                                        4
Levitt 2004), there has been remarkably little rigorous empirical analysis of crack’s rise and its

corresponding social impact. The scarcity of research appears to be due in part to the great

difficulty associated with constructing reliable quantitative measures of the timing and intensity

of crack’s presence in local geographic areas. Baumer et al. (1998), Cork (1999), and Ousey and

Lee (2004) use cocaine-related arrests as a proxy for crack. Ousey and Lee (2002) supplement

arrest data with the fraction of arrestees testing positive for cocaine. Grogger and Willis (2000)

use breaks from trend in cocaine-related emergency room visits in a sample of large cities, as

well as survey responses from police chiefs in these cities to measure the timing of crack’s

arrival. Corman and Mocan (2000) use drug deaths, but the data do not specify which drug is

responsible.

       In this paper, we take a somewhat different approach to measuring crack cocaine. Rather

than relying on a single measure, we assemble a range of indicators that are likely to proxy for

crack. These include cocaine arrests and cocaine-related emergency room visits as in the

previous literature, but also the frequency of crack cocaine mentions in newspapers, cocaine-

related drug deaths, and the number of DEA drug seizures and undercover drug buys that involve

cocaine. While each of these proxies has important shortcomings, together they paint a

compelling story for capturing fluctuations in crack. As demonstrated in Figure 3, the national

time-series aggregates for these variables tend to follow a similar pattern, rising sharply around

1985, peaking between 1989 and 1993, and in most cases declining thereafter. In spite of the

aggregate similarities, using just one of the proxies does not appear to be sufficient for describing

crack: the average cross-city correlation in the measures is only about .35. By combining the

various measures together into a single factor, however, we are able to generate a crack cocaine

index that is not particularly sensitive to any one of the individual measures and corresponds




                                                 5
well to the ethnographic and media accounts of crack cocaine’s spread and prevalence. Our

measure captures the intensity of crack’s presence in a particular place and time and can be

constructed for a wide variety of geographic areas. We estimate our crack index annually for

large cities and states over the period 1980-2000, and are making these data available to other

researchers.6

        We find that crack rose sharply beginning in 1985, peaked in 1989, and slowly declined

thereafter. Our estimated crack incidence remains surprisingly high over time – in the year 2000

crack remains at 60-75 percent of its peak level. Crack is concentrated in central cities,

particularly those with large Black and Hispanic populations. The cities experiencing the highest

average levels of crack are Newark, San Francisco, Philadelphia, Atlanta, and New York.

Although crack arrived early to the West Coast, the strongest impacts were ultimately felt in the

Northeast and the Middle Atlantic States. The Midwest experienced relatively low rates of crack.

        Our index of crack is strongly correlated with a range of social indicators. We find that

the rise in crack from 1984-1989 is associated with a doubling of homicide victimizations of

Black males aged 14-17, a 30 percent increase for Black males aged 18-24, and a 10 percent

increase for Black males 25 and over, and thus accounts for much of the observed variation in

homicide rates over this time period.7 The rise in crack can explain 20-100 percent of the

observed increases in Black low birth weight babies, fetal death, child mortality, and unwed

births in large cities between 1984 and 1989. In contrast, the measured impact of crack on

Whites is small and statistically insignificant. We estimate that crack is associated with a 5




6
  Data can be found on Roland Fryer’s [http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/fryer/fryer.html] web page, or are
available from any of the authors upon request
7
  Victimization data are used instead of offender data because the identity of some offenders is unknown. Among
homicides with a known offender, there is a high correlation between the race and age of the victim and offender.


                                                         6
percent increase in overall violent and property crime in large U.S. cities between 1984 and

1989.8

         The link between crack and adverse social outcomes weakens, however, over the course

of the sample. Even though crack use does not disappear, the adverse social consequences

largely do. Thus, by the year 2000, we observe little impact of crack, which accounts for much

of the recovery in homicide rates and child outcomes for Blacks over the period. We

hypothesize that the decoupling of crack and violence may be associated with the establishment

of property rights and the declining profitability of crack distribution. The fading of adverse

child outcomes may be attributable to the concentration of crack usage among a small, aging

group of hardcore addicts (MacCoun and Reuter 2001, page 123).

         The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II provides a brief history of

crack cocaine. Section III describes the data we use. Section IV presents our methodology for

combining the crack proxies into a single index, presents the results of that exercise, and assesses

the determinants of the timing and intensity with which crack hits a city or state. Section V

analyzes the extent to which crack can account for the observed fluctuations in social indicators

since 1985. Section VI concludes. The appendix outlines the sources of data used and the

precise construction of the variables and crack cocaine index.



Section II: A Brief History of Crack Cocaine

         Cocaine is a powerful and addictive stimulant first extracted from the coca plant in 1862.

During the 19th century, cocaine had a variety of medical uses and could be purchased over the

counter, including in the original version of Coca-Cola (Bayer 2000). In the 1970s, inhaled

         8
           All of these conclusions regarding the relationship between crack and social outcomes must be qualified
with the important caveat that we are describing correlations in the data, rather than clear causal links.



                                                         7
cocaine emerged as a popular but high-priced recreational drug. The street price of pure powder

cocaine was roughly $100 to $200 per gram (which is equivalent to $300-$600 per gram in 2004

dollars). The high price of cocaine had two important implications: (1) cocaine use was

concentrated among the affluent, and (2) retail cocaine purchases required hundreds of dollars

because it was impractical to transact in fractions of grams.9

        Crack cocaine is a variation of cocaine made by dissolving powder cocaine in water,

adding baking soda, and heating. The cocaine and the baking powder form an airy condensate,

that when dried, takes the form of hard, smokeable “rocks.”10 A pebble-sized piece of crack,

which contains roughly one-tenth a gram of pure cocaine, sells for $10 on the street and provides

an intense high, but one that lasts only fifteen minutes.

        Crack is an important technological innovation in many regards. First, crack can be

smoked, which is an extremely effective means of delivering the drug psychopharmacologically.

Second, because crack is composed primarily of air and baking soda, it is possible to sell in small

units containing fractions of a gram of pure cocaine, opening up the market to consumers

wishing to spend $10 at a time. Third, because the drug is extremely addictive and the high that

comes from taking the drug is so short-lived, crack quickly generated a large following of users

wishing to purchase at high rates of frequency. The profits associated with selling crack quickly

eclipsed that of other drugs. Furthermore, unlike most other drugs, crack is often sold in open-

air, high-volume markets between sellers and buyers who do not know one another.

        There are three primary reasons why crack may have been so devastating to the Black

community. First, street gangs, which already controlled outdoor spaces, became the logical

sellers of crack (Venkatesh and Levitt 2000). Gang violence, primarily as a means of

9
  A gram weighs about as much as a dime.
10
  Crack differs from freebase cocaine because the creation procedure lacks the final step of removing the base from
the mixture.


                                                         8
establishing and maintaining property rights, grew dramatically, and potentially accounts for the

sharp rise in Black youth violence. Second, the increased returns associated with drug dealing

attracted young Black males to gangs and may have reduced educational investment. Third, a

large fraction of crack users were young women. Prostitution was common among female crack

addicts, potentially accelerating the spread of AIDS and the unwanted birth of low birth weight

“crack babies.”11 Crack addicted mothers and fathers are unlikely to provide nurturing home

environments for their children (and often ended up incarcerated), leading to the relinquishment

of parental rights.



Section III: Data

         We analyze data separately at the city-level and the state-level. The city-level analysis is

carried out on the 144 cities with population greater than 100,000 in 1980. These cities are of

particular interest because anecdotal evidence suggests that the problems associated with crack

were concentrated in large urban areas. In addition, a number of the variables we use are

collected at the city-level, making it a natural unit of analysis. Focusing on the state-level allows

us to analyze outcome variables that are not available at the city level, and facilitates a linkage

between our work and the large empirical literature carried out using state-level data. In all

cases, annual data are used for the period 1980 to 2000.

         As noted earlier, we utilize a range of measures to proxy for the prevalence of crack.12

At the city-level, these outcomes are crack-related emergency room visits, cocaine-related


11
   Note, however, that the consensus in the recent medical literature is that there are few long term effects of crack
exposure in utero after controlling for the mother’s alcohol and tobacco consumption. (Frank et. al. 2001,
Zuckerman, Frank, and Mayes 2002).
12
    The exact data sources, definitions, and construction of each of the variables are described in greater detail in the
appendix.



                                                            9
arrests, the frequency of crack cocaine mentions in newspapers, DEA drug buys and seizures

involving cocaine, and cocaine-related deaths. The emergency room data are based on

information from the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN). These data initially covered 14

cities, with that number growing to 19 by the end of the sample. In later years, these data

distinguish between crack and powder cocaine, but for consistency over the whole period, we do

not exploit this variation.13 The proxy we use is cocaine-related emergency room visits per

capita in the metropolitan area. Arrest data are collected by city police departments and are

available through the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports. Because of incomplete reporting, we

follow Levitt (1998) and define our cocaine arrest measure as cocaine arrests as a fraction of

total arrests in the city.14 Our measure of crack cocaine mentions in newspapers is the number of

news articles in Lexis-Nexis with a city’s name and the words “crack” and “cocaine,” divided by

the total number of articles with the city's name and the word “crime.” By constructing the

variable as a ratio, we avoid obvious problems associated with the fact that large cities and those

with local newspapers included in Lexis-Nexis will appear much more frequently in the

database. The frequency of DEA drug buys and seizures per capita is taken from the System to

Retrieve Drug Evidence (STRIDE) data base, which catalogs undercover drug buys and seizures

carried out by DEA agents and informants, typically in support of criminal prosecutions. These

data include approximately 274,000 cocaine transactions. The city in which the transaction

occurred is recorded in the data set. STRIDE does not allow one to definitively distinguish

between powder and crack cocaine.15 The final proxy for crack that we use is the rate per capita



13
   In an earlier version of this paper, we presented estimates in which we did attempt to differentiate between powder
and crack cocaine, obtaining similar results.
14
   Arrests for powder versus crack cocaine are not reported separately in the FBI data.
15
   The data set includes separate drug codes for cocaine, cocaine hydrochloride, and a variety of cocaine salts. There
does appear to be a pattern of classifying crack cocaine, which has the hydrocholoride portion of the molecule
removed, as cocaine. It seems, however, that powder cocaine is also sometimes classified under the code “cocaine.”


                                                         10
of cocaine-related deaths, drawn from the annual Mortality Detail File produced by the National

Center for Health Statistics. The death data include accidental poisonings, suicides, and deaths

due to long-term abuse for which cocaine use was coded by physicians as a primary or

contributing factor. We cannot distinguish between crack cocaine and powder cocaine drug

deaths in these data.

       Each of these proxies suffers from important weaknesses. First, with the exception of the

newspaper citations, the measures are unable to clearly differentiate between powder and crack

cocaine. Second, both the cocaine arrest and DEA drug buy data are affected not just by the

prevalence of crack usage, but also by the intensity of government enforcement efforts (see, for

example, Horowitz 2001). Third, the DAWN emergency room data covers only a small set of

metropolitan areas and the sample of hospitals that participates changes over time (Substance

Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 2003 Appendix B). Both the emergency

room data and the drug death data are potentially affected by the subjective nature of physician

determination of the contribution of cocaine to an emergency room visit or a death. Finally, the

newspaper citation measure is the output of a relatively crude algorithm and suffers both from

the criticism that in the early years of the epidemic there were other terms such as “rock cocaine”

that were sometimes used to describe the product before crack cocaine became the agreed upon

nomenclature, and also that the newsworthiness of crack-related stories may have declined over

time, while consumption continued to rise.

       The number of observations, means, and standard deviations for all of these city-level

crack proxies are presented in the top panel of Table 1. Values are reported separately for the

period prior to and after 1985, the year when crack use is believed to have become widespread.

All of these indicators are much higher in the post-1985 period, even for those measures that do




                                                11
not directly distinguish between powder and crack cocaine. Crack mentions in newspapers are

extremely low prior to 1985; these instances likely represent false positives in our Lexis-Nexis

algorithm.16 Note that the number of observations available varies dramatically across measures

due to differences in the cities covered by the data, as well as the years in which data are

collected. The data appendix describes the statistical corrections that are done to account for

missing values in the construction of our crack index.

         When conducting our analysis at the state level, we drop the emergency room and crack

citation variables since these measures are available only for a limited number of large cities.

The rest of our city-level measures are available at the state-level. The state-level crack proxies

are shown in the second panel of Table 1. The absolute levels of the crack proxies are generally

lower in states than in large cities, but the patterns are otherwise similar.

         The final two panels of Table 1 report the criminal, social, and economic outcomes that

we are trying to explain using our crack index at the city-level and state-level respectively.

These outcomes include age specific homicide rates, the full set of violent and property crimes

tracked in the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports, fetal death, low-birth weight babies, teen births and

unwed births, death rates of children aged one to four, weapons arrests, the number of new

admissions to prison, the per capita number of children in the foster care system, the

unemployment rate, and the poverty rate. When the data are available we analyze these variables

separately by race. Some of the variables are available at the state-level only.



Section III: Identifying Crack




16
  For instance, a newspaper story that reported a cocaine addict, while in the process of committing a crime, got
cracked over the head by a police baton, would erroneously register as a crack mention using our methodology.


                                                         12
        The prevalence of crack cocaine is not directly observable. Instead, we must rely on

noisy proxies in an attempt to measure crack. The primary approach that we take for extracting

the information available in these proxies is to construct a single index measure of crack using

factor analysis.17 In particular, we estimate an equation of the form:

(1)                                    Yist = β i Crack st + ε ist

where the subscripts i, s, and t correspond to particular proxy measures, geographic units, and

years respectively. The left-hand-side variables are the proxy measures all of which are stacked

into a single vector. The variable Crack is not directly observed, but rather estimated along with

the β ' s . One could also include covariates on the right-hand side of equation (1) – indeed we

allow for city-fixed effects in our baseline estimates – but for simplicity we omit these covariates

from the formal discussion.

        Estimation of equation (1) generates predicted values both for a set of factors (Crackst)

and a set of coefficients (also known as loadings) βi. We focus our analysis on the single factor

that has the greatest explanatory power. Because our proxies are highly correlated, our data are

well-described by a one-factor model – capturing roughly 50% of the variation in the proxies.18

Additional factors contribute little in terms of explaining the observed variation in our data.

The factor with the greatest explanatory power is what we will call “crack,” but more accurately

it is the single index that explains the largest share of the variation in our crack proxies. The

loadings tell us the degree to which each estimated factor influences the different outcome



17
   This is similar to how psychometricians measure “intelligence” (g) – taking the results of several individual
aptitude tests and determining the single factor that best explains the covariance in these related proxies.
Mathematically, factor analysis identifies the eigenvectors (the factors) and corresponding eigenvalues (the
loadings) of the variance-covariance matrix of the Y variables.
18
   We follow standard practice of normalizing proxy measures included on the left-hand side to have mean zero and
variance one whenever we do factor analysis.



                                                        13
variables. The crack index we obtain is a weighted average of the proxy variables underlying it,

with weights given by the squares of the loadings on each proxy.

         There are three advantages to combining our multiple measures into a single index. First,

we are interested in describing the observed patterns of crack’s arrival and fluctuations. Having

one summary measure of crack rather than five separate proxies greatly simplifies this task.

Second, because each of our individual proxy measures is quite noisy, combining them into a

single index substantially increases the signal-to-noise ratio. For instance, in the simplest case

where βi =1 for each proxy, the share of the variance in a given measure that is attributable to a

true signal is σ crack
                 2
                       /(σ crack
                           2
                                 + σ ε2i ) , where σ crack
                                                     2
                                                           and σ ε2i are the variance of the latent crack factor

and the measurement error in proxy i respectively. Under the assumption that the measurement

errors across proxies are i.i.d, the signal-to-total variance ratio of an equally-weighted index of N

                 σ crack
                   2
proxies is                 .19
                        σε
                         2

             σ crack +
               2             i

                         N

         A third possible benefit of using a single crack index arises when we turn to estimating

the impact of crack on outcomes such as low-birth weight babies or crime rates. Although it

might seem that putting each of the individual proxies directly on the right-hand side of such

regressions would be preferable (see, for example Lubotsky and Wittenberg 2004), in the

plausible scenario in which one or more of our individual proxies may be endogenous to a

particular outcome of interest (e.g. when Black youth homicide is on the rise, police departments

may respond by intensifying enforcement against drug sellers, holding constant overall crack

use), use of an index provides potential benefits by imposing the restriction that each of the

proxies has an identical impact on the outcome variable. If the proxies were each entered
19
  If measurement error is positively correlated across proxies, then the improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio is
less pronounced. The opposite is true if the measurement error is negatively correlated across proxies.


                                                         14
separately as explanatory variables, one might greatly overstate the role of crack in explaining

fluctuations in social outcomes.

         In estimating the impact of crack on social outcomes, an attractive alternative to

constructing a single index is to instead use the various proxies as instrumental variables for one

another. To the extent that the proxies are correlated with the underlying latent variable crack,

but the measurement error in the proxies is uncorrelated, the various crack measures are

plausible instruments for one another. We present results both using our single index proxy and

using an instrumental variables approach.20

         One unique feature of our data that we have not yet emphasized, but proves extremely

valuable in our analysis, is the fact that crack cocaine was a technological innovation which was

virtually unknown until around 1985. This provides us with a well defined pre-crack period. To

the extent that our proxies/index are truly reflecting crack, they should have values near zero in

the pre-1985 period. In addition, variation in the proxies prior to 1985 is likely to be almost

purely measurement error. Comparing the variation in the proxies before and after crack arrives

will provide useful insights into the extent to which fluctuations in our proxies after 1985 can

plausibly be viewed as signal rather than noise.21



Section IV: The Prevalence of Crack Across Time and Space

         Table 2 presents correlations across the various crack proxies we use in the analysis. The

top panel of the table reports correlations across time for the national aggregates of the proxies.


20
   Note, however, that this instrumental variables strategy is a possible solution to the measurement error problem,
but not to any possible endogeneity in the crack measure, as we discuss later.
21
   The existence of a pre-crack period also allows us the opportunity to estimate our factor analysis on the pre-period
data only, isolating any common factors that are moving the crack proxies before crack arrives. One can then
remove these pre-existing factors in constructing a crack index. In practice, this has little impact on our results. An
earlier version of this paper, available from the authors, describes this exercise and the underlying assumptions in
detail.


                                                          15
Given how similar the time-series patterns are for these variables in Figure 3, it is not surprising

that these correlations are high, ranging from .225 to .951. The mean of the off-diagonal

elements is equal to .71. The middle panel of the table presents correlations using either the city-

year or the state-year as the unit of analysis. City-fixed effects and state-fixed effects have been

removed to eliminate systematic and persistent reporting differences across areas. The

correlation across the proxies falls, but remains substantial. For both the city and the state

sample, all the pairwise correlations remain positive and the mean of the off-diagonal elements is

.32 for cities and .36 for states. In other words, when a city or state is high relative to its usual

value on one of the proxies in a given year, it tends to be high on all of them – consistent with

the hypothesis that a single factor is driving the increase. The bottom panel of the table reports

correlations at the city-year and state-year level after removing not only city or state fixed-

effects, but also all of the aggregate time series variation using year dummies. Consequently, the

correlations in the bottom panel reflect whether a city-year or state-year observation that is high

relative to the rest of the sample in that year on one proxy also tends to be high on the other

proxies. These correlations are much lower than the others shown in the table. The mean off-

diagonal element in the city sample falls to only .07; in the state sample it is .15. The DEA

cocaine busts and the newspaper citation index perform particularly poorly. These results

highlight the fact that the co-movement of our proxy variables is due in large part to the fact that

across many areas, all the proxies tend to be high in some years and low in others.

        Table 3 presents our baseline estimates of the loadings obtained using factor analysis.

The greater is the value corresponding to a particular proxy, the more influence it is given in

constructing the crack index. 22 The factor loadings can be negative, although that is not the case


22
  The scaling of the loadings is arbitrary; we follow the standard normalization which is to make the square of the
loadings sum to one. In constructing a crack index that is a weighted average of the underlying proxies, the weights


                                                        16
for any of our analysis. We report five sets of estimates corresponding to the correlation

matrices in Table 3: national aggregates (column 1), city-level data (columns 2 and 3), and state-

level data (columns 4 and 5). At the city and state level, we report results before and after year-

fixed effects have been removed. For the national aggregates, the loadings are relatively equal

across the five proxies. The same is true at the city level before removing year-fixed effects

(column 2), except that the DEA cocaine busts proxy receives less weight than the others. When

year-fixed effects are taken out, more weight is given to cocaine deaths at the expense of

cocaine-related ER visits and, to a lesser extent, crack-related newspaper citations. At the state

level, cocaine arrests and cocaine deaths both get high weight and DEA drug busts are given

more influence after year-fixed effects are removed.

         Figure 4 presents population-weighted crack indexes that correspond to the factor

analysis loadings for the national-level, city-level and state-level analysis in Table 3. We show

results for the specifications without year-fixed effects; the patterns are similar for the other

specifications. The crack index is identified only up to a scale of proportionality, so the absolute

units of the crack measure are not directly interpretable, nor can they be directly compared across

the three figures.

         Our results regarding the time-series pattern of crack are not particularly sensitive to the

level of aggregation used in the analysis. In all three cases, the crack index is low but rising

slightly until 1985, at which point there is a sharp increase to a peak in 1989. The timing of

crack’s rise that we estimate corresponds nicely with the anecdotal evidence regarding the

introduction of crack cocaine in the mid-1980s and its rapid proliferation. Our estimation

technique in no way constrains the estimated crack prevalence to be low in the early years of the


one would use are the square root of the loadings we report in the table. After taking the square root of these values,
the sum of the weights would add to one.


                                                          17
data; this result is driven purely by the data. The one noticeable difference between the three

indexes is the pattern from 1989-2000. In the top figure using national aggregate data, the index

falls almost 50 percent between 1989 and the end of the sample. In the city-level and state-level

samples the decline is about 25 percent, with much of the decline coming in latter half of the

1990’s. Regardless of the index, one perhaps surprising result is that our crack index remains so

high in 2000, a time in which many casual observers had declared the crack epidemic to have

faded. Survey measures of crack usage, however, reinforce our conclusion that crack has not

disappeared. The percentage of high school seniors reporting having used crack in the last

twelve months fell roughly 30 percent (from 3.1 to 2.2 percent) between 1989 and 2000

(Johnston et al 2004). Eighth and tenth graders in the same survey, who were not asked about

crack usage until 1990, reported the highest incidence of annual crack usage in 1999. There is

also evidence that sharp declines in the price of crack have led those who use crack to consume it

in greater quantities (MacCoun and Reuter 2001).

       Existing evidence suggests that the impact of crack has been much greater on Blacks and

Hispanics than on Whites. Because most of our proxy variables are not available separately by

race, we are forced to take an indirect approach to identifying a race-specific crack index. Under

the assumption that the loadings on the crack proxies are the same for Blacks and Whites, using

the available data we can estimate a model in which the impact of crack varies by race. The

overall per capita impact of crack in a city (or state) and year can be decomposed into

(2)                     Crackst = λtBlack PstBlack + λtHispanic PstHispanic + λtWhite PstWhite + ε st

where the P variables represent population shares by race and the λ coefficients are race- and

city-specific crack estimates. λ captures how our crack index varies across cities at a given point

of time as a function of the racial composition of the city; λ is the value the crack index would



                                                          18
take in a hypothetical city all of whose residents were of the race in question. That coefficient

does not necessarily directly reflect the relative rates of crack usage across individuals of

different races if, for example, the presence of more Blacks in a city is associated with higher

crack use by Whites. To estimate the relative impact of crack by race, we run a separate cross-

sectional regression for each year with the crack index as the left-hand-side variable and race

proportions as the right-hand-side variables, omitting a constant.

         The results of this estimation are reported in Figure 5. For both city- and state-level

analyses, crack among Blacks rises until 1989 and then remains relatively steady thereafter. In

large cities, the estimated crack index for Whites is consistently 5-10 times lower than Blacks.

In the state-level sample, Blacks are again much higher than Whites, and in both samples

Hispanics appear roughly comparable to Blacks.

         Figures 6 and 7 present crack estimates by region and size of central city respectively. In

Figure 6, the Northeast experienced the greatest crack problem, followed by the West. In Figure

7, the time series pattern for crack in cities above and below 350,000 residents is quite similar,

except that the crack levels are more than twice as high in the larger cites.23

         Table 4 reports the cities and states in our sample with the highest and lowest estimated

average crack prevalence over the period 1985-2000.24 Because our estimates are noisy at the

city-level and the state-level due to substantial measurement error in our proxies, precise

rankings must be viewed with the appropriate caution. The set of cities with the greatest crack

problem includes cities one might expect: Newark, Philadelphia, New York, and Oakland, for

instance. Boston, San Francisco, and Seattle, however, are perhaps surprising. Other cities one


23
   The patterns observed in Figures 5-7 continue to hold if we simultaneously control for racial composition and the
other factors like region and city size.
24
    Results for the full set of cities and states in the sample, for the years 1985, 1989, 1993, 1997, and 2000 are
reported in Appendix Table 1.


                                                         19
would expect to rank high such as New Orleans, Baltimore, Washington D.C., and Los Angeles

also rank highly, but are not in the top ten. Among states, Maryland and New York head the list.

The cities with the least evidence of crack tend to be smaller, geographically isolated cities, but

not exclusively cities with low Black populations. Huntsville and Jackson, two of cities with the

very low crack estimates, for example, are thirty and seventy percent Black respectively. The

states with low crack tend to have large rural populations and few minorities.



Section V: The Impact of Crack Cocaine

       In this section, we attempt to measure the impact that crack had on society by regressing

a variety of outcome measures on our estimated crack index and varying combinations of

covariates:

(3)                   Outcome st = β * CrackIndex st + ZstΓ + λ s + γ t + εst

where CrackIndex is one of the crack indices we estimated above, and s corresponds to a

geographic area (either national, state, or city), and t represents time. One important point to

note is that our crack index is a measure of the severity of crack in an area as a whole. This

severity can represent both the composition of the population as well as the intensity of use per

person. For instance, since crack use appears to be more prevalent among Blacks than Whites, if

two cities have the same value on the crack index, but one city has a higher proportion of Whites,

the implication is that crack use per Black and crack use per White are likely to be higher in that

city than the other city. Consequently, when we examine socio-economic outcomes as

dependent variables, the logical specification involves defining outcomes in terms of rates per

overall city population. For example, when we examine Black youth homicide, the dependent




                                                    20
variable we use is Black youth homicides per 100,000 city residents, not Black youth homicides

per Black youth.25

        There are two obvious shortcomings associated with the simple OLS approach that we

adopt. The first is that our crack index may suffer from measurement error, which will bias the

estimates of crack’s impact, most likely in a downward direction. The second weakness of this

approach is that the estimates we obtain reflect correlations, rather than true causal impacts. It is

possible that omitted variables such as the erosion of social networks or the decline of two-parent

households affects both crack and outcomes like homicide or children in foster care.

        Instrumenting one proxy using the others provides a means of dealing with the issue of

measurement error, under the assumption that the measurement error in the different proxies are

uncorrelated (conditional on the other controls included in the regression). It is important to

note, however, that this instrumenting strategy is unlikely to help in providing estimates that are

directly interpretable as causal in nature. To the extent that omitted variables or reverse causality

lead one of the crack proxies to be correlated with the error term in equation (3), it is likely that

all of the crack proxies will suffer the same weakness.

        Table 5 shows results from estimating equation (3) on our city-level sample using the

city-level crack index. Each row of the table corresponds to a different outcome variable. The

first column of the table reports the mean of the dependent variable in the sample; because our

outcomes are denominated by the entire city population (not just Blacks or Whites depending on

which race we are looking at), the reported means for both races are less than if the variables

were per member of the group. Because Blacks make up a smaller percentage of the population,

25
  Imposing the further assumption that the ratio of crack’s incidence across Whites and Blacks is constant across
areas in a given year, we have also constructed an index of the crack intensity in a city controlling for racial
composition. This measure of intensity more closely corresponds to the crack variable that one would use as a right-
hand-side variable when using individual-level data, and is available for download at our website. The results we
obtain are quite similar.


                                                        21
the reported means are particularly small relative to a rate per capita for Blacks. We allow the

estimated coefficient on the crack index to vary by time period; columns 2-5 of the table report

the coefficients for the periods 1985-1989, 1990-1994, and 1995-2000 respectively.26 All

specifications include city-fixed effects, year dummies, and controls for percent of the population

that is Black and Hispanic, log population, and log per capita income. Standard errors, shown in

parentheses, take into account AR1 serial correlation within cities over time.

         The top panel of Table 5 reports outcomes for Blacks. The crack index is positively and

significantly associated with seven of the nine outcomes we examine in the 1985-1989 time

period. The estimates are statistically significant at the .01 level for five of the nine positive

outcomes, but for neither of the negative point estimates. A similar pattern of estimates is

present in the 1990-1994 period. After 1995, however, the link between the crack index and

these social outcomes for Blacks disappears--more than half of the point estimates become

negative in the last period, and only the male age 18-24 homicide rate has a positive and

significant coefficients. The middle panel of Table 5 shows city-level estimates for Whites.

Although the crack index is generally positively correlated with these outcomes after 1985 (22 of

the 27 point estimates are positive), only 5 of the 27 coefficients are statistically different than

zero. The bottom panel of the table analyzes results for overall crime rates, which are not

separately available by race. The crack index is positively and significantly correlated with all of

the crime categories from 1985-1989 and seven of the nine categories from 1990-1994, but the

estimated coefficients decline in magnitude and statistical significance in the final period for all

categories of crime.




26
  The crack index is close to zero and exhibits little variation prior to 1985, leading to unstable, imprecisely
estimated coefficients in the early part of our sample. Thus, we do not report results for 1980-1984.


                                                           22
         To aid in interpreting the magnitude of the effects implied by the coefficients in Table 5,

we report graphically the fraction of the observed variation in the outcomes that can be

accounted for by the crack index over the period in which crack rose sharply (1984-1989) in

Figure 8, and from the peak of crack to the end of the sample (usually 1989-2000) in Figure 9.

In these figures, we compare the observed percent changes for the crime and birth-related

outcomes over these time periods to the implied impact of crack calculated in one of two ways:

(1) using the crack index as in Table 5, and (2) instrumenting for cocaine arrests using the other

crack proxies as instruments.27 The implied impact of crack from the OLS specification in a

particular year is the product of the regression coefficient in Table 5 multiplied by the average

value of the crack index in that year. The impact of crack between 1984 and 1989 is simply the

difference between the measured impact of crack in 1989 and in 1984. Calculating the impact of

crack in the instrumental variables regressions is done in a similar manner, with the added

complication related to measurement error in the cocaine arrests proxy.28 The corresponding

standard error bands are shown in the figure as well.




27
   One could also instrument with each of the remaining crack proxies individually, but because of missing data in
some of our proxies, the index approach is preferable in our setting. The results are not sensitive to using a different
one of the crack proxies as the right-hand side variable.
28
   More specifically, only a portion of the observed variation in cocaine arrests is attributable to variation in crack
usage if there is measurement error in cocaine arrests. Assume that cocaine arrests are determined by a latent
variable crack and noise, and that our estimated crack index using all of the proxies except cocaine arrests also
reflects a combination of movements in crack and noise. Further assume that the error terms in these two measures
are uncorrelated, and that these errors are also uncorrelated with the error term in equation (3). Then a consistent
estimate of the impact of cocaine arrests can be obtained from two-stage least squares using the index as an
instrument. In the standard application, one would then compute the overall impact of a change in cocaine arrests as
the product of the change in cocaine arrests multiplied by the estimated coefficient from two-stage least squares. In
computing the impact of crack (as opposed to cocaine arrests per se) in equation (3), however, we only wants to use
the portion of the variation in cocaine arrests driven by crack. It can be shown that algebraically this equates to
scaling down the full variation in cocaine arrests by the signal to signal- plus-noise ratio in cocaine arrests. This
signal to signal-plus-noise ratio can be computed from the variance-covariance matrix of the crack proxies,
combined with a scaling adjustment across proxies that can be inferred from the ratio of the IV estimates when one
proxy is used as the instrument and the other variable is instrumented versus when the roles of the two variables are
reversed.


                                                          23
       A number of important points emerge from Figure 8. First, comparing the columns

shaded white (OLS estimates) and the columns shaded black (instrumental variables estimates),

in most cases the IV estimates are larger than the OLS estimates, although less precisely

estimated. These generally larger IV estimates are consistent with the presence of measurement

error in our index, leading to attenuation bias in our OLS results. Second, the magnitude of the

actual percentage increase in homicide rates among young Black males is far greater than for the

other variables considered. Our measure of crack cocaine explains a substantial part of this

increase, particularly in the instrumental variables specifications. According to our estimates,

crack can account for a 100-155 percent increase in Black male homicides among those aged 14-

17, and a change of 40-105 percent for Black male homicide among those aged 18-24. In

contrast, our crack measure accounts for only small changes in older Black male homicide and

White homicide. Third, for the birth/childhood outcomes, the impact of crack is larger for

Blacks than for Whites, but the results are not as stark as for homicide. We estimate that the rise

in crack between 1984 and 1989 accounts for roughly one-third of the increase in low birth

weight Black babies, less than one-third of the Black rate of unwed births, much or all of the

increase in Black child mortality and fetal death. For Whites, there is some apparent positive

association between crack and low birth weight babies and child mortality. Finally, we find a

positive relationship between crack and a wide range of crimes, although the magnitude is small

when compared to the impact on Black youth homicide. In the OLS specifications, violent crime

and property crime are both estimated to have increased by roughly 4 percent due to crack over

the period 1984-1989; in the IV specifications the increase is approximately 10 percent, but very

imprecisely estimated.




                                                24
        Figure 9 shows the estimated impact of changes in crack on the same set of outcomes for

the period 1989-2000. One-half to three-fourths of the decline in homicide by Black males aged

14-17 can be attributed to the combined impact of a decline in the level of the crack index, and

more importantly, the weakening of the link between crack and violence. By the year 2000,

most of the crack-related spike in youth homicide in the late 1980s was gone--because the

baseline level of youth homicide is almost three times higher in 1989 than in 1984, a 34 percent

decrease in the latter period is equal and opposite to almost a 100 percent increase in the earlier

period in terms of number of homicides. For older criminals and Whites, the impact of receding

crack does not consistently explain a substantial fraction of the observed homicide declines in the

1990s. For Blacks, the adverse effects of crack on birth outcomes in the 1980s are essentially

undone in the 1990s. The impacts on White birth outcomes are small and carry mixed signs. For

city-level crime measures, the reductions attributable to crack in the 1990s erase much, but often

not all, of the crack-driven increases in the 1980s. The notable exception to this pattern is the IV

estimate on violent crime, which suggests that violent crime rose (although not statistically

significantly) in the 1990s as crack receded (because the estimated impact of crack on violent

crime is negative in the 1990s).

        Table 6 replicates the analysis of Table 5, but using states as the unit of analysis rather

than our sample of large cities. The regression results in Table 5 are quite similar to what we

found for large cities; crack has the greatest impact on Black youth homicide, tends to be

positively related to adverse birth outcomes for Blacks and is not significantly related to most

outcomes for Whites. The impact of crack once again weakens over time. One important

difference relative to the city sample is that overall crime is not positively and statistically related

to crack in the state sample. In addition, there is less evidence of a strong impact of crack on




                                                  25
Black birth outcomes outside of the large cities. A number of additional outcome measures are

available at the state level: foster care rates, new prison commitments, unemployment rates, and

poverty rates. None of these outcomes reveals a pattern suggestive of an important impact of

crack in the expected direction. The negative relationship between crack and new prison

commitments, while perhaps surprising given the enormous increase in drug-related

incarceration over this period, hints at the possibility that aggressive punishment of drug sellers

may have reduced the severity of the crack epidemic. In other words, the negative coefficient in

the prison regression may primarily reflect reverse causality running from imprisonment to

crack, rather than vice versa.

       Figures 10 and 11 report the fraction of the observed variation in the outcomes at the state

level that can be explained by the crack index for the periods 1984-1989, and 1989-2000. Not

surprisingly given that crack was concentrated in large cities, the rise and fall of crack has less

explanatory value at the state level. For instance, the crack index explains less than one-third of

the overall rise in young Black male homicide at the state level, and only one-fifth of the increase

in Black low birth weight babies. Overall, comparing the results in Figures 8-11, and noting that

about 16 percent of the U.S. population resides in cities included in our city sample, we estimate

that about 70 percent of the adverse impact of crack was felt in large cities, implying that the

rates per capita were at least 10 times higher in large cities than in the rest of the country.



Section VI: Conclusion

       A number of social, criminological, and economic variables experienced negative shocks

in the late 1980s and early 1990s, particularly among Blacks. We find evidence consistent with

the hypothesis that the rise of crack cocaine played an important contributing role. To overcome




                                                  26
the absence of a reliable quantitative measure of crack, we construct a crack index based on a set

of imperfect, but plausible proxies. This crack index reproduces many of patterns described in

journalistic and ethnographic accounts including the timing of the crack epidemic and the

disproportionate impact on Blacks and Hispanics. We find a strong link between our measure of

crack and increased homicide rates by the young, especially among Blacks, in the late 1980s.

During that time period, our crack index is also associated with adverse outcomes for babies –

especially Black babies. By the early 1990s, however, the relationship between crack and

unwelcome social outcomes had largely disappeared. Thus, though crack use persisted at high

levels, it did so with relatively minor measurable social consequences. This finding is consistent

with an initially high level of crack-related violence as markets responded to the changes in

distribution methods associated with the technological shock that crack represented. After

property rights were established and crack prices fell sharply reducing the profitability of the

business, competition-related violence among drug dealers declined.

     One explanation for the weakening relationship between the crack index and birth

outcomes is the changing composition of crack users. Following its introduction, crack use was

overwhelmingly a drug of adolescents and young adults, and its use was widespread. For

instance, 7.2 percent of respondents in the National Household Survey on Drug Use and Health

(SAMHSA 2003b) who were 18-22 in 1985 report lifetime crack usage, compared to only 2.8

percent of those who were 33-37 years old in 1985. Later cohorts also use crack at much lower

rates than the first cohorts exposed to crack. In 2002, 0.6 percent of the age group that was 18-

22 in 1985 (and by 2002 was 35-39 years old) had used crack in the last month. In stark contrast,

less than 0.2 percent of the 18-22 year olds in 2002 report using crack in the prior month. As

crack addicts aged, fewer were in the high fertility age group. Presumably, as the dangers of




                                                 27
crack to the fetus became clear, women intending to get pregnant may have avoided crack and

those using crack may have been less likely to take a pregnancy to term.

     If the rise of crack indeed exerted an important influence on social outcomes over the last

two decades, then an obvious concern is that studies examining these outcomes which fail to

adequately control for crack may generate misleading conclusions. Ayres and Donohue (2003),

for instance, conjecture that the findings of Lott and Mustard (1997) and Lott (2000) regarding

the impact of concealed weapons laws are spurious, driven by the omitted variable crack cocaine.

Sailer (1999) and Joyce (2004) level the same charges at Donohue and Levitt’s (2001) analysis

of the impact of legalized abortion on crime. An important application of the crack index we

construct is as a control variable in future research.




                                                  28
                                                                 Appendix

Data

This paper uses data from the 144 cities with population above 100000 in 1980 and the 50 U.S. States. The following table describes
the data used in paper.

                                                                                                                                          City (C),
                                                                                                                                          State(S),
                                                                                               Years                           Analyzed   or Both
      Measure                     Explanation                        Availability             Covered          Source          by race?      (B)
Cocaine arrest rate    Percentage of all arrests made for     Most cities, almost all          1980-    Federal Bureau of          N          B
                       possession or distribution of          states                           2000     Investigation (FBI)
                       opium/cocaine and their derivatives,                                             Uniform Crime
                       minimum of 100 total arrests                                                     Reports (UCR)
Cocaine death rate     Per capita number of cocaine-          Almost all cities, all states    1980-    National Center for       N          B
                       related deaths*                                                         2000     Health Statistics
                                                                                                        (NCHS) Mortality
                                                                                                        Detail Files
Cocaine bust rate      Per capita number of busts involving   60 cities in 1980                1980-    Drug Enforcement          N          B
                       cocaine; minimum of 15 busts**         increasing to 110 cities by      1999     Administration (DEA)
                                                              1999, almost all states                   System to Retrieve
                                                                                                        Information From
                                                                                                        Drug Evidence
                                                                                                        (STRIDE)
Cocaine-related ER     Number of cocaine-related              17 cities in 1980                1980-    Drug Abuse Warning        N          C
visits                 emergency department visits per        increasing to 21 cities by       2000     Network (DAWN)
                       100000 population                      1999
Newspaper citation     Number of articles drawn from 341      52 cities in 1980                1980-    Lexis-Nexis               N          C
ratio                  U.S. periodicals containing a city     increasing to 132 cities by      2000
                       name, "crack", and "cocaine"           2000
                       divided by the number of articles
                       containing the city name and
                       "crime", minimum of 30 crime
                       articles
Male homicide rate     Male homicide victims ages 14-17       Most cities, almost all          1980-    FBI UCR                   Y          B
ages 14-17             per 100000 population                  states                           2000     Supplemental



                                                                     29
                                                                                                      Homicide Report

Male homicide rate      Male homicide victims ages 18-25      Most cities, almost all         1980-   FBI UCR                Y   B
ages 18-24              per 100000 population                 states                          2000    Supplemental
                                                                                                      Homicide Report
Male homicide rate      Male homicide victims ages 25 and     Most cities, almost all         1980-   FBI UCR                Y   B
age 25 and over         over per 100000 population            states                          2000    Supplemental
                                                                                                      Homicide Report
Violent crime rate      Violent crimes per 100000 residents   Almost all cities and           1980-   FBI UCR                N   B
                                                              states                          2000
Homicide rate           Homicides per 100000 residents        Almost all cities and           1980-   FBI UCR                N   B
                                                              states                          2000
Rape rate               Rapes per 100000 residents            Almost all cities and           1980-   FBI UCR                N   B
                                                              states                          2000
Assault rate            Assaults per 100000 residents         Almost all cities and           1980-   FBI UCR                N   B
                                                              states                          2000
Robbery rate            Robberies per 100000 residents        Almost all cities and           1980-   FBI UCR                N   B
                                                              states                          2000
Property crime rate     Property crimes per 100000            Almost all cities and           1980-   FBI UCR                N   B
                        residents                             states                          2000
Burglary rate           Burglaries per 100000 residents       Almost all cities and           1980-   FBI UCR                N   B
                                                              states                          2000
Larceny rate            Larcenies per 100000 residents        Almost all cities and           1980-   FBI UCR                N   B
                                                              states                          2000
Auto theft rate         Auto thefts per 100000 residents      Almost all cities and           1980-   FBI UCR                N   B
                                                              states                          2000
Weapons arrest rate     Percentage of all arrests made for    Most cities, almost all         1980-   FBI UCR                Y   B
                        weapons violations, minimum 100       states                          2000
                        total arrests
Rate low birth weight   Per capita number of births <2500     Almost all cities, all states   1980-   NCHS Natality Detail   Y   B
babies                  grams                                                                 2000    Files
Child mortality rate    Per capita number of child deaths     Almost all cities, all states   1980-   NCHS Mortality         Y   B
                        ages 1-4                                                              2000    Detail Files
Rate teen birth         Per capita number of teen births      Almost all cities, all states   1980-   NCHS Natality Detail   Y   B
                                                                                              2000    Files
Rate unwed birth        Per capita number of unwed births     Almost all cities, all states   1980-   NCHS Natality Detail   Y   B
                                                                                              2000    Files




                                                                     30
Fetal death rate        Per capita number of fetal deaths       117 cities before 1996, 57   1980-     NCHS Fetal Death             Y          B
                                                                cities after 1996, most      1998      Files
                                                                states
Foster care rate        Per capita number of children in        Most states                  1983-     American Public             N           S
                        state-managed foster-care                                            1995      Welfare Association
                                                                                                       (APWA) Voluntary
                                                                                                       Cooperative
                                                                                                       Information System
                                                                                                       (VCIS)
Female prison rate      Proportion of new court                 All states                   1980-     Bureau of Justice           N           S
                        commitments that are female                                          1998      Statistics (BJS)
                                                                                                       Correctional
                                                                                                       Populations in the
                                                                                                       United States
Total new prisoners     Total annual new court                  All states                   1980-     BJS Correctional            N           S
                        commitments                                                          1998      Populations in the
                                                                                                       United States
Unemployment rate       Fraction of the labor-force             All states                   1980-     Bureau of Labor             N           S
                        population unemployed                                                2000      Statistics (BLS)
Poverty rate            Fraction of the population below the    All states                   1980-     Census Bureau               N           S
                        federal poverty level                                                2000      Poverty Estimates
Per-capita income       Per capita income in 2000 dollars       All cities and states        1980-     Bureau of Economic          N           B
                                                                                             2000      Analysis (BEA)
                                                                                                       Regional Economic
                                                                                                       Accounts
Population by age,      City-level population measures are      All cities and states        1980-     Census Bureau                Y          B
sex, and race           constructed by linearly interpolating                                2000      Population Estimates
                        across decennial Census years;
                        state-level data use annual
                        estimates

* Cocaine deaths include accidental poisonings, suicides, and other deaths for which cocaine use was coded as a primary or contributing factor. Prior
to 1989, deaths were classified using the International Classification of Diseases 9th revision (ICD-9); starting in 1999 deaths were coded using the
10th revision. Cocaine death entries under ICD-9 include ICD codes 8552, 3042, and 3056 as well as ICD codes 8501-8699, 9501-9529, 9620-9629,
972, 9801-9879, 3050-3054, 3057-3059 with a secondary code of 9685. Cocaine deaths under ICD-10 include codes F140-F149 and F190-F199,
X42, X44, X62, X64, X85, Y12, and Y14 with secondary code T405. For more information on counting drug-related deaths see Lois Fingerhut &
Christine Cox, "Poisoning mortality, 1985-1995", Public Health Reports 113:3, 1998.

** Cocaine busts were defined as busts with primary drug code 9041 and secondary drug codes L000, L005, L010, L269, L900, and L920


                                                                       31
Estimating the Crack Index


The procedure for estimating the crack index is:

1. Remove city or state fixed effects from each of the crack proxies. Readjust each proxy to have
a grand mean of 0 during the period from 1980-1984.
2. Normalize each of the proxies to have unit variance. This eliminates differences in units of
measure across proxies.
3. The factor loadings (Γi) and scores (Zst) satisfy the relationship:

Yist = ZstΓi + εist                                                                                            (1)

Here i indexes a proxies, s a location, and t a time period. We require a scale restriction to
separately identify the loadings and scores. In our analysis, we impose that the sum of the
squared loadings is one.
4. Select an initial value for the loadings.
5. Stack each of the available proxies at a particular location/time. Use least squares regression
across the proxies to estimate the value of the crack index (score) at each location/time. These
regressions are within a location/time, across measures.
6. The squared loadings measure the extent to which each of the proxies contributes to the
overall crack index. To account for missing data, at each location/time, multiply the scores
calculated in step 5 by ∑ γ i , where γi represents the loading associated with proxy i and the
                               2

                              i
summation is made over all available proxies at that location/time.
7. Regress each proxy on the scores calculated in step 5 to generate a new estimate of the loading
associated with that proxy. These regressions are within a particular measure, across
locations/times.
8. Re-normalize the estimated loadings to satisfy the scale restriction.
9. Repeat steps 5-8 until the loadings converge.29
10. Test multiple initial choices for loadings to ensure that the convergent result is optimal in the
sense of minimizing the sum of the squared residuals in (1).

It is important to note that constructed in this manner the absolute mean and variance of the
crack index are arbitrary.




29
   Although the paper reports estimates of a single factor model, for verification purposes we also estimated models
allowing for multiple factors (i.e. Γi and Zst are vectors). With multiple factors the estimated loadings and scores are
unique only up to a rotation. The algorithm described will not converge unless a specific rotation is imposed at each
stage of estimation.


                                                          32
Appendix Table 1: Estimated Crack Indices for Cities and States

                                           Crack Index
City                     1985     1989        1993     1997    2000
Akron                     0.006    0.055      0.045   0.024     0.047
Albuquerque               0.019    1.370     1.557    1.944    2.168
Allentown                 0.158    0.964      1.012   1.175     1.136
Amarillo                 -0.015    0.203      0.622    0.242    0.286
Anaheim                   0.362    1.239      1.165   0.707     0.420
Anchorage                 0.047    0.258     -0.155   0.250    0.284
Ann Arbor                 0.021    0.000      0.115   -0.015   -0.016
Arlington Tx              0.041    2.440      0.817    0.845    0.785
Atlanta                   0.432    4.344      3.180    4.230    3.995
Aurora Co                 0.005    0.086      0.444   0.257    0.588
Austin                   -0.026    0.596      0.617    0.823    0.661
Baltimore                 0.095    2.156      2.640    2.980    1.184
Baton Rouge               0.151    1.297      0.852    1.224    0.880
Beaumont                  0.148    0.160      0.000    0.777    0.766
Birmingham                0.082    0.419      0.493   0.502     0.624
Boston                    0.912    3.662      3.810    3.501    3.129
Bridgeport                0.540    1.143     2.918    2.311    2.208
Buffalo                   0.536    2.687      4.376    4.563    3.214
Cedar Rapids             -0.035   -0.013     0.000    0.043     0.060
Charlotte                 0.427    2.273      1.222    0.352    0.434
Chattanooga               0.024    0.064      0.501   0.829     0.523
Chesapeake                0.093   1.334      1.494    0.725     0.943
Chicago                   0.134   2.689      1.795    1.805    2.284
Cincinnati                0.203    1.401      1.234   0.462     1.181
Cleveland                 0.045    2.935      2.426   1.835     0.837
Colorado Springs         -0.025   0.109      0.308    0.074    0.231
Columbus Ga               0.007   0.298      0.457    0.399    0.541
Columbus Oh               0.033   2.120      2.276    2.144    2.198
Corpus Christi           -0.007   0.045      0.166    0.068    0.156
Dallas                    0.161   1.946      1.884    1.951     2.103
Dayton                    0.028    0.721      0.435    0.838    1.578
Denver                    0.176    1.322      1.571    2.028    2.785
Des Moines               -0.014   1.084       0.104   0.445     0.426
Detroit                   0.126    1.939      2.100   1.739    2.057
Durham                   -0.060    0.186      0.513   0.892     0.597
El Paso                   0.675    2.407      1.347    1.436    1.300
Erie                     -0.009    0.631      0.611   0.518     0.882
Eugene                    0.009    0.066      0.569   0.550     0.422
Evansville               -0.019    0.055      0.037    0.158    0.063
Flint                    -0.021    1.020      0.639    0.443    0.466
Fort Lauderdale           0.254    0.668      2.529   0.343     0.640
Fort Wayne                0.000    1.606     0.738    1.024    0.552
Fort Worth                0.273    2.484      2.068   1.522     1.449
Fremont                   0.214    0.794      0.296   0.685     0.369
Fresno                    0.302    1.482      1.519   0.817     0.469
Garland                   0.013    0.996      0.579   0.900     0.846



                                             33
Gary                0.042   0.242   0.988   1.200     0.049
Glendale Az        -0.002   0.065   0.013   0.040     0.075
Grand Rapids       0.056    0.944   0.491   0.489    0.112
Greensboro          0.106   0.972   1.383   1.341    1.346
Hampton             0.534   1.171   1.763   1.744    2.068
Hartford           -0.014   0.605   0.924   0.487    0.760
Hialeah            -0.040   0.191   0.013   0.008    -0.016
Hollywood          -0.045   0.187   2.564   0.756    0.587
Honolulu            0.320   0.766   0.827   1.207    0.088
Houston             0.101   1.151   1.687   1.305    0.726
Huntington Beach    0.124   0.654   0.225   0.148     0.293
Huntsville          0.000   0.032   0.000   0.070    0.033
Independence       -0.044   0.356   0.133   0.300    0.204
Indianapolis        0.014   0.833   0.612   0.889    0.858
Irving             -0.023   0.050   0.396   0.371     0.408
Jackson            0.000    0.097   0.051      .        .
Jacksonville        0.236   0.817   1.138   0.408     0.600
Jersey City         0.185   2.652   1.884   2.979    2.604
Kansas City Ks      0.040   2.056   0.644   0.311    1.750
Kansas City Mo      0.140   1.525   0.272   0.550    0.919
Knoxville           0.018   0.275   0.400    0.485    0.598
Lafayette           0.000   2.164   1.161    1.365    0.682
Lakewood            0.070   0.229   0.057   -0.036    0.152
Lansing            0.070    0.815   0.316   0.405    0.387
Las Vegas          0.172    0.513   0.776   0.866    1.226
Lexington           0.181   0.687   0.578   0.157     0.191
Lincoln             0.011   0.649   0.326   0.346     0.281
Little Rock         0.035   1.435   1.095   0.939     0.820
Livonia             0.240   0.407   0.145   0.104     0.557
Long Beach          0.038   2.689   2.574   2.293    1.807
Los Angeles         1.118   3.809   2.626   2.356    2.226
Louisville          0.033   0.929   0.505   1.170     0.665
Lubbock             0.053   0.295   0.032   0.377     0.488
Madison             0.116   0.408   1.178   0.667     0.349
Memphis             0.005   0.849   0.439   0.575     1.468
Mesa               -0.049   0.158   0.029   0.120    0.244
Miami               0.217   1.556   1.011   1.354     1.278
Milwaukee          -0.029   1.294   0.997   1.554    0.790
Minneapolis         0.416   1.677   1.670   2.373    1.630
Mobile              0.194   1.408   0.519   1.195     1.895
Montgomery         -0.035   0.711   0.201   0.946    0.814
Nashville          -0.038   0.464   0.226   0.421     0.356
New Orleans         0.757   4.806   2.629   3.129    1.217
New York            0.266   3.720   4.624   3.975     2.922
Newark              0.148   3.814   3.087   7.438    6.409
Newport News        0.141   0.768   0.721   0.762    0.936
Norfolk            0.071    0.605   0.331   0.465    0.502
Oakland            0.491    4.122   4.286   3.109    3.265
Oklahoma City       0.314   1.907   1.625   1.707    1.272
Omaha              -0.042   2.179   0.682   0.703     0.612



                                    34
Orlando             0.345   0.686    2.306    0.981   0.583
Pasadena Tx         0.282   0.240    0.383    0.095   0.000
Paterson            0.481   2.515    2.610    4.244   3.947
Peoria Il           0.002   0.269    0.065    0.021   0.113
Philadelphia        0.385   4.794    3.814    3.750   4.087
Phoenix             0.490   2.260    1.431    1.653   2.227
Pittsburgh          0.133   1.169    3.816    2.988   3.522
Portland            0.136   2.664    2.737    2.455   2.253
Providence          0.220   1.409    1.096    3.640   3.180
Raleigh            -0.002   1.255   1.584    1.631    0.978
Richmond Va         0.007   0.810    1.127   0.739    0.626
Riverside           0.308   2.108    1.890    1.685   1.360
Rochester           0.026   0.309   0.181     0.270   0.173
Rockford           -0.030   0.218   0.306     0.082   0.108
Sacramento         -0.059   2.923    1.515    1.043   1.226
Salt Lake City      0.142   1.561   1.807     3.892   4.281
San Antonio         0.033   2.461    1.789    0.687   0.388
San Diego           0.114   3.472    2.108    1.982   2.217
San Francisco       0.162   5.918    4.871    3.550   2.976
San Jose            0.600   2.048    0.834    1.198   0.559
Santa Ana           0.814   0.945    1.623    0.737   0.670
Savannah            0.024   0.001   -0.005    0.099   0.024
Seattle             0.166   3.021    4.290    2.570   2.600
Shreveport          0.008   0.561    0.691    0.365   0.501
South Bend         -0.008   0.262    0.341    0.365   0.528
Spokane             0.125   0.449    0.223    0.216   0.606
Springfield Ma      0.051   0.918    1.057    2.295   1.221
Springfield Mo      0.000   0.099    0.460    1.457   0.005
St. Louis           0.156   1.638    2.167    1.449   1.638
St. Paul            0.212   1.715    1.622    1.259   0.175
St. Petersburg      0.225   0.896    2.050    0.536   0.395
Sterling Heights    0.000   0.000   -0.001    0.096   0.285
Stockton            0.466   1.031    1.337    0.946   0.807
Syracuse            0.283   0.280    0.367    0.353   0.276
Tacoma              0.002   0.146    0.356    0.296   1.459
Tampa               0.407   0.854    1.334    0.647   0.527
Toledo              0.071   0.488    0.328    0.414   0.500
Topeka              0.003   0.037   -0.017   -0.017   0.204
Torrance            0.103   1.173    0.252    0.127   0.564
Tucson             -0.011   1.591    1.045    1.015   2.727
Tulsa               0.065   0.256    0.258    0.108   0.184
Virginia Beach     -0.007   0.007   0.045    0.032    0.044
Warren             0.008    0.396   1.177     0.000   0.106
Washington          0.593   3.183   1.731     0.716   0.807
Wichita             0.015   0.010    0.039    0.029   0.133
Winston-Salem       0.018   0.142   0.169     0.507   0.411
Worcester          0.248    0.747   1.254     0.136   1.356
Yonkers             0.358   3.242    2.048    2.392   1.508




                                    35
                                   Crack Index
State            1985     1989        1993     1997    2000
Alabama           0.265    0.878      0.314    2.009   1.087
Alaska           -0.006    0.690     -0.075    0.644   1.357
Arizona           0.640   1.962       0.701    1.252    1.991
Arkansas          0.134   1.274       1.093    0.947   0.664
California        1.542    3.837      2.220    1.462    1.450
Colorado         -0.076   0.846      0.797    0.798    1.698
Connecticut       0.658   2.250       3.549    3.374   2.273
Delaware         0.106    2.764      3.066     5.266   2.096
Florida           1.241   0.597       2.518    0.842   0.332
Georgia           0.815    3.160      2.333    3.382   2.240
Hawaii           -0.011   2.822       1.893    1.873   0.188
Idaho             0.166    1.157      0.279    0.217    0.276
Illinois          0.489    2.001      1.976    0.823    1.726
Indiana           0.076    0.565      0.670    1.765    0.864
Iowa             -0.045   0.353      -0.069    0.499   0.439
Kansas            0.641   1.513       0.205    0.509   0.652
Kentucky          0.177    0.764      0.735    1.905   1.316
Louisiana         0.742   2.744      2.279    2.796    1.464
Maine             0.402    0.019      0.273    0.939   0.408
Maryland          1.271    4.676      4.351    5.292   3.002
Massachusetts     1.258   3.447       3.451    4.137    2.500
Michigan          0.423   1.145       1.051    1.196   1.383
Minnesota         0.631   0.502       0.251    0.520   0.551
Mississippi       0.029   1.042       1.007    1.657    1.013
Missouri          0.632    1.046      1.232    0.923    1.049
Montana           0.023    0.081      0.002    0.128   -0.050
Nebraska          0.000    0.090     -0.001    0.019   0.079
Nevada            0.757    1.127      1.794    2.233    2.934
New Hampshire     0.303   0.965      0.448     1.551   0.490
New Jersey        0.639    3.300      3.025    5.163    3.417
New Mexico        0.892   3.056       3.021    4.779    3.638
New York          0.705    4.372      4.661    4.141    2.542
North Carolina    0.228   1.587      1.314     2.038   1.505
North Dakota     -0.006   0.048      -0.073   -0.054   0.224
Ohio              0.438    2.531      1.789    2.105   1.493
Oklahoma          0.316   0.942       1.095    1.316    0.930
Oregon            0.552   2.220       2.271    1.987   1.648
Pennsylvania      0.438    2.295      2.609    2.508    2.160
Rhode Island      1.224   3.231       1.827    2.959   2.447
South Carolina    0.400   2.254       0.801    2.356   1.639
South Dakota      0.043   -0.097      0.029    0.067   0.117
Tennessee         0.319   1.305       1.004    1.579    1.328
Texas             0.759    2.271      1.956    2.389    1.818
Utah              0.025   1.355       1.487    2.961   2.069
Vermont           0.216    0.345     -0.020    0.525    0.190
Virginia          0.177    2.281      2.338    2.279    1.393
Washington        0.519   2.824       1.547    1.997   2.094
West Virginia     0.594   1.171       0.590    0.571   0.649



                                     36
Wisconsin   0.220    0.854   0.662   0.881    0.610
Wyoming     -0.015   0.063   0.056   -0.109   0.061




                             37
Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                                       Pre-1985             1985-Present
Variable                                N          Mean         SD        Mean        SD
City-Level
 Crack Proxies
  Cocaine arrest rate                  3840     0.01259      0.01684     0.04211     0.03374
  Cocaine death rate                   3570    3.284E-6     6.179E-6     2.146E-5    2.612E-5
  Cocaine bust rate                    2186    1.2815E-4    2.1939E-4   2.2881E-4   6.9156E-4
  Cocaine-related ER visits             434      11.12        18.28        124.7       80.87
  Newspaper citation ratio             4076    0.001914     0.005378     0.03343     0.03204
 Homicide Measures
  Male homicide rate ages 14-17        4483        0.3627     0.657       0.749       1.193
  Male homicide rate ages 18-24        4483          2.4      2.687        3.23       4.029
  Male homicide rate age 25 and over   4483        7.253      6.967       6.909       6.997
 Crime Measures
  Violent Crime                        4641        934.6      676.1       1163        800.5
    Homicide rate                      4641        13.66       11.4       14.18       13.47
    Rape rate                          4641        48.04      30.84        53.2       37.65
    Assault rate                       4641        452.9      324.4       658.5       468.6
    Robbery rate                       4641         420       414.1       437.3       381.8
  Property Crime                       4659        8066       3623        7823        4085
    Burglary rate                      4659        2462       1165        1887        1032
    Larceny rate                       4659        5054       2351        5108        2886
    Auto theft rate                    4659        550.2      582.8       827.3       738.2
 Other Outcome Measures
  Weapons arrest rate                  4190     0.01676     0.007955     0.01563    0.008125
  Rate low birth weight babies         3570    0.001502     6.638E-4    0.001717    8.4261E-4
  Child mortality rate                 3570    5.554E-5     3.218E-5    4.769E-5     3.141E-5
  Rate teen birth                      3570    0.003102     0.001566    0.003186    0.001727
  Rate unwed birth                     2031    0.005438      0.00368    0.008098    0.005323
  Fetal death rate                     2133    2.1824E-4    2.1755E-4   2.215E-4    2.5003E-4
State-Level
 Crack Proxies
  Cocaine arrest rate                  1034    0.005265     0.005751    0.01918     0.01675
  Cocaine death rate                   1150    1.207E-6     1.549E-6    8.651E-6    8.277E-6
  Cocaine bust rate                    1106    2.294E-5     2.774E-5     4.54E-5    4.107E-5
 Homicide Measures
  Male homicide rate ages 14-17        1275        0.1504    0.1347      0.2282      0.2193
  Male homicide rate ages 18-24        1275        1.025     0.7042      1.061       0.8437
  Male homicide rate age 25 and over   1275        3.663     2.297       2.869        1.92
 Crime Measures
  Violent Crime                        946         406.3      216.1       480.4       248.9
    Homicide rate                      955         6.663      3.859       6.155       3.457
    Rape rate                          947         29.55      13.39       34.92       13.95
    Assault rate                       954         231.8      114.6       301.1       158.5
    Robbery rate                       955         140.7      112.5       142.6       105.2
  Property Crime                       955         4489       1193        4221        1149
    Burglary rate                      955         1277       440.9       969.4       362.1


                                              38
  Larceny rate                  955         2871      720.1       2834        736.1
  Auto theft rate               955         346.8     188.2       418.1       217.4
Other Outcome Measures
 Weapons arrest rate            1034     0.01277    0.006142     0.01151    0.005613
 Rate low birth weight babies   1050    0.001103    3.2563E-4   0.001097    3.4852E-4
 Child mortality rate           1050      4.3E-5    1.507E-5    3.126E-5     1.299E-5
 Rate teen birth                1050    0.002349    7.8761E-4   0.001963    7.1492E-4
 Rate unwed birth                861    0.002818     0.00114    0.004169    0.001636
 Fetal death rate                857    2.4683E-4   3.5718E-4   2.2531E-4   3.3293E-4
 Foster care rate                381    0.001074    4.1005E-4   0.001245    5.2851E-4
 Female prison rate             1149     0.05824     0.02251     0.08528     0.02475
 Total new prisoners            1149       2724        3146        5843        7826
 Unemployment rate              1150      0.1431     0.04261      0.1277     0.03957
 Poverty rate                   1250     0.07207     0.02547     0.05529     0.01812




                                       39
Table 2: Correlations in Crack Proxies

                                          National Data

                                         Raw Correlations

                               Arrests         Deaths          Busts       ER     Cites
Cocaine arrests                 1.000
Cocaine deaths                  0.839          1.000
Cocaine busts                   0.648          0.225           1.000
Cocaine-related ER visits       0.951          0.881           0.394      1.000
Newspaper citations             0.922          0.630           0.754      0.812   1.000


                                         City-Level Data

                            Correlations Removing City Fixed Effects

                               Arrests         Deaths          Busts       ER     Cites
Cocaine arrests                 1.000
Cocaine deaths                  0.425          1.000
Cocaine busts                   0.147          0.114           1.000
Cocaine-related ER visits       0.682          0.490           0.194      1.000
Newspaper citations             0.385          0.185           0.086      0.467   1.000


                    Correlations Removing City and Year Fixed Effects

                               Arrests         Deaths          Busts       ER     Cites
Cocaine arrests                 1.000
Cocaine deaths                  0.164          1.000
Cocaine busts                   0.049          0.043            1.000
Cocaine-related ER visits       0.262          0.123            0.082     1.000
Newspaper citations            -0.001          0.003           -0.052     0.020   1.000


                                            State-Level Data

                              Correlations Removing State Fixed Effects

                                              Arrests          Deaths     Busts
                Cocaine arrests                1.000
                Cocaine deaths                 0.545           1.000
                Cocaine busts                  0.282           0.258      1.000




                                                 40
                                      Correlations Removing State and Year Fixed Effects

                                                                   Arrests                Deaths                Busts
                           Cocaine arrests                          1.000
                           Cocaine deaths                           0.223                   1.000
                           Cocaine busts                            0.097                   0.140               1.000




______________________________________________________________________________
The national correlations are the correlations across time of national aggregate annual values of the five crack proxies. The city correlations are
correlations across location and time for the 144 U.S. cities with population above 100000 in 1980. The state correlations are correlations across
location and time for the 50 U.S. states. The data spans the years 1980-2000.




                                                                        41
Table 3: Estimates of Factor Loadings



 Crack Proxies                                       National                 City-Level                           State-Level
 Cocaine arrests                                        0.492            0.572            0.578             0.649             0.590

 Cocaine deaths                                         0.415            0.495            0.746             0.639             0.668

 Cocaine busts                                          0.351            0.110            0.129             0.414             0.453

 Cocaine-related ER visits                              0.441            0.509            0.158                .                 .

 Newspaper citations                                    0.518            0.396            0.262                .                 .

 % of variation explained by factor                     0.765            0.428            0.310             0.563             0.495
 No. Obs.                                                 21             3024             3024              1050              1050
 Remove year fixed effects                               No               No               Yes               No                Yes




______________________________________________________________________________
The table reports results of factor analysis to extract the first principle component of the five crack proxies. Each of the proxies was standardized
to have unit variance over the period 1980-2000 and a grand mean of zero from 1980-1984 prior to estimation of the loadings. The loadings are
restricted to have a squared sum of 1. The "% of Variation" row reports the percentage of the total variance in the transformed variables that can
be explained by the first principle component. The city sample includes U.S. cities with a population above 100000 in 1980. The city and state
estimates remove city or state fixed effects prior to factor analysis. Columns 3 and 5 also remove year fixed effects from each of the measures
prior to factor analysis.




                                                                         42
Table 4: Areas With Highest and Lowest Average Crack Levels



  Cities With Highest Average Crack Levels          States With Highest Average Crack Levels

Rank       City Name        Average Crack         Rank       City Name        Average Crack
 1     Newark                   3.693              1     Maryland                 2.836
 2     San Francisco            2.948               2    New York                 2.831
 3     Atlanta                  2.651               3    New Mexico               2.583
 4     Philadelphia             2.651               4    New Jersey               2.495
 5     New York                 2.609               5    Massachusetts            2.445
 6     Buffalo                  2.361               6    Delaware                 2.339
 7     Oakland                  2.340              7     Connecticut              2.055
 8     Boston                   2.306               8    Rhode Island             1.940
 9     Paterson                 2.267               9    Georgia                  1.919
 10    Seattle                  2.023              10    Pennsylvania             1.723


  Cities With Lowest Average Crack Levels           States With Lowest Average Crack Levels

Rank       City Name        Average Crack         Rank       City Name        Average Crack
 1     Huntsville               0.008               1    South Dakota             -0.008
 2     Hialeah                  0.009               2    Montana                  0.018
 3     Jackson                  0.014               3    Wyoming                   0.021
 4     Virginia Beach           0.021               4    North Dakota             0.022
 5     Wichita                  0.027               5    Nebraska                  0.023
 6     Cedar Rapids             0.027               6    Iowa                      0.177
 7     Akron                    0.027               7    Maine                     0.221
 8     Sterling Heights         0.028               8    Idaho                     0.317
 9     Topeka                   0.030              9     Minnesota                0.338
 10    Glendale Az              0.034              10    Vermont                   0.374




                                                         43
Table 5: Estimated Effects of Crack on Outcome Measures, City Sample


                                                     Coefficient on Crack
Outcome                            Mean      1985-1989 1990-1994       1995-2000
Black
 Male homicide rate ages 14-17     0.672        0.175**        0.108**        0.0351
                                               (0.0372)       (0.0301)       (0.0278)
 Male homicide rate ages 18-24      3.07        0.266*         0.335**         0.24**
                                                (0.107)       (0.0927)       (0.0889)
 Male homicide rate over age 24     6.39        0.308*         0.307*         0.0798
                                                (0.144)         (0.12)        (0.113)
 Weapons arrest rate              0.00892    -1.605E-4       -1.368E-4     -3.084E-4
                                             (1.846E-4)      (1.717E-4)     (1.74E-4)
 Rate low birth weight            8.74E-4     4.07E-5**      3.291E-5**     3.852E-6
                                             (7.164E-6)      (6.453E-6)    (6.525E-6)
 Rate teen birth                   0.0015     3.19E-5**       1.181E-5    -5.225E-5**
                                             (1.026E-5)      (9.443E-6)    (9.798E-6)
 Rate unwed birth                 0.00495    1.388E-4**      1.337E-4**   -8.391E-5**
                                             (2.941E-5)      (2.632E-5)    (2.673E-5)
 Child mortality rate             1.702E-5   1.464E-6**       4.061E-7     -2.938E-7
                                             (5.373E-7)      (4.122E-7)    (3.701E-7)
 Fetal death rate†                9.025E-5    4.713E-6       5.317E-6*      -1.305E-6
                                             (2.581E-6)      (2.323E-6)    (2.541E-6)
White
 Male homicide rate ages 14-17     0.359       0.0217         0.0618**      -0.0138
                                              (0.0252)           (0.02)    (0.0182)
 Male homicide rate ages 18-24      1.69       0.0159           0.212**     0.0869
                                              (0.0621)         (0.0512)    (0.0476)
 Male homicide rate over age 24     4.75        0.125            0.159      -0.0918
                                               (0.116)         (0.0951)    (0.0883)
 Weapons arrest rate               0.0078    -2.299E-4       -1.928E-4    -9.049E-5
                                             (1.772E-4)       (1.65E-4)   (1.668E-4)
 Rate low birth weight            8.919E-4    1.179E-5        1.216E-5     3.781E-7
                                             (7.741E-6)      (6.893E-6)   (6.882E-6)
 Rate teen birth                  0.00171     4.831E-6        1.372E-5     1.251E-5
                                             (1.229E-5)      (1.128E-5)   (1.167E-5)
 Rate unwed birth                 0.00306     4.496E-5       5.377E-5*    -2.268E-6
                                             (2.599E-5)      (2.336E-5)   (2.402E-5)
 Child mortality rate             3.782E-5    2.09E-6*        1.101E-6    -5.466E-8
                                             (8.565E-7)      (6.584E-7)   (5.916E-7)
 Fetal death rate†                1.818E-4    4.201E-6        7.559E-6    1.223E-5*
                                             (5.193E-6)      (4.788E-6)   (5.249E-6)
Crime Measures
 Violent crime rate                1570        29.6*           53.1**       0.0899
                                                (14)           (13.1)        (13.6)
  Homicide rate                     21.9      0.744*          0.925**       -0.169
                                              (0.326)         (0.289)       (0.283)
  Rape rate                         58.8        2.08          0.0208         -1.59
                                               (1.16)          (1.03)        (1.01)


                                                        44
     Assault rate                                        767               29*                34.8**                9.96
                                                                          (11.4)              (10.6)               (10.8)
     Robbery rate                                        721              -2.53               16.8**               -5.12
                                                                          (5.99)              (5.68)               (6.03)
   Property crime rate                                  8280              172**                3.55                -46.3
                                                                          (55.2)              (52.2)                 (55)
     Burglary rate                                      2160               4.85               -12.3                -11.7
                                                                          (18.7)              (17.7)               (18.6)
     Larceny rate                                       5050              97.5**              -28.4                -9.35
                                                                          (36.6)              (34.5)               (36.4)
     Auto theft rate                                    1070              72.7**              47.1**                -29.5
                                                                          (18.6)              (17.5)               (18.2)




______________________________________________________________________________
The “Coefficient” columns report estimated coefficients from OLS regressions of the outcome measures on the crack index interacted with indicator variables for the
years 1985-1989, 1990-1994, and 1995-2000. The regressions include controls for percent of the population Hispanic, percent of the population Black, log population,
and log per capita income as well as city and year fixed effects. Standard errors are in parenthesis. * denotes significance at the 5% level; ** denotes significance at the
1% level. The OLS estimates were corrected to allow AR(1) serial correlation in the error terms. The coefficient on crack in the 1980-84 period is imprecisely
estimated due to the small amount of variation in crack during this period and is omitted from the table.




                                                                                    45
Table 6: Estimated Effects of Crack on Outcome Measures, State Sample


                                                     Coefficient on Crack
Outcome                            Mean      1985-1989   1990-1994      1995-2000
Black
 Male homicide rate ages 14-17     0.184       0.0352**        0.0258**      0.0184**
                                                 (0.01)       (0.00748)     (0.00638)
 Male homicide rate ages 18-24     0.868       0.0723**         0.125**      0.0549**
                                               (0.0278)        (0.0217)      (0.0189)
 Male homicide rate over age 24     1.88        0.144**         0.104**       0.0134
                                               (0.0438)        (0.0337)      (0.0292)
 Weapons arrest rate              0.00553     3.889E-6        -3.733E-5     -9.123E-5
                                             (1.346E-4)      (1.096E-4)    (9.967E-5)
 Rate low birth weight            3.465E-4   1.288E-5**       1.968E-6      -2.209E-6
                                             (3.029E-6)      (2.521E-6)    (2.292E-6)
 Rate teen birth                   0.227       0.00425       -0.00497**    -0.00611**
                                              (0.00261)       (0.00187)     (0.00162)
 Rate unwed birth                 0.00184    4.366E-5**        3.14E-5*     -1.109E-5
                                             (1.575E-5)      (1.249E-5)    (1.101E-5)
 Child mortality rate             7.284E-6    1.504E-7        -1.931E-7   -5.009E-7**
                                             (1.962E-7)      (1.414E-7)    (1.221E-7)
 Fetal death rate†                6.935E-5   -4.113E-7        1.062E-6      -1.836E-7
                                             (1.899E-6)      (1.561E-6)    (1.432E-6)
White
 Male homicide rate ages 14-17     0.139      9.242E-4          0.0111     -0.00162
                                              (0.00871)       (0.00611)    (0.00514)
 Male homicide rate ages 18-24     0.654        0.0295          0.0279     -0.00707
                                               (0.0243)        (0.0174)     (0.0147)
 Male homicide rate over age 24     2.11        0.0568          0.0749       -0.0476
                                               (0.0633)        (0.0466)     (0.0396)
 Weapons arrest rate              0.00774    -3.323E-4*       -1.338E-4     -1.27E-4
                                             (1.334E-4)      (1.119E-4)    (1.05E-4)
 Rate low birth weight            8.022E-4    3.892E-6         2.085E-6    2.645E-6
                                             (5.708E-6)      (4.813E-6)   (4.415E-6)
 Rate teen birth                   0.111      1.254E-4       -7.718E-4*   -3.552E-4
                                             (3.726E-4)      (3.169E-4)   (2.931E-4)
 Rate unwed birth                 0.00237     2.822E-5         2.768E-6      4.71E-6
                                             (1.765E-5)      (1.411E-5)   (1.256E-5)
 Child mortality rate             2.831E-5    -1.534E-7       1.03E-6**   -1.862E-7
                                             (4.759E-7)      (3.295E-7)   (2.829E-7)
 Fetal death rate†                1.823E-4    3.035E-6         3.043E-6    1.725E-6
                                             (3.727E-6)      (3.155E-6)   (2.933E-6)
Crime Measures
 Violent crime rate                 592         -6.94            3.03        -3.28
                                               (6.41)           (5.48)       (5.15)
  Homicide rate                     7.8       -0.0139           0.24*       -0.132
                                               (0.12)         (0.0987)     (0.0904)
  Rape rate                         35.4       -0.431          -0.898       -0.579
                                              (0.726)          (0.582)      (0.519)


                                                        46
    Assault rate                                       346              -1.81              -0.0541                -1.99
                                                                        (4.05)              (3.47)               (3.28)
    Robbery rate                                       208               -5.3                3.64                 -1.81
                                                                        (3.51)              (2.95)               (2.74)
   Property crime rate                                4490               28.8                11.9                 -14.4
                                                                        (30.9)              (26.8)               (25.5)
    Burglary rate                                     1130               5.06                6.32                  4.56
                                                                        (9.27)              (8.02)               (7.65)
    Larceny rate                                      2860               13.4               -8.47                 -8.22
                                                                        (20.5)              (17.7)               (16.8)
    Auto theft rate                                    507               10.7               14.7**               -10.1*
                                                                        (6.21)              (5.37)               (5.12)
 Other Measures
  Foster care rate                                  0.00137          -3.437E-6           -4.417E-5             1.728E-5
                                                                     (2.635E-5)          (2.749E-5)           (3.878E-5)
   Female prison rate                               0.0813            -0.00159            -0.00166            -0.00494**
                                                                      (0.00165)           (0.00127)            (0.00118)
   Total new prisoners                               11400              -281*                -63.1               -97.1
                                                                        (136)                (122)               (124)
   Unemployment rate                                0.0636           -6.537E-4            6.801E-4             3.055E-4
                                                                     (9.395E-4)          (7.682E-4)           (6.915E-4)
   Poverty rate                                      0.136            -0.00193             0.00242              0.00151
                                                                      (0.00188)            (0.0014)            (0.00122)




__________________________________________________________________________________________
The “Coefficient” columns report estimated coefficients from OLS regressions of the outcome measures on the crack index interacted with indicator variables for the
years 1985-1989, 1990-1994, and 1995-2000. The regressions include controls for percent of the population Hispanic, percent of the population Black, log population,
and log per capita income as well as state and year fixed effects. Standard errors are in parenthesis. * denotes significance at the 5% level; ** denotes significance at
the 1% level. The OLS estimates were corrected to allow AR(1) serial correlation in the error terms. The coefficient on crack in the 1980-84 period is imprecisely
estimated due to the small amount of variation in crack during this period and is omitted from the table.




                                                                                   47
Figure 1: Black Male Homicide Rates by Age



                                    Black Male Homicide Rates by Age

                     30

                     25
     Homicide rate




                     20
                                                                                            Ages 14-17
                     15                                                                     Ages 18-24
                                                                                            Over Age 24
                     10

                      5

                      0
                      1975   1980     1985          1990         1995         2000   2005
                                                   Year




______________________________________________________________________________
The figure depicts population-weighted national averages derived from state data.




                                                                      48
Figure 2: Outcome Measures



                                                      Weapons Arrests                                                                                   Fetal Death Rate

                                   0.024                                                                                             0.0007
   made for weapons violations




                                   0.022
    Percentage of total arrests




                                                                                                        Per capita number of fetal
                                                                                                                                     0.0006
                                    0.02
                                                                                                                                     0.0005
                                   0.018




                                                                                                                  deaths
                                                                                               Black                                                                                  Black
                                   0.016                                                                                             0.0004
                                                                                               White                                                                                  White
                                   0.014
                                                                                                                                     0.0003
                                   0.012
                                                                                                                                     0.0002
                                    0.01
                                   0.008                                                                                             0.0001
                                       1979    1984      1989        1994          1999                                                   1979   1984      1989         1994   1999
                                                           Year                                                                                              Year



                                                  Low Birth Weight Babies                                                                                 Foster Care

                                                                                                                                     0.007
                                   0.1365                                             0.0665
   Percentage of births with low




                                                                                                                                     0.006




                                                                                                        individuals in foster care
                                   0.1345                                             0.0645



                                                                                                          Per capita number of
                                                                                                                                     0.005
                                   0.1325                                             0.0625
           birth weight




                                                                                               Black                                 0.004                                            Black
                                   0.1305                                             0.0605
                                                                                               White                                 0.003                                            White
                                   0.1285                                             0.0585

                                   0.1265                                             0.0565                                         0.002

                                   0.1245                                             0.0545                                         0.001

                                   0.1225                                             0.0525                                            0
                                        1979   1984     1989      1994      1999                                                        1979     1984      1989         1994   1999
                                                         Year                                                                                                Year


___________________________________________________________________________________________________________
The figures depict population-weighted annual national averages derived from state-level data.




                                                                                                       49
Figure 3: Crack Proxies


                                                                   Cocaine Arrests                                                                                                                              Cocaine-Related Deaths

                                             0.07                                                                                                                                          4.50E-05
  Percentage of arrests related to cocaine




                                                                                                                                                                                           4.00E-05




                                                                                                                                                     Per-capita number of cocaine deaths
                                             0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                           3.50E-05
                                             0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                           3.00E-05
                                             0.04                                                                                                                                          2.50E-05

                                             0.03                                                                                                                                          2.00E-05

                                                                                                                                                                                           1.50E-05
                                             0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                           1.00E-05
                                             0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                           5.00E-06

                                               0                                                                                                                                           0.00E+00
                                               1979        1984          1989                                                  1994      1999                                                     1979          1984           1989         1994    1999
                                                                                                                Year                                                                                                                 Year




                                                                    Citation Ratio                                                                                                                    Cocaine-Related Emergency Department Visits

                                               0.08                                                                                                                                          200

                                                                                                                                                                                             180
                                               0.07
  Ratio of "crack cocaine" articles to




                                                                                                                                                     department visits per 100000



                                                                                                                                                                                             160
                                                                                                                                                     Cocainee-related emergency




                                               0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                             140
             "crime" articles




                                               0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                             120

                                               0.04                                                                                                                                          100

                                               0.03                                                                                                                                           80
                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                               0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                               0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                    0                                                                                                                                          0
                                                    1979    1984                               1989                            1994      1999                                                  1979           1984            1989          1994    1999
                                                                                                                 Year                                                                                                           Year



                                                                                                                                         DEA Cocaine Busts

                                                                                                                0.00035
                                                                         Per capita number of cocaine e busts




                                                                                                                 0.0003

                                                                                                                0.00025

                                                                                                                 0.0002

                                                                                                                0.00015

                                                                                                                 0.0001

                                                                                                                0.00005

                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                        1979          1984       1989                                                  1994            1999
                                                                                                                                                     Year




______________________________________________________________________________
The figures depict population-weighted annual national averages derived from city-level data.




                                                                                                                                                50
Figure 4: Crack Indices

                            Aggregate National Crack Index                                                                          City-Level National Crack Index

                 7                                                                                                  2.5

                 6
                                                                                                                      2
                 5
                                                                                                                    1.5




                                                                                                      Crack index
                 4
   Crack index




                 3                                                                                                    1

                 2
                                                                                                                    0.5
                 1
                                                                                                                      0
                  0
                                                                                                                      1979          1984          1989          1994   1999
                  1979    1984              1989                           1994   1999
                 -1                                                                                                 -0.5
                                                   Year                                                                                                  Year



                                                                                  State-Level National Crack Index

                                                                    2.5

                                                                      2


                                                                    1.5
                                                      Crack index




                                                                      1

                                                                    0.5


                                                                      0
                                                                      1979        1984         1989                          1994          1999
                                                                    -0.5
                                                                                                      Year


____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
The reported indices are population weighted national estimates of the crack index.




                                                                                                51
Figure 5: Crack Indices by Race


                                   Crack Indices By Race (City Level)

                  3.5

                       3

                  2.5

                       2
    Crack index




                                                                                                          Black
                  1.5                                                                                     White
                                                                                                          Hispanic
                       1

                  0.5

                     0
                     1979    1984               1989              1994              1999
                  -0.5
                                                   Year



                                 Crack Indices By Race (State Level)

                  10


                   8


                   6
    Crack index




                                                                                                          Black
                   4                                                                                      White
                                                                                                          Hispanic

                   2


                   0
                   1979     1984               1989               1994              1999

                  -2
                                                  Year



______________________________________________________________________________
The race-specific indices were estimated using year-by-year cross sectional regressions of the city-level crack index on the population
percentages of Blacks, Whites, and Hispanics.




                                                                         52
Figure 6: Crack Indices by Region


                                           Crack Indices by Region

                    3


                  2.5


                    2

                                                                                                              Northeast
    Crack index




                  1.5
                                                                                                              South
                                                                                                              Midwest
                    1
                                                                                                              West

                  0.5


                    0
                    1979      1984               1989               1994               1999
                  -0.5
                                                     Year



______________________________________________________________________________
The regional indices were estimated using year-by-year cross sectional regressions of the city-level crack index on indicator variables for the
specified regions.




                                                                        53
Figure 7: Crack Indices by City Size


                                    Crack Indices by 1980 Population

                    3


                  2.5


                    2
    Crack index




                  1.5
                                                                                                              <350000
                                                                                                              >350000
                    1


                  0.5


                    0
                    1979      1984               1989               1994               1999
                  -0.5
                                                     Year




______________________________________________________________________________
The indices were estimated using year-by-year cross sectional regressions of the crack index on indicator variables for the specified city size.




                                                                        54
Figure 8: Actual Changes in Social Outcomes and Predicted Changes Due to Crack 1984-
1989, City-Level Sample

                                                                               Crime Categories by Race


                             200
  Percent change 1984-1989




                             150


                             100


                              50


                               0


                             -50
                                    Black m ale    Black m ale    Black m ale          Black        White m ale    White m ale    White m ale            White
                                   hom icide rate hom icide rate hom icide rate      weapons       hom icide rate hom icide rate hom icide rate       weapons
                                    ages 14-17     ages 18-24     over age 24        arrest rate    ages 14-17     ages 18-24     over age 24         arrest rate


                                                                                Birth Outcom es by Race

                             60

                             50
  Percent change 1984-1989




                             40

                             30

                             20

                             10

                              0

                             -10

                             -20
                                   Black rate    Black rate    Black rate Black child Black fetal White rate White rate White rate White child White fetal
                                    low birth    teen birth     unwed      m ortality death rate† low birth teen birth   unwed      m ortality death rate†
                                     weight                       birth      rate                  weight                 birth       rate


                                                                                 Index Crim e Categories


                             50
  Percent change 1984-1989




                             40

                             30

                             20

                             10

                              0

                             -10

                             -20
                                     Violent       Hom icide      Rape rate   As sault rate    Robbery      Property     Burglary rate Larceny rate    Auto theft
                                   crim e rate       rate                                        rate      crim e rate                                   rate

                                                   Actual Change      OLS Predicted Change Due to Crack        IV Predicted Change Due to Crack

_____________________________________________________________________________

                                                                                              55
† indicates that data are available from 1980 to 1998 only. The leftmost bar (“Actual Change”) plots the actual percent change in the outcome of
interest between 1984 and 1989 with 1984 as the base year. To obtain the “OLS Predicted Change Due to Crack” (middle bar), let
βˆ85−89 denote the estimated effect of crack during the 1985-1989 period, C89       denote the mean crack index in 1989, and   Y84   denote the

                                                                                          βˆ85−89 C89 − βˆ80−84 C84
mean value of the outcome of interest in 1984. The predicted change is constructed as                                     . The IV predicted
                                                                                                       Y84
changes are constructed similarly, except that the coefficients are based on an instrumental variables strategy in which cocaine arrests are used as
the right-hand-side variable in equation (3) and a crack index constructed using the other crack proxies is used as an instrumental variable. In
calculating the implied impact of crack using IV, only the portion of the observed variation in cocaine arrests attributable to variation in crack is
relevant. It can be shown that algebraically this equates to scaling down the full variation in cocaine arrests by the signal to signal- plus-noise
ratio in cocaine arrests. This signal to signal-plus-noise ratio can be computed from the variance-covariance matrix of the crack proxies,
combined with a scaling adjustment across proxies that can be inferred from the ratio of the IV estimates when one proxy is used as the
instrument and the other variable is instrumented versus when the roles of the two variables are reversed. OLS and IV regressions include
controls for percent of the population Hispanic, percent of the population Black, log population, and log per capita income as well as city and
year fixed effects. The whiskers display 95% confidence intervals for the OLS and IV estimated effects. To facilitate comparison of effect sizes
across social outcomes, in some cases confidence intervals were permitted to extend beyond the bounds of the plots. The OLS estimates were
estimated allowing AR(1) serial correlation in the error terms; IV standard errors were obtained via the bootstrap.




                                                                         56
Figure 9: Actual Changes in Social Outcomes and Predicted Changes Due to Crack 1989-
2000, City-Level Sample
                                                                                   Crim e Categories by Race

                             40
                             30
  Percent change 1984-1989




                             20
                             10
                               0
                             -10
                             -20
                             -30
                             -40
                             -50
                             -60
                                    Black m ale    Black m ale    Black m ale               Black         White m ale    White m ale    White m ale             White
                                   hom icide rate hom icide rate hom icide rate          weapons         hom icide rate hom icide rate hom icide rate        weapons
                                    ages 14-17     ages 18-24     over age 24            arrest rate      ages 14-17     ages 18-24     over age 24          arrest rate


                                                                                     Birth Outcom es by Race

                             60
                             50
                             40
  Percent change 1984-1989




                             30
                             20
                             10
                              0
                             -10
                             -20
                             -30
                             -40
                                   Black rate     Black rate    Black rate   Black child   Black fetal   White rate   White rate    White rate White child White fetal
                                   low birth      teen birth   unw ed birth mortality rate death rate†   low birth    teen birth   unw ed birth mortality rate death rate†
                                     w eight                                                              w eight


                                                                                     Index Crim e Categories

                             20

                             10
  Percent change 1984-1989




                               0

                             -10

                             -20

                             -30

                             -40

                             -50
                                      Violent       Hom icide      Rape rate      As sault rate    Robbery        Property     Burglary rate Larceny rate     Auto theft
                                    crim e rate       rate                                           rate        crim e rate                                    rate

                                                     Actual Change       OLS Predicted Change Due to Crack            IV Predicted Change Due to Crack



_____________________________________________________________________________

                                                                                                  57
† indicates that data are available from 1980 to 1998 only. The leftmost bar (“Actual Change”) plots the actual percent change in the outcome of
interest between 1989 and 2000 with 1989 as the base year. To obtain the “OLS Predicted Change Due to Crack” (middle bar), let
βˆ85−89 denote the estimated effect of crack during the 1985-1989 period, C89       denote the mean crack index in 1989, and   Y89   denote the

                                                                                          βˆ95−00 C 00 − βˆ85−89 C89
mean value of the outcome of interest in 1989. The predicted change is constructed as                                     . For outcomes that were
                                                                                                       Y89
not available through 2000 the change from 1989 through the final year of available data is reported in the final column. The IV predicted
changes are constructed similarly, except that the coefficients are based on an instrumental variables strategy in which cocaine arrests are used as
the right-hand-side variable in equation (3) and a crack index constructed using the other crack proxies is used as an instrumental variable. In
calculating the implied impact of crack using IV, only the portion of the observed variation in cocaine arrests attributable to variation in crack is
relevant. It can be shown that algebraically this equates to scaling down the full variation in cocaine arrests by the signal to signal- plus-noise
ratio in cocaine arrests. This signal to signal-plus-noise ratio can be computed from the variance-covariance matrix of the crack proxies,
combined with a scaling adjustment across proxies that can be inferred from the ratio of the IV estimates when one proxy is used as the
instrument and the other variable is instrumented versus when the roles of the two variables are reversed. OLS and IV regressions include
controls for percent of the population Hispanic, percent of the population Black, log population, and log per capita income as well as city and
year fixed effects. The whiskers display 95% confidence intervals for the OLS and IV estimated effects. To facilitate comparison of effect sizes
across social outcomes, in some cases confidence intervals were permitted to extend beyond the bounds of the plots. The OLS estimates were
estimated allowing AR(1) serial correlation in the error terms; IV standard errors were obtained via the bootstrap.




                                                                         58
Figure 10: Actual Changes in Social Outcomes and Predicted Changes Due to Crack 1984-
1989, State-Level Sample
                                                                                   Crim e Categories by Race



                             150
  Percent change 1984-1989




                             100


                              50


                               0


                             -50
                                    Black m ale    Black m ale    Black m ale               Black         White m ale    White m ale    White m ale             White
                                   hom icide rate hom icide rate hom icide rate          weapons         hom icide rate hom icide rate hom icide rate        weapons
                                    ages 14-17     ages 18-24     over age 24            arrest rate      ages 14-17     ages 18-24     over age 24          arrest rate


                                                                                     Birth Outcom es by Race


                             45

                             35
  Percent change 1984-1989




                             25

                             15

                              5

                              -5

                             -15

                             -25
                                   Black rate     Black rate    Black rate   Black child   Black fetal   White rate   White rate    White rate White child White fetal
                                   low birth      teen birth   unw ed birth mortality rate death rate†   low birth    teen birth   unw ed birth mortality rate death rate†
                                     w eight                                                              w eight


                                                                                     Index Crim e Categories

                             50

                             40
  Percent change 1984-1989




                             30

                             20

                             10

                               0

                             -10
                                      Violent       Hom icide      Rape rate      As sault rate    Robbery        Property     Burglary rate Larceny rate     Auto theft
                                    crim e rate       rate                                           rate        crim e rate                                    rate




                                                                                                  59
                                                                                Other Social Outcom es

                              100

                               80
   Percent change 1984-1989




                               60

                               40

                               20

                                0

                              -20

                              -40
                                     Fos ter care rate††     Fem ale prison rate†     Total new pris oners†      Unem ploym ent rate            Poverty rate

                                                  Actual Change      OLS Predicted Change Due to Crack         IV Predicted Change Due to Crack



_____________________________________________________________________________
† indicates that data are available from 1980 to 1998 only and †† indicates that data are available from 1983 through 1995 only. The leftmost bar
(“Actual Change”) plots the actual percent change in the outcome of interest between 1984 and 1989 with 1984 as the base year. To obtain the
“OLS Predicted Change Due to Crack” (middle bar), let                        βˆ85−89 denote the estimated effect of crack during the 1985-1989 period, C89      denote

the mean crack index in 1989, and                      Y84   denote the mean value of the outcome of interest in 1984. The predicted change is constructed as

βˆ85−89 C89 − βˆ80−84 C84
                                                    . The IV predicted changes are constructed similarly, except that the coefficients are based on an instrumental
                                    Y84
variables strategy in which cocaine arrests are used as the right-hand-side variable in equation (3) and a crack index constructed using the other
crack proxies is used as an instrumental variable. In calculating the implied impact of crack using IV, only the portion of the observed variation
in cocaine arrests attributable to variation in crack is relevant. It can be shown that algebraically this equates to scaling down the full variation in
cocaine arrests by the signal to signal- plus-noise ratio in cocaine arrests. This signal to signal-plus-noise ratio can be computed from the
variance-covariance matrix of the crack proxies, combined with a scaling adjustment across proxies that can be inferred from the ratio of the IV
estimates when one proxy is used as the instrument and the other variable is instrumented versus when the roles of the two variables are reversed.
OLS and IV regressions include controls for percent of the population Hispanic, percent of the population Black, log population, and log per
capita income as well as state and year fixed effects. The whiskers display 95% confidence intervals for the OLS and IV estimated effects. To
facilitate comparison of effect sizes across social outcomes, in some cases confidence intervals were permitted to extend beyond the bounds of
the plots. The OLS estimates were estimated allowing AR(1) serial correlation in the error terms; IV standard errors were obtained via the
bootstrap.




                                                                                           60
Figure 11: Actual Changes in Social Outcomes and Predicted Changes Due to Crack 1989-
2000, State-Level Sample
                                                                                   Crim e Categories by Race

                             40
  Percent change 1984-1989




                             20


                               0


                             -20


                             -40


                             -60
                                    Black m ale    Black m ale    Black m ale               Black         White m ale    White m ale    White m ale             White
                                   hom icide rate hom icide rate hom icide rate          weapons         hom icide rate hom icide rate hom icide rate        weapons
                                    ages 14-17     ages 18-24     over age 24            arres t rate     ages 14-17     ages 18-24     over age 24          arrest rate


                                                                                     Birth Outcom es by Race

                             30

                             20
 Percent change 1984-1989




                             10

                              0

                             -10

                             -20

                             -30

                             -40

                             -50
                                   Black rate     Black rate    Black rate   Black child   Black fetal   White rate   White rate    White rate White child White fetal
                                   low birth      teen birth   unw ed birth mortality rate death rate†   low birth    teen birth   unw ed birth mortality rate death rate†
                                     w eight                                                              w eight


                                                                                     Index Crim e Categories

                             10

                               0
  Percent change 1984-1989




                             -10


                             -20

                             -30

                             -40

                             -50
                                      Violent       Hom icide       Rape rate     Ass ault rate    Robbery        Property     Burglary rate Larceny rate     Auto theft
                                    crim e rate       rate                                           rate        crim e rate                                    rate




                                                                                                  61
                                                                                Other Social Outcom es

                              30

                              20
   Percent change 1984-1989




                              10

                               0

                              -10

                              -20

                              -30
                                     Foster care rate††     Fem ale prison rate†      Total new prisoners†       Unem ploym ent rate            Poverty rate

                                                 Actual Change      OLS Predicted Change Due to Crack          IV Predicted Change Due to Crack




_____________________________________________________________________________
† indicates that data are available from 1980 to 1998 only and †† indicates that data are available from 1983 through 1995 only. The leftmost bar
(“Actual Change”) plots the actual percent change in the outcome of interest between 1984 and 1989 with 1984 as the base year. . To obtain the
“OLS Predicted Change Due to Crack” (middle bar), let                       βˆ85−89 denote the estimated effect of crack during the 1985-1989 period, C89      denote

the mean crack index in 1989, and                     Y89   denote the mean value of the outcome of interest in 1989. The predicted change is constructed as

βˆ95−00 C 00 − βˆ85−89 C89
                                                    . The IV predicted changes are constructed similarly, except that the coefficients are based on an instrumental
                                    Y89
variables strategy in which cocaine arrests are used as the right-hand-side variable in equation (3) and a crack index constructed using the other
crack proxies is used as an instrumental variable. In calculating the implied impact of crack using IV, only the portion of the observed variation
in cocaine arrests attributable to variation in crack is relevant. It can be shown that algebraically this equates to scaling down the full variation in
cocaine arrests by the signal to signal- plus-noise ratio in cocaine arrests. This signal to signal-plus-noise ratio can be computed from the
variance-covariance matrix of the crack proxies, combined with a scaling adjustment across proxies that can be inferred from the ratio of the IV
estimates when one proxy is used as the instrument and the other variable is instrumented versus when the roles of the two variables are reversed.
OLS and IV regressions include controls for percent of the population Hispanic, percent of the population Black, log population, and log per
capita income as well as state and year fixed effects. The whiskers display 95% confidence intervals for the OLS and IV estimated effects. To
facilitate comparison of effect sizes across social outcomes, in some cases confidence intervals were permitted to extend beyond the bounds of
the plots. The OLS estimates were estimated allowing AR(1) serial correlation in the error terms; IV standard errors were obtained via the
bootstrap.




                                                                                          62
                                            References

Almond, Douglas., Chay, Kenneth, and Greenstone, Michael. 2003. “Civil Rights, The War on
    Poverty, and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in Mississippi.” Mimeo. MIT.

Ayres, Ian., and Donohue, John. 2003. “Shooting Down the More Guns, Less Crime
     Hypothesis,” 55 Stanford Law Review 1193 (2003)

Baumer, Eric P. 1994. "Poverty, Crack, and Crime: A Cross-City Analysis." Journal of Research
    in Crime and Delinquency 31:311-327.

Baumer, Eric P., Janet Lauritsen, Richard Rosenfeld, and Richard Wright. 1998. "The Influence
    of Crack Cocaine on Robbery, Burglary, and Homicide Rates: A Cross- City, Longitudinal
    Analysis." Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 33:316-340.

Bayer, Linda. 2000. Crack and Cocaine. New York: Chelsea House Publishers.

Bennett, William, John DiIulio, and John Walters, 1996, Body Count, New York: Simon and
    Schuster.

Blank, Rebecca. 2001. An Overview of Social and Economic Trends, By Race.” In America
     Becoming: Racial Trends and Their Consequences. Neil J. Smelser, William J. Wilson, and
     Faith Mitchell, Editors. Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
     Washington, DC: National Academy Press, pp. 21-40.

Blumstein, Alfred, 1995, "Youth Violence, Guns, and the Illicit-Drug Industry," Journal of
    Criminal Law and Criminology, vol 86, no. 1, pp. 10-36.

Blumstein, Alfred, and Richard Rosenfeld, 1998, “Explaining Recent Trends in U.S. Homicide
    Rates.” The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 88:1175.

Boston, Thomas. 2001. Trends in Minority-Owned Businesses. In America Becoming: Racial
     Trends and Their Consequences. Neil J. Smelser, William J. Wilson, and Faith Mitchell,
     Editors. Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC:
     National Academy Press, pp 190-221.

Bourgois, Phillip. 2002. In Search of Respect: Selling Crack in El Barrio. Cambridge University
     Press.

Centers for Disease Control. 2004. “HIV/AIDS among African Americans.”

Chitwood, Dale, James Rivers, and James Inciardi. 1996. The American Pipe Dream:
      Crack Cocaine and the Inner City. Austin: Harcourt Brace College Publishers.

Cook, Philip, and John Laub, 1998, “The Unprecedented Epidemic in Youth Violence,” in
    Michael Tonry (ed.) Crime and Justice: An Annual Review of Research, 26-64, University
    of Chicago Press.


                                                63
Cork, Daniel, 1999, “Examining Space-Time Interaction in City-Level Homicide Data: Crack
     Markets and the Diffusion of Guns Among Youth,” Journal of QuantitativeCriminology
     15(4):379-406.

Corman, Hope and Mocan, H. Naci, 2000, “A Time-Series Analysis of Crime, Deterrence, and
    Drug Abuse in New York City.” American Economic Review, 90 (June): 584-604.

Datta-Bhutada, S., H. L. Johnson, and T. S. Rosen, 1998, “Intrauterine cocaine and crack
     exposure: neonatal outcome,” Journal of Perinatology May-Jun;18(3):183-8.

Donohue, John, and Steven Levitt, 2001, “Legalized Abortion and Crime”, Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 116 (2): 379-420.

Ferguson, Ronald. 2001. “Test Score Trends Along Racial Lines, 1971-1996: Popular Culture
     and Community Academic Standards.” In America Becoming: Racial Trends and Their
     Consequences. Neil J. Smelser, William J. Wilson, and Faith Mitchell, Editors.
     Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National
     Academy Press, pp.348-391.

Frank et. al. 2001. “Growth, Development, and Behavior in Early Childhood Following Prenatal
     Cocaine Exposure: A Systematic Review” The Journal of the American Medical
     Association, 285(12), 1613-1625.

Grissmer, Flanagan, and Williamson. 1998. Why Did The Gap Narrow? In The Black White Test
     Score Gap. Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips, Editors.

Grogger, Jeff, and Michael Willis, 2000, “The Emergence of Crack Cocaine and the Rise in
      Urban Crime Rates,” Review of Economics and Statistics 82(November): 519-529.

Horowitz, Joel, 2001, “Should the DEA’s STRIDE Data Be Used for Economic Analyses of
      Markets for Illegal Drugs?” Journal of the American Statistical Association 96: 1254-
      1262.

Jacobs, Bruce. 1999. Dealing Crack: The Social World of Streetcorner Selling. Boston:
        Northeastern University Press.

Johnston, L.D., P.M. O’Malley, J.G. Bachman, and J.E. Schulenberg, 2004, Monitoring the
       Future national survey results on drug use, 1975-2003. Volume I: Secondary school
       students (NIH Publication No. 04-5507). Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug
       Abuse.

Joyce, Ted. 2004. “Did Legalized Abortion Lower Crime?” Journal of Human Resources 39(1):
     1-28.

Levitt, Steven, 1998, “Juvenile Crime and Punishment.” Journal of Political Economy, 106
        (December): 1156-1185.



                                              64
Levitt, Steven, and Sudhir Venkatesh, 2000, “An Economic Analysis of a Drug-Selling Gang's
     Finances.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (August): 755-789.

Lott, John. R. 2000. More Guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun Control Laws.
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lott, John., and Mustard, David. 1997. Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed
      Handguns. Journal of Legal Studies, 26 (1), 1-68.

Lubotsky, Darren, and Martin Wittenberg. 2004. “Interpretation of Regressions with Multiple
    Proxies.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana.

MacCoun, Robert, and Peter Reuter, 2001, Drug War Heresies: Learning from Other Vices,
    Times, & Places, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Neal, Derek. 2004. Why Has Black-White Skill Convergence Stopped? Mimeo. University of
     Chicago.

Ousey, Graham, and Matthew Lee, 2002, “Examining the conditional nature of the illicit drug
    market-homicide relationship: A partial test of the theory of contingent
    causation. Criminology 40 (1, Feb): 73-102.

Ousey, Graham, and Matthew Lee, 2004, “Investigating the Connections between race, illicit
    drug markets, and lethal violence, 1984-1997.” Journal of Research in Crime and
    Delinquency, 40 (March): 1-32.

Sailer, Steven, 1999, “Does Abortion Prevent Crime?” Slate Magazine, August 23.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2003a, Emergency Department
       Trends from the Drug Abuse Warning Network, Final Estimates 1995-2002, DHHS
       Publication No. 03-3780, Rockville, Maryland.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2003b, National Survey on Drug
       Use and Health, Detailed Tables. Rockville, Maryland.

Venkatesh, Sudhir, and Steven Levitt, 2000, “Are We a Family or a Business?' History and
    Disjuncture in the Urban American Street Gang,” Theory and Society, 29 (Volume 3): 427-
    462.

Welch, Finis. 2003. Catching Up: “Wages of Black Men.” The American Economic Review, 93
    (2), pp. 320-325.

Wilson, James Q. 1990. “Against the Legalization of Drugs,” Commentary 89, pp. 21–28.

Zuckerman, Frank, and Mayes. 2002. “Cocaine Exposed Infants and Developmental Outcomes:
       “Crack Kids” Revisited.” The Journal of the American Medical Association, 287 (15), 1990-
      1991.



                                               65
