NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

JUDICIAL LOBBYING: THE POLITICS OF
LABOR LAW CONSTITUTIONAL INTERPRETATION
Matias Iaryczower
Pablo T. Spiller
Mariano Tommasi
Working Paper 11317
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11317
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005

We would like to thank Andy Atkeson, Juliana Bambaci, Rui de Figueiredo, Christian Hellwig,
David K. Levine, Leeat Yariv and seminar participants at MPSA, UCLA and Berkeley for helpful
comments. The authors can be reached at miaryc@ucla.edu, spiller@haas.berkeley.edu, and

tommasi@udesa.edu.ar. Please send all correspondence to Pablo Spiller, Haas School of Business, University
of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, or via e-mail. The views expressed herein are those of

the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Matias Iaryczower, Pablo T. Spiller, and Mariano Tommasi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation
Matias Iaryczower, Pablo T. Spiller, and Mariano Tommasi
NBER Working Paper No. 11317
May 2005
JEL No. K4, O1
ABSTRACT
This paper links the theory of interest groups influence over the legislature with that of congressional
control over the judiciary. The resulting framework reconciles the theoretical literature of lobbying
with the negative available evidence on the impact of lobbying over legislative outcomes, and sheds
light to the determinants of lobbying in separation-of-powers systems. We provide conditions for
judicial decisions to be sensitive to legislative lobbying, and find that lobbying falls the more divided
the legislature is on the relevant issues. We apply this framework to analyze supreme court labor
decisions in Argentina, and find results consistent with the predictions of the theory.
Matias Iaryczower
UCLA
miaryc@ucla.edu
Pablo Spiller
University of California
Walter A. Haas School of Business
Faculty Bldg. 593
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
spiller@haas.berkeley.edu
Mariano Tommasi
Universidad de San Andres
tommasi@udesa.edu.ar

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

The theoretical literature on interest group politics has put the emphasis on the link
between lobbying and legislative outcomes. The empirical evidence, however, provides
scant support for this connection (see Ansolabehere, de Figueiredo and Snyder 2002).1
The thrust of this paper is that the impact of lobbying has to be analyzed not in the votes
of the legislature, but rather in the actions of the courts (and the agencies), where much
policy making in modern societies is done. We focus on two intimately related questions.
How do the interactions between a legislature and a formally independent judiciary shape
the incentives for interest groups to engage in costly lobbying activities? Under what
conditions will lobbying effectively influence policy outcomes in this setting?
The literature on interest group politics considers two broad avenues through
which lobbying influences policy outcomes. The first class of models encompasses
different forms of vote buying in legislatures, emphasizing the role of campaign
contributions (Denzau and Munger 1986; Snyder 1990, 1991; Baron 1994). The second
considers the so-called informational lobbying: interest groups supply government
officials with information, inducing policy outcomes closer to their preferred policies
(Ainsworth 1993; Austen-Smith 1993; Lohmann 1995; Rasmusen 1993). The legislature
is here also taken as the relevant policy-making arena, based (implicitly or explicitly) on
the fact that the information generated by lobbyists can, in general, be related to the
electoral salience of a lobbyist’s cause (Ainsworth 1993; de Figuereido 2002).
The fact that lobbying may influence directly only legislators’ payoffs does not
imply, however, that it is sensible to focus on legislatures as the only relevant policymaking body. To the contrary, as long as courts have influence on policy outcomes, the
asymmetric impact of lobbying on the payoffs of the court and the legislature will shape

2

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

its effectiveness to affect policy in equilibrium, and thus the incentives for interest groups
to engage in costly lobbying activities in the first place.
The overall effect of this asymmetry rests crucially on the relation between the
judiciary and the legislature. While most judiciaries are isolated from direct public
approval, they are not immune from elected politicians’ influence. Indeed, in most
democracies, judicial decisions are not the last word. Legislatures can normally reverse
judicial statutory rulings with a simple majority, although overturning constitutional
rulings normally requires a higher level of political consensus. The legislature can,
furthermore, affect the court’s incentives by imposing sanctions such as court
enlargements (Gely and Spiller 1992), impeachments (Iaryczower, Spiller and Tommasi
2002), and in some countries simply by not reappointing them.2
The court, then, can be effectively constrained in its decisions by the majorities
in government. This is the essence of the so-called, “separation of powers” literature:
public opinion alters judicial decisions, but does so only indirectly, by affecting the
composition and preferred policies of members of the legislature (see Segal 1997, and
Bergara, Richman and Spiller 2003 for a discussion).
In this paper we consider the separation-of-powers logic within a model of
informative lobbying. In this environment, the political constraints faced by the court do
not reflect public opinion directly, but are driven instead by the actions undertaken by an
interest group. By focusing on the incentives of interest groups to lobbying only when
such actions effectively influence policy outcomes, our approach provides conditions
under which previous accounts of interest group influence on politicians can still survive,

3

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

while reconciling the implications of these theoretical arguments with the weak empirical
support for the connection between lobbying and legislative outcomes.
In the next sections, we develop these arguments formally, and derive empirical
implications of our analysis. We then apply this framework to empirically study the
politics of labor law constitutional interpretation in Argentina from 1935 to 1998.
Lobbying Under Separation of Powers
The Model
There are two individual players, the court and the interest group, and a legislature
populated by a continuum of legislators with total size one. To fix ideas, in what follows
we will refer to the interest group simply as the union. Policy space is X = [0,1], and
given ideal policy zi, player i has preferences over policies x∈X represented by a utility
function ui ( x, zi ) = − 1 ( x − zi )2 . 3 Without loss of generality, we assume that the union’s
2

ideal policy is at the right extreme of the policy space, zu= 1, and refer to policy x’ as
being pro-labor with respect to x’’ whenever x’ > x’’.
Legislators and the court differ in their responsiveness to voters. In particular,
we assume that the court is completely unresponsive to the position of voters in the
policy space, and denote its preferred policy by zc∈ X. We assume, though, that
legislators are, at least partially, responsive to voters’ stance on the issue. Assuming for
simplicity that the distribution of voters in the policy space can be characterized by a
single parameter θ ∈ X, we let the ideal policy of legislator j be given by zLj(θ;βj)≡βj+hθ,
where for all j, βj >0 and βj +h < 1. The parameter h allows us to capture varying degrees
of voters’ influence on legislators’ preferred policies. The degree of conflict in the
legislature is captured by the distribution of points βj across members of the legislature,

4

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

which we describe by the cumulative distribution G(.); i.e., for any point β, G(β) denotes
the proportion of legislators for which βj <β.
Policy outcomes result from the interaction of the court and the legislature. While
the precise form of this interaction depends on specific institutional details, in most
polities the elective body can ultimately impose its will under some sufficiently
demanding procedure. This final stage is the one we represent in the model: the court
chooses a ruling xc∈X, which the legislature can reverse with the votes of a majority m ∈
[1/2,1] of legislators. We say that a court’s ruling is “stable” in the legislature – and
therefore final – if there exists no alternative policy that a majority m of legislators would
prefer to it in a binary choice, and denote the set of stable rulings given the majority rule
m by Sm.
Legislators and the court are uninformed about the realization of θ, and have
common prior beliefs represented by the cumulative distribution function F(⋅) with
density f(⋅). We assume that f(⋅) has full support (i.e., f(θ)>0 for all θ∈X), but otherwise
allow prior beliefs to be completely arbitrary. Informally, this means that legislators can
potentially be very well (but not perfectly) informed about the realization of θ. In
contrast, the union is perfectly informed about the realization of θ, and can potentially
credibly transmit this information through lobbying, which takes here the form of strikes
and public demonstrations. In particular, given a realization θ’, the union can organize an
observable level a of demonstrations bearing a cost C(a,θ’). We will assume that C(⋅) is
twice differentiable, that for every realization of the median voter θ, C(0,θ)=0,
Ca(a,θ)>0, and that Caθ(a,θ)<0; i.e., the marginal cost of lobbying is decreasing in the

5

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

pro-labor stance of the population. For simplicity of exposition, we will further assume
that C(a,θ)=a(k -θ), k>1.
The timing of the game can thus be described as follows: (i) θ is realized and
privately observed by the union; (ii) the union decides a publicly observable level of
lobbying intensity a; and (iii) the court chooses a ruling xc in the set of stable policies in
the legislature Sm.4
An equilibrium is a triplet Γ={γ(⋅),xc(⋅),F(⋅|a)} consisting of (i) a strategy for the
union, γ : X→R+, mapping “types” θ to levels a of lobbying intensity a, (ii) a strategy for
the court, xc : R+→ Sm, mapping observations of lobbying levels a to stable rulings xc∈Sm,
and (iii) beliefs F( |a) by the court and the legislators such that:
(a) γ (θ ) ∈ arg max uu ( xc ( a )) − C ( a, θ ) ∀θ∈X;
a∈R+

(b) xc (a ) ∈ arg max{uc ( x) : x ∈ S (m | a )} ∀a∈R+, and
x∈ X

(c) whenever a∈ γ(X), F(⋅|a) is determined from F(⋅) and γ(⋅) using Bayes’ rule.

In addition, we supplement this equilibrium concept with a refinement restricting beliefs
off the equilibrium path known as criterion D1 (Banks and Sobel 1987; Cho and Kreps
1987).5
The Symmetric Information Benchmark
We first characterize, as a benchmark, the symmetric information equilibrium. Note that
in this case legislators are perfectly informed about the value of θ, and the union derives
no benefit from lobbying, irrespective of the preferences of the electorate. Hence, there
will be no lobbying in equilibrium. The relationship between preferences of the electorate

6

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

and policy outcomes in the symmetric information environment, however, is the key
element determining the amount and effectiveness of lobbying in the private information
environment.
We start by characterizing the set of stable policies in the legislature given
majority rule m. Letting β Lm ≡ G-1(1-m) and β Hm ≡ G-1(m), it is easy to see that
Sm(θ)=[zL(θ; β Lm ), zL(θ; β Hm )]. That is, β Lm is the critical legislator for a pro-labor
coalition, in the sense that any policy x to the left of her preferred policy would be
replaced by a more pro-labor policy. Similarly, β Hm is the critical legislator for an antilabor coalition, in that any policy to the right of her will be replaced by a more anti-labor
policy. Note that βL(m) ≤ βH(m), and βL(m) = βH(m) only with simple majority rule
(m=1/2), in which case Sm(θ) collapses to the preferred policy of the median voter in the
legislature, and the court has no policy making power. It follows that for m > 1/2, the set
of possible court’s ideal policies that would be stable given θ has positive measure. 6
The court will then select its ideal policy unless it is constrained either for being
“extremely” pro-labor or anti-labor in relation to the relevant players in congress. In
particular, since the preferred policy of every legislator is strictly increasing in θ, a higher
value of θ results in a pro-labor shift of the entire set of stable policies. A court with a
fixed policy preference zc may then become a “pro-labor” court for a legislature
observing a low realization θ’ (zc > zL(θ’;βH ) ), or an ”anti-labor” court for a legislature
observing a high realization θ’’(zc < zL(θ’’;βL )). Figure 1 depicts in bold the resulting
court’s equilibrium rulings as a function of the state of nature, θ.
<Figure 1 about here>

7

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

The two parallel lines in the figure represent the preferences of the critical legislators as a
function of the state of nature, zL(θ ; βL )=βL+hθ and zL(θ ; βH )= βH+hθ . For each θ, the
set of stable policies S(θ) is the segment between these lines, the interval [βL+hθ, βH+hθ]
in the vertical axis. If, for some θ , the court’s ideal point zc is in S(θ), the court will be
able to rule according to its preferred policy, facing no effective legislative constraints.
In the example depicted in the figure, this occurs for all states between the (interior)
points θ0 and θ1. In this region, then, the flat portion of the bold line represents the court’s
equilibrium ruling. For θ < θ0, however, S(θ) is entirely below zc. Thus, if it were
common knowledge among legislators that public sentiment is strongly anti-labor, the
ideal point of the court would not survive the challenge of a more anti-labor legislation.
The best choice for the court in such states is, therefore, to enact the most pro-labor stable
ruling; i.e., βH+hθ. For θ<θ0, then, the bold line representing the court’s equilibrium
rulings coincides with βH+hθ. Similarly, for θ>θ1, S(θ) is entirely above zc. In this
subset of states the legislature is too pro-labor compared to the court, and thus the best
choice for the court in such states is to enact the most “anti-labor” stable ruling; i.e.,
βL+hθ. Proposition 1 below summarizes the preceding discussion.
Proposition 1. Assume that the realization of θ is public information. Then (i) γ(θ)=0 for
all θ, and (ii) there exist θ0,θ1 ∈ [0,1], θ0 ≤ θ1, such that:
 z L (θ ; β H ) = β H + hθ


xcPI (θ ) = 
zc


 z L (θ ; β L ) = β L + hθ

if

θ ≤ θ0

if

θ 0 ≤ θ ≤ θ1

if

θ ≥ θ1

8

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

Specifically, θ0=0 for zc<βH, θ0=1 for zc >βH+h, and θ0= (zc-βH)/h otherwise. θ1 is
similarly defined, with βL in place of βH.

The court is thus effectively constrained by the legislature for some realizations of public
opinion when the set K = {θ : θ ≤ θ 0 ∨ θ ≥ θ1} is non-empty. In other words, the court
will be able to rule its preferred policy independently of public opinion only if this policy
is both (i) pro-labor relative to the preferences of the critical legislator for a pro-labor
coalition before a pro-labor electorate (zc > zL(1;βL )= βL+h) and (ii) anti-labor relative to
the preferences of the critical legislator for an anti-labor coalition before an anti-labor
electorate (zc < zL(0 ;βH )= βH ). Note that, as in Gely and Spiller (1990), this condition is
more likely to be satisfied when there is significant dissent in congress (the critical
legislators for a pro and anti-labor coalitions are far apart, βL<<βH) and legislators are not
too responsive to public opinion (h is small).
Moreover, it follows from proposition 1 that, in general, the size of K increases
with βL and decreases with βH. Thus, the set of realizations of public opinion for which
the court is effectively constrained is always smaller the higher dissent in congress is.
Proposition 1 does not imply, however, that the size of K should be generically lower the
less responsive legislators are to public opinion. To see this, note that the set of values of

θ for which a sincere ruling by the court would not face an anti-labor reversal increases
with h (the court benefits, in this regard, from a more eager response of legislators to
public opinion). Hence, the overall effect of legislators’ responsiveness to public opinion
on judicial independence depends on the relative position of the court in the policy space.
Informative Judicial Lobbying

9

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

The previous analysis showed that when the court is constrained for some (publicly
known) preferences of the electorate, an increase in θ induces a more pro-labor ruling,
and thus, a more pro-labor policy outcome in equilibrium. The first goal of this section is
to show that, when policy-makers are uncertain about the realization of θ, lobbying by the
interest group restores the complete information mapping between the preferences of the
electorate and policy outcomes. Suppose, for example, that the court would be
constrained for some known preferences of the electorate. Then this result says that in the
presence of lobbying, the court would be forced to adjust its behavior to reflect this
constraint, even when it would be independent to rule according to its preferred policy
given the prior beliefs of uninformed legislators. Similarly, suppose instead that the court
would be independent to rule according to its preferred policy for some known
preferences of the electorate. Then the court would indeed be able to rule freely in the
presence of lobbying, even if it would be constrained given the prior beliefs of
uninformed legislators. The result is stated formally in the next proposition (lemma 1 in
the appendix provides a detailed characterization of equilibrium strategies):
Proposition 2. In the unique D1 equilibrium:
(i)

Lobbying γ(θ) increases with θ in K, and does not change with θ in [θ0,θ1];

(ii)

Court’s (stable) rulings xc(a) satisfy xc(γ(θ))=xcPI(θ) for every θ, where
xcPI(θ) is given in proposition 1. In particular, the pro-labor tendency of
rulings increases with the level of strikes; i.e., xc(a) is increasing in a.

That is, in equilibrium the level of strikes will reflect the preferences of the electorate up
to the extent that this information can influence a binding constraint for the court (and

10

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

thus policy outcomes). We say, then, that strikes are effectively fully informative. As
long as (informed) policy is responsive to the electorate’s preferences, two union types
facing different pro-labor dispositions of the electorate will always choose different
levels of lobbying, allowing the reproduction of the complete information link between
policies and the preferences of the electorate.
This does not imply, however, that the equilibrium will necessarily involve
transmission of information. In fact, lobbying will be completely unresponsive to the
preferences of the electorate if (and only if) the court is unconstrained for every possible
realization of θ. Conversely, there will be a complete separating equilibrium if (and only
if) the court is constrained for every realization of public preferences. That is, only if the
court’s ideal policy is “extremely anti-labor” (i.e., zc < βL), or “extremely pro-labor” (i.e.,
zc > βH+h) by proposition 1 standards.
Proposition 2 allows us to study the response of the expected level of strikes and
pro-labor rulings to changes in the composition of the legislature. Note that for our
purposes changes in the composition of the legislature are relevant only to the extent that
they affect the boundaries of the stable set of policies in the legislature, zL(θ;βL )=βL+hθ
and zL(θ;βH)=βH+hθ. Moreover, recall from the analysis of the symmetric information
benchmark that the set of realizations of public opinion for which the court is effectively
constrained is always smaller the higher dissent in congress is. That is, in general, the size
of K increases with βL and decreases with βH. Proposition 2 then directly implies the
following result, and its corollary:
Proposition 3. A pro-labor shift in the preferred policy of the critical legislator for a prolabor coalition βL (anti-labor coalition, βH), increases the expected pro-labor tendency of

11

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

the court’ rulings level Eθ [xc], and increases (reduces) the expected level of lobbying, Eθ
[γ].
Corollary 1. A mean preserving increase in the size of the set of stable policies in the
legislature reduces the expected level of strikes in equilibrium.

Proposition 3 also has direct implications over the response of equilibrium outcomes to
changes in court’s preferences. First, it is clear from the previous analysis that the
expected level of pro-labor rulings will increase following a pro-labor change in the
court’s preferences unless the court is constrained for every realization of θ both
preceding and following this change. The change in the expected level of strikes is,
however, ambiguous.7 Similarly, we know from the analysis of the symmetric
information benchmark that the effect of legislators’ responsiveness to public opinion on
judicial decisions depends on the relative position of the court in the policy space. This
implies that the relation between lobbying and the responsiveness of legislators to public
opinion will also necessarily depend on the relative position of the court in the policy
space.
Empirical Implications
The model has direct and empirically refutable implications. The first two implications
are unique to this model. First, proposition 2 states that, in equilibrium, the “pro-labor”
level of judicial decisions is increasing in the extent of the union’s political activity.
Thus, we should observe more “pro-labor” decisions when facing a higher level of union
strikes. Second, the expected level of lobbying decreases the more effective the
separation of powers between the court and the legislature is (i.e., the less responsive

12

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

legislators’ preferences are to the electorate’s concerns, and the more divided congress is
on the relevant issues). Specifically, as the corollary to proposition 3 points out, we
expect the level of strikes to be decreasing in the amplitude of the set of stable policies in
congress.
Our model also has more standard separation of powers empirical implications.
As in most separation of powers models, Proposition 3 implies that the equilibrium level
of “pro-labor” judicial decisions depends on the political composition of congress. In
equilibrium, a more “pro-labor” congress will trigger more “pro-labor” decisions
provided that the court is effectively constrained by congress. Thus, our model provides
unique, as well, as standard empirical implications concerning separation of power
models. The unique implications constitute direct tests of the signaling value of interest
groups lobbying.
The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation in Argentina
In this section we apply the model to study the politics of labor law constitutional
interpretation in Argentina, and provide an evaluation of its empirical implications using
data on strikes and supreme court’s decisions between 1935 and 1998.
This case presents a natural application of the proposed framework. While
formally independent, Argentina’s supreme court has faced both implicit and explicit
threats from the political powers, and has adjusted its behavior accordingly (see Helmke
2002, and Iaryczower, Spiller and Tommasi 2002). Moreover, the centralized control by
unions of an institutional structure allowing the effective organization of large
demonstrations have both broadened their scope of interest from industry level to national

13

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

labor policies, and transformed organized demonstrations into instruments of political
influence.
In this environment, the relevant assumptions we impose to the analysis translate
into the following mild requirements. First, legislators are at least somewhat responsive
to (but not perfectly informed about) the preferences of the electorate.8 Second, the union
knows the cost of organizing public demonstrations, and this cost decreases the more
intensely voters oppose anti-labor legislation. As we have shown in the previous section,
under this assumption the observed level of protests will transmit valuable information
about the preferences of the electorate to politicians in equilibrium, even if the union’s
slogans constitute a biased representation of society’s interests.
The Political Environment
According to our framework, the relative position of the court with respect to the set of
stable policies in the legislature is a major factor determining both court rulings and the
level of lobbying. Our first task in defining the relevant independent variables, then, is to
obtain an assessment of the distribution of preferences within congress along a prolabor/anti-labor policy space.
Throughout most of the twentieth century, Argentina had a strong presidential
system with two dominant political parties (McGuire 1995; Jones 2002) characterized by
a relatively sharp contrast in their stance with respect to labor policies and the regulation
of organized labor (Rotondaro 1971; Torre 1983; Fernandez 1988; McGuire 1997). While
all presidents have sought, to some extent, support from (at least some of) the unions, the
strong association between unions and the Peronist party, and the Peronist/anti-Peronist
division of Argentine society defined Argentina’s political reality in the second part of

14

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

the 20th century. Relying on these facts, we classify each president (and its party in the
legislature) as pro or anti-labor, and use this classification, along with the partisan
composition of the legislature, to obtain an assessment of the pro-labor composition of
the Argentine legislature.
We start by classifying Argentina’s presidents between 1935 and 1997 as prolabor or anti-labor, following to the greater extent possible the “stylized facts” presented
by previous studies. Presidents Farrel, Peron, and all Presidents who governed
representing the Peronist Party (Campora, Lastiri, and Martinez in 1973- 1976, Menem
between 1989 and 1999) were classified as pro-labor. President Frondizi (1958-1962) did
not represent the Peronist party but was also classified as pro-labor.9 The remaining
presidents (mainly military dictators and democratic presidents representing the UCR
Party) were classified as anti-labor.
Taking this classification as given, we use parties’ representation in the
legislature to compute the distribution of preferences for the upper and lower chambers in
each period t, GtU (⋅) and GtL (⋅) . We assume, first, that legislative parties are perfectly
cohesive, and that parties in the opposition have the opposite stance in the labor policy
space than the president’s party. The distribution of imputed preferences for legislators of
chamber j in period t is in this case given by Gt j ( x) = ωt j for 0 ≤ x < 1 and Gt j (1) = 1 ,
where ωt j denotes the proportion of seats held by the anti-labor’s party in chamber j in
period t (we assume here that ωt j = 1 during periods of military interruptions to the
democratic regime). We also let parties be imperfectly aligned with the president, and
refer to this as a noisy representation of legislative parties. Specifically, for both the antilabor and the pro-labor party, we assume that the proportions of party members with ideal

15

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

policy closer to the extreme anti-labor (0) and pro-labor (1) policies are given by a beta
distribution B (α , β ) with support in [0,1], for β=1 and α=0.1 and α=0.2. 10 With this
assumption, then, the distribution of preferences of legislators in chamber j in a
democratic period t is given by Gt j ( x; α ) = ωt j Βα ( x) + (1 − ωt j )(1 − Βα (1 − x)) .11
Dependent Variables
The dependent variables in our study are supreme court’s pro-labor rulings and the
amount of union strikes. We define the variable strikes as the number of strikes per
year.12 Court rulings are those on labor and social security cases involving the
constitutionality of government norms decided by the Argentine supreme court between
1935 and 1998. 13 Within this universe of cases, we define the categorical variable prolabor ruling to take the value of one (zero) if a court ruling (i) upholds a government
norm during a pro-labor (anti-labor) presidency or (ii) challenges a government norm
during an anti-labor (pro-labor) presidency.
Independent Variables
The pro-labor composition of the legislature is relevant for our purposes for two reasons.
First, the appointment of a president’s nominee to the supreme court requires the
approval of the senate (by simple majority until 1994). Thus, the pro-labor composition
of the senate affects directly the preferences of the court. To reflect the influence of the
senate in a simple manner, we use the midpoint between the ideal point of the president
and the median voter of the senate at the time of appointment as an estimate of the prolabor disposition of each justice. The pro-labor disposition of the court in each period,
pro-labor court, is then defined as the policy preference of the court’s median justice.14

16

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

Second, the pro-labor compositions of the upper and lower chambers determine
the set of stable policies in the legislature in any given period. A ruling is stable if it does
not trigger a response by a pro or an anti-labor coalition in the legislature. Since until
1994 Argentina’s Constitution allowed the legislature to enlarge the supreme court with a
simple law, we will focus primarily on the critical legislators for simple majority rule in a
bicameral legislature. These are denoted pro-labor critical and anti-labor critical and
defined – for both the cohesive and noisy representations of legislative parties - as the
minimum and maximum among the median legislators of the upper and lower
chambers.15
The equilibrium level of pro-labor rulings and strikes depend, however, on the
relative position of the court with respect to the set of stable policies in the legislature.
Consider first the court. Justices will rule based solely on their preferences provided that
their preferred policies are stable policies in the legislature, and will otherwise adjust
their rulings so that these fall within the set of acceptable policies in the legislature. As a
result, court’s preferences will influence Justices’ behavior directly only to the extent that
the court is unconstrained. If instead an anti-labor court is constrained by the legislature,
changes in the critical legislator for a pro-labor coalition - and not in court’s preferences will influence court’s decisions (we call this a pro-labor constraint). Similarly, if a prolabor court is constrained by the legislature, changes in the critical legislator for an antilabor coalition will influence court’s decisions (we call this an anti-labor constraint). We
then define the following variables. Pro-labor constraint equals pro-labor critical if an
anti-labor court is constrained (i.e., if pro-labor court < pro-labor critical) and zero
otherwise. Similarly, anti-labor constraint equals anti-labor critical if a pro- labor court is

17

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

constrained (if pro-labor court > anti-labor critical) and zero otherwise. Finally, court
unconstrained is defined as pro-labor court if the court is unconstrained, and zero
otherwise.
The union, on the other hand, will only engage in lobbying if policy outcomes are
responsive to lobbying efforts. This implies that the expected level of lobbying (strike
activity) increases the more constrained the court is, and decreases (corollary 1) with the
length of the set of stable policies in the legislature. We then define the variable binding
as the distance between pro-labor court and the set of stable policies, and length as the
distance between pro-labor critical and anti-labor critical.
We also define two control variables related to the political environment. First,
we introduce the variable dictator, taking the value one in periods of interruptions to the
democratic regime, to allow for possible direct effects of military governments on both
rulings and strikes.16 Second, since the first administration of President Peron marked a
defining moment in the relation of the polity to the judiciary (Iaryczower, Spiller and
Tommasi 2002), in the organization of the labor movement, and in the consequent use of
strikes (see Figure 2), we introduce the variable post-Peron, taking the value one for
observations after President’s Peron initial departure from office in September 1955.
< Figure 2 about here >
Estimation
As indicated by proposition 2, court’s pro-labor rulings are increasing in the observed
level of strikes. The equilibrium level of strikes is in itself a response to the political
environment and the relative positioning of the court in the (labor) policy space. It is not,
however, a function of actual rulings by the court, which only happen after the level of

18

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

strikes is observed. Specifically, for our main specification, the variables in the right hand
side of the equation for pro-labor judicial decisions are given by court unconstrained, prolabor constraint, anti-labor constraint, post-Peron, and dictator. The variables in the right
hand side of the strikes equation are given by length, binding, pro-labor court, postPeron, dictator, along with three lagged observations of the growth of GDP, included as
controls.
Thus, the model we estimate is a triangular system of two equations. We then test
the hypothesis that the variance-covariance matrix is diagonal with the data arranged on a
case-based unit of analysis. Employing the Breusch and Pagan 1980 test (see Greene
2000, 621), we conclude that the system is indeed fully recursive, and thus proceed to
estimate it equation by equation (see Greene 2000, 678). Furthermore, since pro-labor
ruling is a categorical variable, we use a logit model to estimate the conditional
probability of a pro-labor ruling. Also, since the data for the number of strikes are only
available yearly, we use the number of strikes in the year in which the supreme court
decided the case in the court’s decision equation. We use average annual values for the
right hand side variables of the strikes equation.
Table 1 presents the results of the pro-labor rulings equation under the cohesive
and noisy representations of the legislature for the complete sample (Model I), and for
only democratic periods (Model II). 17
< Table 1 about here >
The results are consistent with the predictions of the model. As in separation of power
models, the probability of a pro-labor ruling increases with the pro-labor disposition of
unconstrained courts (court unconstrained) and when a binding constraint for a pro-labor

19

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

court is relaxed (an increase in anti-labor constraint),18 or when a binding constraint for
an anti-labor court is further tightened (an increase in a pro labor constraint). The
coefficient of pro-labor constraint, however, is not statistically significant for the whole
sample (Model I), although it is statistically significant at the 5 % level for the democratic
periods sample (Model II).
Moving towards the more unique implications of our model, we find that,
consistent with proposition 2, pro-labor rulings increase with the level of strikes. This
result stands for both the cohesive and noisy representations of the legislature, and for the
whole or only the democratic period samples. In particular, setting the value of all
variables at their sample average, a one standard deviation increase in the number of
strikes - 152.6 and 180.4 for the complete and democratic samples- increases the
probability of a pro-labor ruling by 12 to 13% for both samples and models.
We also find that the pro-labor tendency of court rulings increases during
breakdowns of the democratic regime, and decreases following President Peron’ s first
two terms in office.19
Table 2 presents the results of four exercises that complement the previous
analysis. In Model III, we consider the model under the assumption that the relevant
majority determining the constraints for the court is a supermajority of two thirds of the
members of each chamber. We find that the coefficients of strikes and the preferences of
unconstrained courts (court unconstrained) are statistically significant of the same order
of magnitude as in Table 1. Political constraints with supermajority, however, seem to be
less significant as explanatory variables for court’s behavior.20
<Table 2 about here>

20

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

Model IV considers an alternative method to capture the preferences of the court.
While the appointment of the president’s nominees to the supreme court requires the
approval of the senate, it can be argued that the senate has only a formal role in this
procedure. In this case, our measure of court’s preferences would be improved by simply
removing the influence of the senate. Thus, in Model IV we assume that the pro-labor
stance of each justice equals that of the nominating president.21 According to the
goodness of fit indicators, Model I performs better than Model IV. Model V considers the
period prior to the first administration of President Peron, during which unions had more
restrictive organizational capabilities. Thus, we do not expect strikes to be significantly
informative about the preferences of a wide electorate. Consistent with this description,
we find that although the estimated coefficients of strikes remain positive in all
specifications, they are no longer statistically significant. Finally, Model VI considers the
strategic defection hypothesis proposed by Helmke 2002. According to Helmke 2002, the
political constraints faced by the Court in a given period can fall short of accounting for
the entire range of incentives faced by the Court. The strategic defection hypothesis
argues that Justices’ behavior reflects not only the effect of current political constraints,
but also their anticipation of the political constraints they will face in the future. To
evaluate this hypothesis, we restrict the sample including only rulings decided one year
before a change of president. The results are similar, although the precision of the
estimates seems to improve, lending some support to this argument.
Table 3 presents the results obtained from the estimation of the strikes equation.
The independent variables in Model I include length, binding, pro-labor court, postPeron, dictator, and three lagged observations of the growth of GDP, included as

21

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

controls. The results are consistent with the model’s empirical implications. First,
according to proposition 3 (and its corollary), we expect the level of strikes to increase
the more constrained the court is, and decrease with the size of the stable set (the
“pooling” area). Table 3 supports these implications, as the coefficients of binding and
length are of their predicted signs (positive and negative respectively) and all are
statistically significant.22 Table 3 also shows that unions were less combative during
military governments, and that (as Figure 2 anticipated) the organization of the labor
movement since Peron resulted in a higher capacity of unions to engage in political
demonstrations.23 In Model II, we also include the categorical variable end term, which
takes the value of one in year t if a president’s term finishes either in t or t+1. The
estimated coefficient is positive, although it is statistically significant at the 10 % level
only for the noisy representations of legislative parties. Our results, then, provide some
indication that unions strike more often in transitional periods.
Conclusions
We started this paper pointing to the scant empirical support for models of legislative
lobbying. We provide here a framework that reconciles the theoretical literature of
lobbying with the negative available evidence. The first contribution of the paper is then
to show that the empirical work has been looking at the wrong impact of lobbying on
policy. Rather than affecting policy by impacting on the nature of legislation, lobbying
may be affecting policy via judicial decisions. Thus, judicial lobbying.
Since interest groups cannot directly lobby justices, however, the link between
lobbying and court rulings can only be indirect: lobbying influences court rulings by
affecting the political constraints faced by the court. Identifying this mechanism allows

22

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

us to reconsider the determinants and effectiveness of lobbying in separation-of-powers
systems. We show that a key factor in determining lobbying is the extent by which the
information so generated can sway decisive majorities in the legislature to tighten the
political constraints faced by an anti-interest group court, or relax the constraints faced by
a pro-interest group court.
Our empirical results for the interactions among unions, courts, and the
legislature in Argentina are consistent with this description. Argentine courts tend to side
more with unions the more the unions strike. Unions, in turn, strike more when courts
face a more unified legislature. It is in these situations that unions’ lobbying makes the
legislature more pro-labor, triggering, then, more pro-union judicial decisions. Our paper,
then, suggests that analyses of lobbying should pay closer attention to the actual nature of
the policy making process, and in particular, to the interaction of the bureaucracy, the
courts and the legislature.

23

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

Appendix
Definition (Ramey 1996) Fix a sequential equilibrium Γ, and denote the payoff in Γ of a
type-θ union by U(θ). Fix an off-the-equilibrium-path action a by the union; i.e., a ∉

γ([0,1]), and suppose there is a nonempty set X’ ⊂ X such that: for all θ ∉ X’ there exists
θ’∈X’ such that U(a,x,θ) ≥ U(θ) implies U(a,x,θ’) > U(θ’). Then the equilibrium is said
to violate criterion D1 unless it is the case that the support of F(θ|a) is included in X’. A
sequential equilibrium is a D1 equilibrium if it does not violate criterion D1 for any a ∉

γ([0,1])

Lemma 1. Coupled with beliefs satisfying Bayes’ rule, the following strategies constitute
a sequential equilibrium: (i) court’s strategy xc(a) is defined by xc (a ) = xcPI (γ −1 (a )) for
all a such that γ -1(a) ∈ K, and xc(γ0(θ0)) = zc , where xcPI (⋅) ,θ0 and θ1 are given in
proposition 1; and (ii) union’s strategy γ(⋅) is defined by:

 k 
2
0
Λ H ln
if
 + h θ ≡ γ (θ )

k −θ 




γ (θ ) = 
γ 0 (θ 0 )
if


γ 0 (θ ) + Λ ln k − θ1  + h 2 (θ − θ ) ≡ γ 1 (θ ) if
0
L
1

 k −θ 

[

0 ≤ θ ≤ θ0

θ 0 ≤ θ ≤ θ1
θ1 ≤ θ ≤ 1

]

where Λ s ≡ h(1 − β s ) − h 2 k for s=H,L.
Proof of Lemma 1. First note that if beliefs satisfy Bayes’ rule, then (i) for all a such that

γ -1(a) ∈ K, f(θ|a)=1 if θ =γ -1(a), and f(θ|a) = 0 if θ ≠ γ -1(a), and (ii)for a= γ0(θ0), f(θ|a)
= f(θ) / [F(θ1)-F(θ0)] if θ ∈ [θ0,θ1], and f(θ|a) = 0 otherwise. Hence it follows directly

24

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

from proposition 1 that the Court’s proposed strategy specifies is a best response given
these beliefs. It remains to show the optimality of union’s strategy given f( |a) and xc( ).
To do so it is enough – by the revelation principle – to consider direct mechanisms in
which every type has the incentive to make truthful announcements. Suppose first that

θ0>0. Our initial step is to show that if the restriction of the union strategy to [0,θ0] is
given by γ0(θ), as defined above, then a union of type θ ≤ θ0 does not have the incentive
to misrepresent its type by claiming that its type is θ’∈[0,θ0], θ’≠ θ. To see this, consider
an arbitrary strategy γ~ (θ ) and its restriction to [0,θ0]. Truth telling is then optimal for θ
in this range only if:

( ) ( (

)) ( ( ) )

θ ∈[ 0 ,θ0 ]

(

)

()

2

 1
1 − β H − hθˆ − γ~ θˆ (k − θ )
2



θ = arg max U θˆ, θ ≡ uu z L θˆ; β H − C γ~ θˆ , θ = −
ˆ

Note that the FOC for a maximum at θ can be written as:
∂γ~ (θ )  ∂uu ( z L (θ ; β H )) / ∂x  ∂z L (θ ; β H ) [1 − β H − hθ ]h
=
=

~
k −θ
∂θˆ
∂θˆ
 ∂C (γ (θ ),θ ) / ∂a 

From this it follows immediately that γ~ (θ ) is strictly increasing in θ in [0,θ0] (the second
order condition, assuring that γ~ (θ ) is incentive compatible across [0,θ0], follows from
the assumption that Caθ(a,θ)<0. See Fudenberg and Tirole 1998, pp. 262). Moreover, for
the functional forms specified, we can obtain:

γ~ (θ ) = ∫

θ

0

h(1 − β H ) − h 2 s
 k 
2
0
ds = h(1 − β H ) − h 2 k ln
 + h θ = γ (θ )
k−s
k
−
θ



[

]

Note that we have made use of the fact that γ(0) = 0. For suppose not; that is, suppose

γ(0)= a > 0, and consider a deviation by type θ=0 to action a = 0. Equilibrium policy

25

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

following the observation of lobbying level a =min γ([0,1]) results in the complete
information policy corresponding to the lower type in the distribution; i.e., xc( a ) =
xc(θ=0). But after a deviation, uninformed agents will respond with strategies that are
optimal given some beliefs with support in [0,1]. Then policy following a deviation
cannot possibly be worst for the union than equilibrium policy. Hence, the deviation is
profitable for type 0, since it reduces costs but can’t adversely affect outcomes.
An identical argument shows that if θ1 < 1, a θ-type union, θ ≥ θ1, does not have
an incentive to play γ1(θ’’) for θ’’≠θ, θ’’∈ [θ1,1]. Furthermore, it follows from the
previous argument that a type θ < θ0 does not have an incentive to play γP = γ0(θ0); i.e.,
every type θ ∈ [0,θ0) prefers (γ0(θ),zL(θ;βH)) to (γP,zc). Similarly, when θ1 ∈ (0,1), there
is no type θ > θ1 with an incentive to play γP = γ1(θ1). We continue by showing that when
0 < θ0 < θ1 <1, no type in θ ∈ [0,θ0] has an incentive to play γ(θ’) for θ’∈[θ1,1] (and the
opposite). That is, we want to show that u(zL(θ;βH)) – C(γ0(θ),θ) ≥ u(zL(θ’;βL)) –
C(γ1(θ’),θ) for θ ≤ θ0, θ’ ≥ θ1. Since θ ≤ θ0 prefers (γ0(θ),zL(θ;βH)) to (γP,zc) = (γ1(θ1),
zL(θ1;βL)), we have, for θ≤θ0:
uu ( z L (θ ; β H )) − C (γ 0 (θ ),θ ) ≥ u ( z L (θ1 ; β L )) − C (γ 1 (θ1 ),θ ) (1)

Also, we know that θ’’ ≥ θ1 prefers (γ1(θ’’), zL(θ’’;βL)) to (γ1(θ’), zL(θ’;βL)) for θ’ ≥ θ1,

θ’’ ≠ θ’, θ’’ ≥ θ1. In particular, with θ’’ = θ1, this implies, for θ’ > θ1:
u ( z L (θ1 ; β L )) − C (γ 1 (θ1 ), θ1 ) ≥ u ( z L (θ ' ; β L )) − C (γ 1 (θ ' ), θ1 )

(2)

Now by (2), for θ ≤ θ1,
γ 1 (θ ') ∂C ( a, θ ) da
∂C (a, θ1 )da
≤ ∫1
(θ1 )
γ (θ1 )
∂a
∂a

γ 1 (θ ')

u ( z L (θ ' ; β L )) − u ( z L (θ1 ; β L ) ≤ ∫ 1
γ

26

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

so that for θ ≤ θ1 ≤ θ’,

u ( z L (θ ' ; β L )) − C (γ 1 (θ ' ), θ ) ≤ u ( z L (θ1 ; β L )) − C (γ 1 (θ1 ), θ )

(3)

The result then follows from (1) and (3). In addition, (3) also shows that any type in the
pool [θ0,θ1] prefers the pool than to announce θ’ ≥ θ1. A similar argument establishes that
when 0<θ0 <θ1 <1, no type θ ∈ [θ1,1] has an incentive to play γ(θ’) for θ’ ∈ [0,θ0], and
that no type in the pool prefers to announce θ’ ≤ θ0. Finally, it is easy to see that γ can
have no discontinuities at γ0(θ0), for in this case there would exist θ < θ0 sufficiently
close to θ0 for which a deviation by θ0 would be profitable (involving a marginal loss in
policy, but a discrete reduction in lobbying costs). Similarly, it can be shown that when

θ1<1, γ1(θ1)=γ0(θ0) when θ0>0. That γ1(θ1)=0 if θ0= 0, as we argued above, is covered in
the claim that γ(0) = 0.

Proof of Proposition 2. That there exists an equilibrium where (i) and (ii) hold follow
immediately from Lemma 1. It remains to show that this is indeed the unique equilibrium

(

)

~
~
satisfying criterion D1. So let Π ≡ γ~ , ~
xc , f (⋅ | a ) be an equilibrium satisfying criterion

D1. We will show that if θ0>0, then γ~ (θ ) = γ 0 (θ ) ∀θ ∈ [0,θ 0 ] . The same argument can
then be applied to show that if θ1 <1, then γ~(θ ) = γ 1 (θ ) ∀θ ∈ [θ1 ,1] .
From the proof of lemma 1, we only need to show that γ~ (θ ) is strictly increasing in
~
[0,θ0]. So suppose that this is not the case. That is, for a>0, let Γ −1 (a) denote the inverse

image set of a under γ~ , and suppose that there exists an aP>0 such that

{

( )

}

~
~
X 0P ≡ θ ∈ Γ −1 a P : 0 ≤ θ ≤ θ 0 is not a singleton. Since γ~ must be monotonically (weakly)

27

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

(

)

~
~
increasing, X 0P must then be an interval [ θ , θ ] ⊆ [0,θ0]. Let xL f (⋅ | a); β L , and

(

)

~
xL f (⋅ | a ); β H denote the preferred policies of the critical legislators β L and β H given

~
beliefs f (⋅ | a) . As in the case with complete information, we can now show that the set

( (

) (

))

~
~
of stable policies is given by S ~f (⋅| a ) = xL f (⋅ | a ); β L , xL f (⋅ | a ); β H ≡ ( s ( a ), s ( a )) . But if
~
X 0P = [ θ , θ ] ⊆ [0,θ0], then Bayes’ rule and the full support assumption imply that

~
~
f (θ | a P ) > 0 for every θ∈[ θ , θ ] and f (θ | a P ) = 0 otherwise. This in turn implies that

z L (θ ; β H ) < s (a P ) < z L (θ ; β H ) . And since θ ≤ θ 0 = ( zc − β H ) h , then z L (θ ; β H ) < zc .
Thus the constraint is binding for the Court, and ~xc (a P ) = s (a P ) . Next, choose θ < θ
sufficiently close to θ so that s (a P ) < z L (θ ; β H ) . Since by assumption Caθ <0, the slope of
a union’s indifference curve in the (a,x) space is decreasing in the type θ, and we can
always find a pair (a*,xc*) such that U (a*, xc *, θ ) > U (a P , s (a P ), θ ) (1), and for any θ’ <θ
~
~ ~
U ( a*, xc *, θ ) < U ( a P , s ( a P ), θ )∀θ ≤ θ ' (2). Furthermore, we can as well find one such

pair for xc* < zL(θ;βH). Suppose first that a ∈ range(γ~ ) . Since γ~ is an equilibrium, this
~
~
implies that ~
xc (a*) < xc * (IC for θ). But then (2) implies that γ~ (θ ) ≠ a * ∀θ ≤ θ . Then
~
xc (a*) ≥ z L (θ ; β H ) , which is a contradiction. Now
supp{ f (⋅ | a*) } ⊂ [θ, θ ] and hence ~
~
~
~
suppose instead that a ∉ range(γ~ ) . Then if U ( a*, xc , θ ) ≥ U ( a P , s ( a P ), θ ) for θ ≤ θ , (2)

implies that xc > xc*, so that, by (1), U ( a*, xc , θ ) > U (a P , s (a P ), θ ) . Thus criterion D1
~
requires supp{ f (θ | a*) } ⊆ [θ, θ ]. But in this case type θ has an incentive to deviate

from the proposed equilibrium behavior.

Q.E.D.

28

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

References
Ainsworth, Scott 1993. “Regulating Lobbyists and Interest Group Influence.” The Journal
of Politics 55 (February): 41-56
Austen-Smith, David 1993. “Information and Influence: Lobbying for Agendas and Votes.”
American Journal of Political Science 37 (August): 799-833.
Ansolabehere, Stephen D., John M. de Figueiredo, and James M. Snyder 2003. "Why Is
There So Little Money in Politics?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(Winter):
105-130.
Banks, Jeffrey S., and Joel Sobel 1987. “Equilibrium Selection in Signaling Games.”
Econometrica 55 (May): 647-661.
Baron, David 1994. “Spatial Electoral Competition and Campaign Contributions with
Informed and Uninformed Voters.” American Political Science Review 88 (March): 3347.
Bergara, Mario, Barak D. Richman, and Pablo T. Spiller 2003. “Modeling Supreme Court
Strategic Decision Making: The Congressional Constraint.” Legislative Studies
Quarterly 28 (May): 247-280.
Bernheim, Douglas 1994. “A Theory of Conformity.” Journal of Political Economy 102
(October): 841-877.
Cho, Inn Koo, and David M. Kreps 1987. “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (May): 179-221.
de Figuereido, John M. 2002. “Lobbying and Information in Politics.” Business and
Politics 4 (2): 125-129

29

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

Denzau, Arthur T., and Michael C. Munger 1986. “Legislators and Interest Groups: How
Unorganized Interests Get Represented.” American Political Science Review 80
(March): 89-106.
Fernandez, Arturo 1988. Las Practicas Sociopoliticas del Sindicalismo (1955-1985).
Buenos Aires: Centro Editor de America Latina.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole 1998. Game Theory, 6th ed. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Gely, Rafael and Pablo T. Spiller 1990. “A Rational Choice Theory of Supreme Court
Statutory Decisions with Applications to the State Farm and Grove City Cases.”
Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 6 (Fall): 263-300
Gely, Rafael and Pablo T. Spiller 1992. “The political economy of supreme court
constitutional decisions: The case of Roosevelt’s court-packing plan.” International
Review of Law and Economics 12 (March): 45-67.
Greene, William 2000. Econometric Anaysis, 4th. ed. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Helmke, Gretchen 2002. “The Logic of Strategic Defection: Court-Executive Relations in
Argentina Under Dictatorship and Democracy.” American Political Science Review 96
(June): 291-303.
Iaryczower, Matias 2005. “Contestable Leaderships: Party Discipline and Vote Buying in
Legislatures.” Typescript. University of California, Los Angeles.
Iaryczower, Matias, Pablo T. Spiller, and Mariano Tommasi 2002. “Judicial Independence
in Unstable Environments.” American Journal of Political Science 46 (October): 699716.

30

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

Jones, Mark 2002. “Explaining the High Level of Party Discipline in the Argentine
Congress.” In Legislative Politics in Latin America, ed. Scott Morgenstern and Benito
Nacif. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lohmann, Susanne 1995. “Information, Access and Contributions: A Signaling Model of
Lobbying.” Public Choice 85 (December): 267-284
McGuire, James 1995. “Political Parties and Democracy in Argentina.” In Building
Democratic Institutions: Party Systems in Latin America, ed. Scott Mainwaring and
Timothy Scully. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
McGuire, James 1997. Peronism without Peron: unions, Parties, and Democracy in
Argentina. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Nueva

Mayoria

2001.

“Argentina:

Conflictos

Laborales

desde

1980.”

<

http://www.nuevamayoria.com/ES/ >
O’Donnell, Guillermo 2000. “Argentina, Domestic Violence and Economic Data, 19551972”. [Computer File]. ICPSR Version. Ann Arbour MI: Inter-University Consortium
for Political and Social Research [Distributor], 2000.
Ramey, Garey 1996. “D1 Signaling Equilibria with Multiple Signals and a Continuum of
Types.” Journal of Economic Theory 69 (May): 508-531.
Rasmusen, Eric 1993. “Lobbying when the Decisión Maker can Acquire Independent
Information.” Public Choice 77 (December): 899-913
Rotondaro, Ruben 1971. Realidad y Cambio en el Sindicalismo. Buenos Aires: Pleamar
Segal, Jeffrey A. 1997. “Separation-of-Power Games in the Positive Theory of Congress
and Courts.” American Political Science Review 91 (March): 28-44.

31

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

Snyder, James M. Jr. 1990. “Campaign Contributions as Investments: The U.S House of
Representatives, 1980-1986.” Journal of Political Economy 98 (December): 11951227.
Snyder, James M. Jr. 1991. “On Buying Legislatures.” Economics and Politics 3 (July): 93109.
Snyder, James M. Jr. 1992. “Long Term Investing in Politicians, or, Give Early, Give
Often.” Journal of Law and Economics 35 (April): 15-43.
Stratmann, Thomas 1992. “Are Contributors Rational? Untangling Strategies of Political
Action Committees.” Journal of Political Economy 100 (June): 647-664.
Stratmann, Thomas 1995. “Campaign Contributions and Congressional Voting. Does the
Timing of the Contributions Matter? Review of Economics and Statistics 77 (February):
127-136.
Stratmann, Thomas 1996. “How Reelection Constituencies Matter: Evidence from Political
Action Committees’ Contributions and Congressional Voting.” Journal of Law and
Economics 39 (October): 603-635.
Toma, Eugenia F. 1991. “Congressional Influence and the Supreme Court: The Budget as
Signaling Device.” Journal of Legal Studies 20 (January): 131-146.
Torre, Juan Carlos 1983. Los Sindicatos en el Gobierno, 1973-1976. Buenos Aires, Centro
Editor de America Latina.

32

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

TABLE 1. Logit Regressions. Dependent Variable: Pro-Labor Rulings
Variable

Strikes
Court unconstrained
Pro-labor constraint
Anti-labor constraint
Post-Peron
Dictator
Constant

Model I
Cohesive
0.003 ***
(0.001)
1.437 ***
(0.493)
1.144
(0.734)
n.o.
-1.558 ***
(0.506)
1.064 **
(0.541)
-0.346
(0.405)

Database
2

Prob > LR chi
2
Prob > Pearson chi
Area u / ROC curve
Correctly Classified

Model II

Noisy (0.1) Noisy (0.2)
0.003 ***
0.003 ***
(0.001)
(0.001)
2.829 *
n.o.
(1.497)
1.128
1.147
(0.820)
(0.968)
1.565 ***
1.927 ***
(0.496)
(0.610)
-1.449 *** -1.328 ***
(0.462)
(0.473)
1.027 **
1.083 **
(0.480)
(0.500)
-0.449
-0.637
(0.452)
(0.548)

Cohesive
0.003 **
(0.002)
1.856 ***
(0.551)
2.414 **
(1.135)
n.o.
-1.891 ***
(0.620)

-0.460
(0.423)

Standard , N=315
0.000
0.019
0.673
0.616

0.000
0.018
0.674
0.648

Noisy (0.1) Noisy (0.2)
0.003 **
0.003 **
(0.001)
(0.001)
3.799 **
n.o.
(1.591)
2.955 **
3.626 **
(1.299)
(1.568)
2.307 ***
3.126 ***
(0.627)
(0.850)
-1.728 *** -1.402 ***
(0.554)
(0.554)

-0.847 *
(0.509)

-1.470 **
(0.703)

Democracy, N=178
Goodness of
0.000
0.025
0.676
0.648

Fit
0.001
0.033
0.682
0.607

0.001
0.027
0.698
0.646

0.000
0.029
0.709
0.674

Note : For each coefficient, the table shows the estimated value and standard deviation (in
parenthesis, below). * p < 0.1 ; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

33

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

TABLE 2. Logit Regressions. Dependent Variable: Pro-Labor Rulings
Model III
Supermajority for
Stable Set
Cohesive Noisy (0.1)
0.004 ***
0.003 **
Strikes
(0.001)
(0.001)
1.854 ***
1.951 ***
Court unconstrained
(0.549)
(0.415)
Variable

Pro-labor constraint a
n.o.

Post-Peron

-1.942 ***
(0.602)

0.481
(0.367)
-1.205 **
(0.530)

-0.540
(0.429)

-0.825 *
(0.432)

Dictator

Database
2

Prob > LR chi
2
Prob > Pearson chi
Area u / ROC curve
Correctly Classified

Senate not involved
in S.C. appointments
Cohesive Noisy (0.1)
0.004 ***
0.003 ***
(0.001)
(0.001)
1.066 ***
n.o.
(0.379)
0.959
0.735
(0.718)

Anti-labor constraint

Constant

Model IV

n.o.
-1.414
(0.482)
0.675
(0.443)
-0.136
0.36316

(0.749)
1.210 ***
(0.452)
-1.327 ***
(0.452)
0.678
(0.435)
-0.188
(0.427)

Democracy, N=172

Standard, N=315

0.001
0.039
0.670
0.593

0.000
0.024
0.669
0.616

0.000
0.144
0.751
0.686

Model V

Model VI

Pre-Peron

Strategic Defection

Cohesive
0.023
(0.025)
2.282 ***
(0.708)
2.129 **

Noisy (0.1)
0.025
(0.025)

(0.916)

(1.011)
2.486 ***
(0.760)

n.o.

-1.304
(0.924)

n.o.
2.190 **

-1.555
(0.975)

Pre-Peron, N=65

Goodness of Fit
0.000
0.003
0.015
0.104
0.659
0.769
0.625
0.754

Cohesive
0.004 **
(0.002)
1.920 ***
(0.615)

n.o.
-1.751 ***
(0.621)
1.666 **
(0.714)
-0.649
(0.519)

Noisy (0.1)
0.004 **
(0.002)
3.785 **
(1.622)
3.249 **
(1.414)
2.523 ***
(0.744)
-1.574 ***
(0.579)
1.941 ***
(0.717)
-1.080 **
(0.642)

1+ Year for a change
of President, N=210

0.005
0.088
0.761
0.754

0.000
0.073
0.671
0.592

0.000
0.049
0.698
0.643

Note : For each coefficient, the table shows the estimated value and standard deviation (in parenthesis, below). * p < 0.1 ;
** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01 .
a
Positive values of pro-labor constraint predict pro-labor rulings (PLR=1) perfectly in models III, VI (observations were droppped).

34

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

TABLE 3. Dependent Variable: Strikes (Annual Observations). Least Squares Regression
with Robust Standard Errors
Variable

a

Model I
Cohesive

Length b
Binding
Pro-Labor court
Post-Peron
Dictator

223.3 ***
(83.1)
-106.6 **
(41.7)
328.2 ***
(39.2)
-256.8 ***
(53.4)

Model II

Noisy (0.1) Noisy (0.2)
-180.8 **
-346.0 ***
(85.3)
(126.4)
168.6 **
145.3 ***
(63.7)
(51.3)
-169.0 *** -144.6 ***
(58.6)
(48.0)
323.1 ***
289.1 ***
(37.0)
(29.7)
-337.7 *** -322.1 ***
(84.2)
(74.3)

132.5 ***
(33.5)

216.7 ***
(59.1)

233.2 ***
(57.8)

219.6 ***
(82.2)
-100.7 **
(43.5)
328.7 ***
(39.3)
-258.8 ***
(53.4)
15.7
(23.0)
121.9 ***
(39.4)

62
0.000
0.66

62
0.000
0.67

62
0.000
0.68

62
0.000
0.66

End Term
_cons

N
Prob > F
R-squared

Cohesive

Noisy (0.1) Noisy (0.2)
-212.5 **
-421.2 ***
(89.1)
(133.9)
159.6 **
130.5 **
(65.5)
(54.3)
-169.8 *** -139.1 ***
(57.7)
(47.0)
329.5 ***
293.5 ***
(35.5)
(29.4)
-365.5 *** -357.2 ***
(83.9)
74.2411
37.2 *
46.0 **
(21.0)
(21.1)
209.2 ***
226.9 ***
(58.1)
(55.7)
62
0.000
0.69

62
0.000
0.70

Note : For each coefficient, the table shows the estimated value and robust standard errors (in
parenthesis, below). * p < 0.1 ; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01 .
a
All specifications include three lagged observations of the growth of GDP.
b
Length is highly collinear with pro-Labor Court, post-Peron and dictator in the cohesive
representation of legislative parties, and was dropped from the analysis.

35

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

FIGURE 1. Court’s best response with θ public information

1
zL(1;βH)

zL(θ;βH)

zL(θ;βL)

zL(1;βL)
S(θ)
xcPI(θ)
zc
zL(0;βH)

zL(0;βL)

0

θ0

θ1

1

In the case depicted in Figure 1, z(0;βH)<zc<z(1;βL). The court is perceived as “pro-labor” for
θ<θ0. Here the constraint is binding and xcPI(θ)=zL(θ;βH). Similarly, the court is perceived as
“anti-labor” for θ>θ1, and xcPI(θ)=zL(θ;βL). For θ∈[θ0,θ1], the court is unconstrained and
xcPI(θ)=zc.

36

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

FIGURE 2. Number of strikes in Argentina, 1935-1998

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0
34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98

37

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

1

For studies finding a relation, see Stratman 1992, 1995 and 1996. See also Snyder

1992.
2

This is, for example, the case of El Salvador, where justices must be reappointed by the

legislature. The budget could also serve as an instrument of influence. See Toma 1991.
3

All results would go through employing Euclidean preferences with the usual

properties. We present the analysis with specific functional forms to illustrate the nature
of the results in closed form solutions.
4

For completeness, there is a fourth stage in which the legislature reviews the court’s

decision, but given that courts would only make policy choices that are stable, we can
without any loss, discard this last stage.
5

See the appendix for a formal statement. Intuitively, this criterion requires that on

observing a deviation (an action not taken with positive probability by any type of agent
in the candidate equilibrium), the uninformed agents (court and union) will infer that the
deviating party belongs to the class of agents who had the greatest incentive to make the
observed deviation (Bernheim 1994).
6

Note that this framework allows us to accommodate different procedures for legislative

approval. For example, consider the case in which a policy has to be approved by two
collective bodies (House and Senate, a committee and the floor, etc) by simple majority.
In this case, βL and βH would be given by the median voters in each chamber, S(θ) would
not in general be a singleton, and the court would face a nontrivial strategic problem. To
simplify the presentation, however, we continue with the benchmark interpretation of a

38

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

unicameral legislature with a supermajority rule unless it is otherwise noted, and drop the
m subscript when there can be no confusion.
7

This should come as no surprise, however, since for this purpose, increasing xc with βL

and βH given is qualitatively similar as simultaneously reducing both βL and βH taking xc
as given, and we know from proposition 3 that βL and βH have opposite effects on the
expected level of strikes.
8

This will generally be the case even in systems as the Argentinean, where legislators’

reelection rates are low, since the electoral connection constitutes an asset for other
elective posts such as governors, majors and provincial legislatures. Moreover, this will
generally also be the case even if, as in Argentina, party bosses control the nomination to
party lists, since party bosses need to maintain the support of party members to retain the
command of the party (see Iaryczower 2005).
9

Peronism was banned from participating in the 1958 elections, and President Frondizi

was elected with the explicit support of Peron (see, for example, McGuire 1997).
10

This family of distributions is stochastically increasing in α and reduces to the uniform

distribution when α = β = 1. Thus, the “noise” in the identification of the legislative
parties with the President increases with α.
11

To clarify the second term in this expression, note that due to the symmetry of

treatment, the proportion of legislators of the pro-labor party to the left of (more antilabor than) a given point x in [0,1] is equal to the proportion of legislators of the antilabor party to the right of (more pro-labor than) the point 1-x, 1 − Βα (1 − x) .

39

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

12

Since these data were not available from a single source for our entire period (1935 –

1998), we selected what we considered to be the best possible source in our sample and
generated the remaining data using the percent variation in the next best available series.
The most comprehensive and reliable source is O’Donnel 2000, covering the period
1955-1972. For 1935–1955 we used data from Rotondaro 1971, which independently
covers the period 1935–1968. For the period 1972–1998 we used Torre 1983, Fernandez
1988, and Nueva Mayoria 2001.
13

By norms, we mean laws, presidential decrees, administrative decisions and

resolutions. Cases in which the constitutionality of a lower court decision was questioned
(arbitrariedad), and cases in which the constitutionality of the interpretation of a norm by
a lower court was questioned, but not the norm in itself, were excluded. Moreover, we
also excluded those cases in which the supreme court decided not to opine over the
constitutionality of the challenged norm alleging formal or technical reasons. Finally, to
avoid duplications in substance arising from the fact that the Argentine court does not
have the ability to determine a law as unconstitutional per se, but rather has to deal with
the unconstitutionality of its application to a particular case (person), we limit the pool of
cases to those published in extenso in La Ley, the main judicial publication in Argentina.
14

We do this for the cohesive and noisy representations of the legislature. Note that the

median voter in the Senate at the time of appointment, T, is computed from the
distributions GTU (x) and GTU ( x; α ) respectively, and that therefore the measure of pro-labor
court changes with each specification.

40

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

15

We do however also include a model specified for two thirds supermajority required in

both chambers. Denoting the critical legislator for a pro-labor (anti-labor) coalition in
chamber j=U,L by β Lj ( β Hj ), the critical legislator for pro-labor and anti-labor coalitions
in this case are given by min{β LU , β LL } and max{β HU , β HL } , respectively.
16

Recall that we also treat military governments as completely unified, anti-labor

governments, controlling both houses.
17

The results presented in Tables one to three were obtained using STATA version 7.0.

18

Recall that the relative positions of the court and of the critical legislators in the

legislature vary with each specification. Thus, while there are no instances in which the
political constraint is binding for a pro-labor court for “cohesive” parties, this event does
indeed occur under a noisy representation of the legislature.
19

The effect of dictatorships on pro-labor rulings should be considered in addition to the

effect brought by a unified government (as we assume dictatorships imply unified
governments). The results, however, may also reflect the nature of cases that come up for
decision to the court in dictatorship periods (more intensively anti-labor) and in postPeron periods (more intensively pro-labor).
20

The evidence, however, is not conclusive. On the one hand, while there are no

instances of a pro-labor court being constrained by the legislature in the cohesive
representation of the legislature, the coefficient of anti-labor constraint is not statistically
significant in the noisy representations of the legislature (this is accentuated with α = 0.2,
with a p-value of 0.729). On the other hand, however, rulings are always pro-labor when

41

Judicial Lobbying: The Politics of Labor Law Constitutional Interpretation

the constraint for an anti-labor court is binding. In this case, these observations carry no
statistical information with respect to the likelihood function and have to be removed
from the estimation. This is not to say that this variable is not relevant for the outcomes,
but instead that its contribution can be replaced by the rule: “if a supermajority constraint
is binding for an anti-labor court, the court will rule in favor of labor.”
21

We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this exercise.

22

We note, however, that length was highly collinear with pro-labor court, post-Peron

and dictator in the cohesive representation of legislative parties, and was dropped from
the analysis.
23

We also find that the level of strikes decreases the more pro-labor the court is. As noted

in the previous section, however, the empirical implication regarding the position of the
court is ambiguous in general. Thus, although intuitive, this finding does not provide
evidence in favor or against the model.

42

