NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HAS US MONETARY POLICY CHANGED?
EVIDENCE FROM DRIFTING COEFFICIENTS AND REAL-TIME DATA
Jean Boivin
Working Paper 11314
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11314
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005

I thank Ben Bernanke, John Donaldson, Marc Giannoni, Hong Li, Rick Mishkin, Athanasios Orphanides,
Mark Watson and an anonymous referee, as well as participants at the Columbia Macro Lunch and NBER
Monetary Economics Meeting for useful comments. I thank Athanasios Orphanides for sharing his real-time
output gap data and Dean Croushore for assistance with the Greenbook data. Mauro Roca provided helpful
research assistance. Financial support from the National Science Foundation (SES-0214104) is
acknowledged. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Jean Boivin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Has US Monetary Policy Changed? Evidence from Drifting Coefficients and Real-Time Data
Jean Boivin
NBER Working Paper No. 11314
May 2005
JEL No. E52, C32, C50
ABSTRACT
Despite the large amount of empirical research on monetary policy rules, there is surprisingly little
consensus on the nature or even the existence of changes in the conduct of U.S. monetary policy.
Three issues appear central to this disagreement: 1) the specific type of changes in the policy
coefficients, 2) the treatment of heteroskedasticity, and 3) the real-time nature of the data used. This
paper addresses these issues in the context of forward-looking Taylor rules with drifting coefficients.
The estimation is based on real-time data and accounts for the presence of heteroskedasticity in the
policy shock. The findings suggest important but gradual changes in the rule coefficients, not
adequately captured by the usual split-sample estimation. In contrast to Orphanides (2002, 2003),
I find that the Fed's response to the real-time forecast of inflation was weak in the second half of the
1970's, perhaps not satisfying Taylor's principle as suggested by Clarida, Galìì and Gertler (2000).
However, the response to inflation was strong before 1973 and gradually regained strength from the
early 1980's onward. Moreover, as in Orphanides (2003), the Fed's response to real activity fell
substantially and lastingly during the 1970's.
Jean Boivin
Columbia Business School
Uris Hall, Room 821
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
jb903@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

Since the end of the great inflation of the 1970’s, the U.S. has experienced only mild inflation and a
considerable reduction in the volatility of real activity.1 An important question is what, ultimately,
brought about these improved economic outcomes.
One possible explanation is that the Federal Reserve changed its behavior in an important way.
From a narrative perspective, this seems fairly uncontroversial, although the reasons for the changes
might be more so.2 The monetarist influence of the late 1970’s, culminating in the “experiment” of
1979-1982 under chairman Volcker, is often cited as an example. It has also been argued that the
composition of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and other political pressures might
have fundamentally altered monetary policy decisions over time. Further, the Fed might have
learned from past experiences, changed its views about the economy and, accordingly, modified its
conduct of monetary policy.3
However, despite the large amount of empirical research on monetary policy rules, there is
surprisingly little consensus on the nature or even the existence of these hypothesized changes.
Clarida, Galì and Gertler (2000) provide empirical evidence of important changes in the U.S.
conduct of monetary policy over the last forty years. In particular they find that while monetary
policy accommodated inflation in the 1970’s, this drastically and suddenly changed with the ap1

See among others, McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000) and Stock and Watson (2002).

2

See Romer and Romer (2002) and Sargent (2002)’s discussion.

3

Romer and Romer (1989) argue that the Fed’s concerns for inflation and unemployment may have changed

significantly with the arrival of Volcker. The importance of changing political pressures and ideologies on the conduct
of monetary policy has been advanced by Froyen (1974), Potts and Luckett (1978) and Blinder (1986) among others.
Finally, DeLong (1997), Taylor (1998), Sargent (1999) and Romer and Romer (2002) suggest learning or changing
beliefs stories — not necessarily continuous according to the latter — that could explain an evolution in the Fed’s
response to the economy.

3

pointment of Volcker in 1979. They emphasize that the pre-Volcker conduct of monetary policy did
not satisfy the so-called Taylor principle, so that a given increase in inflation was typically associated with a smaller increase in the nominal interest rate, thus resulting in a lower real interest rate.
They argue that such behavior on the part of the Fed did not rule out non-fundamental fluctuations.
Lubik and Schorfheide (2004) reach similar conclusions while formally testing for indeterminacy in
the context of an estimated general equilibrium model.
This evidence has been challenged along three dimensions. First, Cogley and Sargent (2001)
argue that the Fed’s evolving views about the economy might have been more gradual. Cogley and
Sargent (2001) specify a reduced form vector autoregression (VAR) with drifting coeﬃcients which
produces results, they argue, broadly consistent with those of Clarida, Galì and Gertler (2002),
although the time variation is not clearly of a discrete nature. Second, Sims (2001) and Stock
(2001) argue that Cogley and Sargent’s (2001) conclusion might be contaminated by the presence
of heteroskedasticity. This claim is supported in part by the evidence of Sims (1999) and Sims
and Zha (2004), who find that most of the observed changes between the pre- and post-Volcker
periods can be attributed to changes in the variance of the shocks. Yet, Cogley and Sargent (2005),
extending their earlier model to allow for heteroskedasticity in the reduced form VAR shocks, still
find important changes in the implied policy rule parameters. Finally, the evidence of changes in
the conduct of monetary policy has also been challenged on the ground that it does not properly
account for real-time issues, both in terms if the vintage of data used and the misperceptions
about potential output. For instance, Orphanides (2001) argues that estimating monetary policy
rules on ex post data, which were not available to policymakers in real-time, can lead to a very
distorted picture of the historical conduct of monetary policy. Orphanides (2002) concludes that
when the Clarida, Galì and Gertler (2000) rule is estimated using real-time data on inflation and

4

unemployment the conduct of monetary policy in the 1970’s is not greatly diﬀerent from the one
thereafter. Orphanides (2003) reaches a similar conclusion, using real-time estimates of the output
gap, except that he finds evidence of a reduction in the response to real activity.
The conclusion on whether or not systematic monetary policy changed thus appears to be particularly sensitive to: 1) the way the time variation of the coeﬃcients is modeled, 2) the treatment
of heteroskedasticity and 3) whether or not the real-time nature of the data is taken into account.
The goal of this paper is to contribute to this debate by considering an empirical framework
that accounts simultaneously for these three potential issues. Given that there is considerable
uncertainty about the true nature of the changes in monetary policy, I entertain the possibility
that the conflicting evidence reported in the literature might be stemming from the use of empirical
framework not suﬃciently flexible to allow for a rich evolution of monetary policy. I consider a
forward-looking Taylor rule with time-varying coeﬃcients. Following the pioneering work of Cooley
and Prescott (1978), the time variation is modeled as driftless random walks, and is estimated
using the median-unbiased estimator proposed by Stock and Watson (1998). I argue that this is an
appealing and flexible way of uncovering changes in policy. Importantly, the estimation recognizes
explicitly the presence of heteroskedasticity, allowing for changes in the variance of the policy shock.
Finally, given the possibility that the existing evidence suggesting important changes in monetary
policy might be due to an inappropriate account of the real-time nature of monetary policy, I
follow Orphanides (2001, 2002, 2003) and model the forward-looking behavior directly using the
forecasts produced in real time by the staﬀ economists at the Board of Governors, published in the
Greenbook.
The findings suggest substantial changes in the Fed’s response to inflation and real activity,
not properly accounted for by the typical split-sample approach. In contrast to what is typically

5

assumed in the literature, a single regime does not appear to properly characterize the pre-Volcker
conduct of monetary policy. The response to inflation was strong until around 1974, but then
fell dramatically in the second half of the 1970’s, perhaps not satisfying the Taylor principle. In
parallel, the response to real activity weakened continuously throughout the 1970’s. Moreover,
the transition under Volcker appears to have happened gradually, with the most important changes
occurring between 1980 and 1982 and not in 1979, as is often assumed. From the mid-1980’s onward,
monetary policy consistently responded strongly to inflation and weakly to real-activity. More than
the real-time data issue, the failure to properly account for this rich evolution of monetary policy
appears to be the reason why Clarida, Galì and Gertler (2000) and Orphanides (2002, 2003) find
conflicting results.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the specification of the forward-looking
Taylor rule and describes the Greenbook forecasts. Section 3 specifies a time-varying parameter
model and Section 4 describes the estimation. In section Section 5, I present the results and
show their robustness to an alternative treatment of heteroskedasticity, various specifications of
the forecasting horizons and diﬀerent measures of real activity. In particular, to make sure that
the main conclusions are not due to unknown particular features of the conditioning scenarios
embedded in the Greenbook forecasts, I report results based on the current period real-time value
of inflation and real activity. Section 6 concludes.

6

2

A forward-looking Taylor rule

A popular structural characterization of the monetary policy conduct is the forward-looking version
of Taylor’s (1993) rule:

Rt = αt + β t π t+hπ |t + γ t xt+hx |t + ρt (L)Rt−1 + εt

(1)

= Φ0t Zt + εt
where Rt is a short-term interest rate and π t+hπ |t and xt+hx |t are the Fed’s expectations of inflation
and some proxy of the output gap, respectively at horizons hπ and hx . Note that all coeﬃcients
have a t subscript to emphasize that they are potentially time-varying. The vector Φt denotes the
collection of these parameters and Zt the corresponding regressors.
This specification has been widely used both as a successful empirical description of monetary
policy and as a normative prescription.4 Taylor (1993) argues that a constrained version of this
rule — with no lags of Rt , hπ = hx = 0, the contemporaneous value of linearly detrended GDP,
and time invariant parameters — fits the Greenspan’s conduct of monetary policy between 1987 and
1992 impressively well. This led to numerous applications of the Taylor rule on U.S. data, and for
other countries as well.5
Various approaches have been employed to estimate such a rule. One is to explicitly model and
estimate the expectation process, as in Clarida, Galì and Gertler (2000). They assume that the Fed
has rational expectations, which implies a set of moment conditions that can be used in a GMM
framework.6 Their split-sample estimates suggests important changes in the conduct of monetary
4

See for instance the papers collected in Taylor (1999) and the references therein.

5

For instance, Clarida, Galì and Gertler (1998) show the empirical success of (1) for Germany, Japan, UK, France

and Italy, over the post-1980 period.
6

A much earlier reference on the direct estimation of the Fed’s expectations and of their inclusion, through IV

estimation, in the policy rule, is Abrams, Froyen and Waud (1980).

7

policy. Orphanides (2001, 2002, 2003) argues, however, that this evidence, based on ex post data,
does not properly account for the information that was actually available to policy makers at
the time decisions were made. If the data available to policy makers and their perception about
the output gap were, in real time, considerably diﬀerent from what we now know, the historical
characterization of monetary policy based on ex post data could be distorted. In fact, using realtime forecasts of inflation and real activity to estimate equation (1), Orphanides (2002, 2003) finds
that the conduct of monetary policy in the 1970’s is not greatly diﬀerent from the one thereafter,
thus contradicting the conclusion reached by Clarida, Galì and Gertler (2000).
Since this diﬀerence in result has been attributed in part to the treatment of the real-time nature
of monetary policy, it is important to acknowledge this issue in the empirical framework. I thus
follow Orphanides and use, as a proxy for the Fed’s expectations, the forecasts computed by the
staﬀ of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors before each FOMC meeting and published in what is
known as the Greenbook.7 As Orphanides argues, one of their key appeal is that they do not assume
knowledge of the subsequent revisions of these data, embedded in the ex post data typically used.
Moreover, they might contain more information than small-scale empirical models, such as VARs.
As illustrated by Romer and Romer (2000), the Fed might have an informational advantage over the
private sector that is reflected in the Greenbook. Second, as argued by Bernanke and Boivin (2003),
a large set of conditioning information might be required to properly model monetary policy. In
that respect, the Greenbook forecasts presumably include information from a wide range of sources,
including the forecasters’ “judgement”, which is not otherwise directly measured.
7

The Greenbook forecasts have been used originally in the estimation of policy rules by McNees (1986, 1992) and

more recently by Orphanides (2001, 2002, 2003) and Romer and Romer (2003). Romer and Romer (2000) document
their superior historical performance, relative to private sector forecasts, in forecasting inflation. For a discussion of
the properties of the Greenbook forecasting errors, see Romer and Romer (2000, 2002) and Orphanides (2002).

8

Implicit in the estimation of (1) by OLS, as in Orphanides (2001, 2002, 2003), or with timevarying parameters, as in the present paper, is the assumption that the Greenbook forecasts are
contemporaneously uncorrelated with the policy shock, εt . In particular, this requires that for any
given period, the forecasts are not based on knowledge of the actual deviation of the policy setting
from the one prescribed by the rule itself, i.e. the policy surprise. While some casual arguments
could be made to support this assumption8 , its validity can unfortunately not be checked directly, as
there is no oﬃcial detailed documentation of the conditioning scenarios underlying the Greenbook
forecasts.9 One potential limitation of the direct estimation of Taylor rules using Greenbook data
is thus that the endogeneity could introduce some bias in the policy parameter estimates. If this
is the case, one should be careful before concluding that the inflation response, say, took a specific
range of values at some point in the sample. However, two important observations should be made
at this stage. First, as long as this endogeneity was systematic throughout the sample period, it
could not be responsible for a low frequency evolution of the policy parameters that our empirical
8

For instance, that the forecasts are produced by the Staﬀ, before the FOMC meeting, independently of the actual

decision subsequently taken.
9

Reifschneider, Stockton and Wilcox (1997) provide some information on how these forecasts were constructed in

last ten years at least. First, the forecasts are based on a set of conditioning assumptions, in particular about the
expected path of monetary policy. Typically, this assumption is that the “nominal federal funds rate will remain
unchanged over the next sixth to eight quarters”. By construction, they thus do not provide the best forecasting
performance possible, but rather a benchmark summarizing the momentum already in place in the economy. This
“neutral” assumption about the future path of monetary policy reflects the institutional division between the Board
staﬀ and the FOMC, and in particular the fact that the Staﬀ aims to avoid being construed as making policy
recommendations. This could suggest that for most of that period, the forecasts were not conditioned on the policy
surprise. The second feature is that while econometric models, like the large-scale FRB/US model, are used in
constructing the forecasts, there is a large “judgmental” component. As a result, the forecasts cannot be mechanically
reproduced from any particular forecasting model.

9

framework is designed to uncover. Second, if inflation and real-activity respond only with a lag to
changes in policy, as is often assumed in monetary VAR analysis using quarterly data10 , the realtime current quarter values of inflation and real activity, i.e. hπ = hx = 0, should not be aﬀected
contemporaneously by εt , and are thus not subject to the potential endogeneity problem. Based on
this observation, the strategy adopted in this paper is to document the evolution of monetary policy
using diﬀerent specifications of the forecasting horizons in the Taylor rule. Since, as I show below,
the characterization of the evolution of monetary policy is essentially the same for all horizons, and
in particular for the specification using the forecasts for the current quarter, this suggests that the
evidence of changes in monetary policy, the main conclusion of this paper, is not an artifact of this
potential endogeneity issue.

3

Modeling the time variation

How did the conduct of monetary policy change and by how much? Answering these questions
requires modeling the time variation in the parameters. In doing so, it is important to keep in
mind that the conduct of monetary policy might have evolved in various ways. In particular,
there is no guarantee that the implied changes in the parameters were discrete. For instance, time
variation stemming from an evolving view of the Fed on the economy would suggest gradual and
continuous drifts in the policy parameters. Even the Volcker “experiment”, which is most often
thought as a one-time discrete change in policy, might have implied an adjustment process taking
place over a few years. Furthermore, not all the parameters are necessarily changing exactly at the
same date. If this is the case, split-sample estimates could be misleading. Unfortunately, standard
10

See among others, Bernanke and Blinder (1992), Bernanke and Mihov (1998) and Christiano, Eichenbaum and

Evans (2000).

10

stability tests, such as the Quandt (1960) likelihood ratio test, cannot discriminate between the
diﬀerent forms of instability: they all have power against various alternatives and more than one
type of change might be present in the policy reaction function.
It thus seems useful to explore an alternative to the often assumed discrete break model. The
time-varying parameter (TVP) model considered in this paper assumes instead that the policy
parameters follow driftless random walks:
Φt = Φt−1 + ωt
where E[ω t ] = 0. This is the model proposed by Cooley and Prescott (1976), partly as a way to
empirically account for the Lucas (1976) critique on the inappropriateness of stable econometric
models for policy evaluations. It has been widely used in forecasting applications,11 and Cogley and
Sargent (2001, 2003) use this specification for the parameters of their reduced-form VAR model.
Given the various factors that might have influenced monetary policy, the main appeal of the
TVP model is its ability to uncover changes of a general, and potentially permanent, nature,
for each parameter separately. Of course, if the true change is a single discrete jump, and is
simultaneous for all parameters, the TVP model would be mis-specified. But this is arguably a
very specific case and even then, the TVP model can provide, as seems to be the case in the
empirical application below, a useful approximation. Intuitively, the TVP estimator of Φt applies
weights, decreasing the importance of observations farther away from t, whereas OLS gives equal
weights to all observation.12 As such, the TVP estimate would produce a smooth estimate of the
discrete change, with the parameters starting to change before the actual break date. It is thus
possible to determine whether the uncovered changes are consistent at all with a discrete break
11

See Stock and Watson (1996).

12

Note that this down-weighting scheme implies, for the sample size considered in this paper, that observations at

the beginning and at the end of the samples have very little influence on the mid-sample estimates of the parameters.

11

model.
Moreover, as soon as there is more than one discrete change, or diﬀerent dates for diﬀerent
parameters, it might in fact be desirable to approximate the changes with the TVP model rather
than estimating a multiple break model. One reason is that the multiple break model requires the
estimation of many parameters, an estimate on each side of the breaks, for each coeﬃcient. Another
reason is that it requires an estimate of the break dates, which in macroeconomic applications
often involves considerable uncertainty.13 Consequently, although such an estimation approach is
feasible in principle, it tends to produce unsatisfactory results when the number of breaks is large
relative to the sample size or the break dates are too close to each other. The TVP specification
can approximate the multiple discrete changes in a parsimonious way, the number of estimated
parameters being independent of the number of break dates.
The TVP model thus appears to be a flexible, parsimonious and tractable way of uncovering
the nature of the time variation.

4

Heteroskedasticity-robust TVP estimation

Provided with an estimate of the variance of ω t , the time series of the parameters, {Φt }, can be
obtained using the Kalman filter or equivalently, by generalized least squares. All the parameters of
the model, including the variance of ω t , can be estimated jointly by maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE), using the Kalman filter to construct the likelihood function from its forecasts error decomposition representation. But if the variance of ω t is small, its maximum likelihood estimate tends
to be biased toward 0.14 This is potentially an important problem in the context of macroeconomic
relations because, even though the time variation in the parameters is found to be statistically
13

See for instance Stock and Watson (2002). This is also a feature of the results presented below.

14

That is, the MLE has a (large) point mass at 0. See Stock and Watson (1998) for a discussion of this point.

12

significant, and the changes over the sample are economically important, they might still imply a
small period to period variation in the parameters. As we show below, this is indeed the case for
the current application.
This paper thus considers an alternative way of estimating the variance of ω t using an estimation
approach proposed by Stock and Watson (1998). Their strategy is explicitly designed to account
for the deficiency of the MLE when the parameters’ variance is small. Another important appeal
is that it is computationally easy to implement.
The general idea of the estimation method is to exploit the fact that the distribution of a
stability test, under the alternative of a TVP model, depends on the variance of the parameters.
Hence, if all other parameters are known or consistently estimable, an estimate of the variance of
these parameters can be inferred from a realization of a given stability test.
More specifically, we can rewrite the random walk specification for the time-varying policy
parameters as:
∆Φt = ωt = τ υ t
where υt and the policy shock, εt , are assumed to be mutually uncorrelated mean 0 random disturbances.15 The scalar τ governs the size of the variance of the parameters. To permit approximations
based on non-degenerate asymptotic distributions, the case where it is small is formalized by making
τ local to 0, that is:

τ = λ/T.
In order to understand this parameterization, one needs to make the distinction between the small
15

Stock and Watson (1998) and Boivin and Watson (1999) discuss the set of assumptions underlying the asymptotic

theory of this estimator.

13

sample quantity τ , which we wish to estimate, and the asymptotic device that is used to estimate
it. In fact, while asymptotically this parameterization implies that the variance of the parameters
vanishes, for any given sample T and λ 6= 0, τ is a fixed non-zero quantity. Besides, since the
estimation is based on the asymptotic distribution of a test statistic, this parameterization gives a
meaning to τ being “small” asymptotically. More specifically, as it is the case when computing the
local power of a test, the standard deviation of the parameters is assumed to shrink at the same
rate as the sample size, which is suﬃciently slowly to make the asymptotic distributions of the test
depend on λ.
From Theorem 1 of Stock and Watson (1998), the asymptotic distribution of the Quandt (1960)
likelihood-ratio test,16 QLRT , under the TVP alternative, is a functional of Brownian motions,
indexed by λ:

QLRT ⇒

sup
s0 <s<s1

½

h0λ (s)0 h0λ (s)
ks(1 − s)

where h0λ (s) = hλ (s) − shλ (s) , hλ (s) = W1 (s) + λD

Rs
0

¾
−1/2

W2 (r)dr , D = Σzz

1/2

Συυ /σ 2 , Σzz =

−1
0 0
17 Given
E[Zt Zt0 ] , Συυ = E(υt υ0t ) = Σ−1
zz ΩΣzz , Ω = E[Zt εt εt Zt ] and Wi are Brownian motions.

D, an estimate of λ can be inferred from the realization of QLRT . Stock and Watson (1998) use
D = I in their application, since it simplifies the computation of the estimator and makes the time
variation comparable across parameters, if the variables are measured in standard deviation units.
Since there is no clear alternative, I follow this approach.
16

This is a standard approach to test the null of stability against the alternative of a structural break occurring at

an unknown date. Andrews (1993) derived the asymptotic null distribution of this test.
17

Stock and Watson (1998) assume that Zt does not contain lagged dependent variables. However, the results of

Li (2004) imply that the derivations of Stock and Waston (1998) are also valid when Zt contains lagged dependent
variables.

14

In order to make sure that the time variation found in the policy rule is not contaminated by
the presence of heteroskedasticity in the policy shocks, an heteroskedasticity-robust version of this
estimation is implemented. The estimation of var(∆Φt ) proceeds as follows:

1. An estimate of λ is readily obtained by inverting the heteroskedasticity-robust version of the
QLRT test, which can be performed simply by using a lookup table, such as the one in Stock
and Watson (1998);
2. Σzz is estimated with T −1

PT

0
t=1 Zt Zt

and, based on the Stock and Watson (1998) results, un-

der the local-to-zero time-variation in the parameters, Ω can be estimated by T −1
which is the White estimator of E[Zt εt ε0t Zt0 ], based on the OLS residuals, ε̂t ;

PT

2
0
t=1 ε̂t Zt Zt ,

−1
3. Σ̂υυ is constructed from Σ̂−1
zz Ω̂Σ̂zz .

³
´2
n o
d t ) = λ̂/T Σ̂υυ , the time series Φ̂t is obtained in the same way as
Conditional on var(∆Φ

in the standard MLE approach, using the Kalman smoother. This eﬀectively means that in the
estimation of Φ̂t , observations away from t, on both sides, are down-weighted. In fact, the larger
the estimated variance of the parameters, the more rapidly these weights are declining as we get
away from t.
Importantly, and again to make sure that the results are not contaminated by the presence of
heteroskedasticity in the policy rule, the implementation of the Kalman filter allows for changes
in the variance of the policy shock. The variance of the policy shock is estimated separately over
diﬀerent regimes, from the OLS residuals.18
18

Note that, given the local-to-zero time variation assumed in this paper, this way of estimating the variance of

the shocks is entirely consistent with the TVP specification, asymptotically.

15

5

Empirical results

5.1

Data and baseline specification

Equation (1) is estimated using monthly data and two lags of Rt . Rt is the annualized monthly
average of the federal funds rate and π t+hπ |t is the Greenbook forecast of the annualized percentage
change in the GNP or GDP deflator between t and t+hπ .19 Because of repeated changes in the base
year, no consistent time series of forecasted real GNP or GDP can be constructed from the Greenbook, over the sample considered. As a result, in the benchmark specification, xt+hx |t is proxied
using the diﬀerence between the natural rate of unemployment and the forecasted unemployment
rate. Defining the unemployment gap in this way makes its sign consistent with that of the output
gap, as conventionally defined.
There is considerable uncertainty, not only about the appropriate measure but also, the relevant
concept of real activity.20 To maintain the real-time nature of the estimation, in the baseline
specification, I use, as a measure of the natural rate of unemployment at time t, an historical average
of the unemployment rate up to that point. This is the same measure that Orphanides (2002)
presents and appears broadly consistent with narrative accounts of this period.21 I investigate below
the robustness of the baseline results to alternative real-time measures of real-activity, including
Orphanides’ (2003) real-time output gap measure.
The earliest Greenbook forecasts available are for the October 1965 FOMC meeting and are
made publicly available with a five year lag.22 The forecasts have been produced for various
19

In October 1991, the Greenbook switched from forecasting the GNP deflator to the GDP deflator. In terms the

inflation measure, this change in definition has essentially no eﬀect on our results.
20

Note that the time-varying constant accommodates, to some extent, mis-specification in the real-activity measure.

21

See for instance Orphanides (2003).

22

Note that the current values of inflation and real activity are not known within the period. Besides, the Greenbook

forecasts are not available at a standard frequency: usually eight data points a year are available, and they are not

16

horizons, in some instances ranging up to eight quarters ahead. But only the shorter horizons are
consistently available throughout the period. As a result, the forecasting horizons considered in
this paper vary from the current quarter up to three quarters ahead.23 The baseline specification
assumes a three quarter (3-Q) ahead forecasting horizon on both inflation and the unemployment
gap, for which the available sample is 1969:5 to 1998:6. While this is broadly consistent with
the horizons considered in the literature, I also document below the robustness of the results to
alternative choices.
Figure 1 displays the time series of the various measures used in the baseline specification.

5.2

Baseline results

As discussed in the Introduction, the existing literature suggests that the conclusion on whether
or not systematic monetary policy changed depends on various aspects of the empirical famework,
including the type of time variation in the parameters, the treatment of heteroskedasticity and
the real time nature of the data. To sort out the influence of each of these factors, in this subsection I first test the stability and perform a split sample estimation of (1). Since a central
theme of this paper is that a proper model of the time variation is crucial to the conclusion, I
then consider a baseline TVP model that is otherwise identical the split-sample model. While this
basline specification allows to identify the eﬀect of the TVP assumption, it is not necessarily meant
evenly spaced. In this paper I assume that in a given month, the Fed only observes the Greenbook forecasts for the
FOMC meeting that occurred before the beginning of that month. This presumably assumes slightly less information
than the Fed actually had. Sensible perturbations around this assumption, including linear interpolation between the
meetings, did not aﬀect the results.
23

For the diﬀerent horizons, a consistent time series, with at least two observations per quarter, starts as follows:

Current quarter (C-Q): 1967:11. One quarter ahead (1-Q): 1968:7. Two quarters ahead (2-Q): 1968:9. Three quarters
ahead (3-Q): 1969:5.

17

to represent the most satisfactory specification. This is why in Section 5.3 I check the robustness
of the conclusions to alternative, perhaps more realistic, specifications.
The first step is to provide statistical evidence that (1) indeed displays instability. Table 1
reports the p-values of the heteroskedasticity-robust version of the QLRT test, applied to diﬀerent
combinations of the parameters characterizing the long run policy responses.24 There is evidence
of instability for all these combinations. The test, applied jointly to all the coeﬃcients, suggest at
least two breaks: one in February 1974 and the other in May 1979. These results already suggest
that the time-variation might be more complex than the one-time discrete change that is often
assumed. The TVP estimates I report below will shed further light on the nature of these changes.

Table 1: Hetero-robust QLRT test
Parameters Tested

p−values

{α, β, γ, ρ1 , ρ2 }

0.000

{β, γ, ρ1 , ρ2 }

0.001

{β, ρ1 , ρ2 }

0.015

{γ, ρ1 , ρ2 }

0.002

The joint stability test on all coeﬃcients result implies a median unbiased estimate of λ equal
to 7.63, which suggests a relatively small period to period variation in the parameters. As I alluded
to in the description of the estimation approach, this estimate is within the range of values of λ for
which the MLE tends to run into problems.25
24

The p-values are obtained using Hansen (1997)’s simulation procedure.

25

Stock and Watson (1998) show that for the local level model and for λ = 8, the probability of getting λ̂ = 0

with MLE is 42%. Comparatively, for the median-unbiased estimation approach, it is only 13% (See Table 1 of their
paper).

18

Given the existing empirical results, it is useful to consider the estimates of the coeﬃcients,
assuming a one-time structural break. A natural break date, within the confidence intervals of the
break dates just estimated, is October 1979. Romer and Romer (1989) argue that it corresponds
to a significant shift in policy, soon after the start of Volcker’s tenure as chairman of the Fed.
The results from the policy rule estimated on each side of this date are reported in Table 2. The
estimates of β and ρi imply a long-run response to inflation,

β
1−ρ(1) ,

equal to 1.37 and 1.57 in the

first and second samples respectively. In terms of the response to inflation, these estimates would
suggest that monetary policy in the 1970’s was not too diﬀerent than under Volcker or Greenspan.
This is in line with the point made by Orphanides (2002, 2003).

Table 2: Split sample policy rule estimates with break in October 1979
α

β

γ

ρ1

ρ2

0.159

0.109

0.178

1.335

−0.415

(0.133)

(0.032)

(0.047)

(0.086)

(0.082)

0.203

0.195

0.020

1.253

−0.377

(0.124)

(0.042)

(0.041)

(0.062)

(0.060)

Pre-1979:9

Post-1979:10
(Standard errors in parenthesis)

Turning to the TVP results, the estimation is implemented as described in the previous section,
with the variance of the policy shock assumed to experience a structural break at the same date
as the parameters in the split sample estimation, i.e. October 1979. This is the same account of
heteroskedasticity implicit in the split-sample estimation. Figure 2 reports in the top panels the
estimates for the long-run response to inflation and unemployment, together with one standard
error confidence bands,26 as well as the split-sample estimates reported in the previous table. The
26

These are obtained from the Kalman filter, conditional on the median-unbiased estimate of the variance of the

19

bottom panels report the estimates of the federal funds rate persistence, ρt (1), and the intercept,
αt , together with one standard error confidence bands.
Contrary to the split-sample estimates, the TVP results suggest that the conduct of monetary
policy greatly evolved since the early 1970’s. The response to inflation varies roughly between 0.7
and 2.4 , that to unemployment between 0.4 and 2.6, and the persistence of the federal funds rate
between 0.85 and 0.93.27
The point estimates of the policy responses to inflation and unemployment reveal interesting
patterns. In the early 1970’s, the response to inflation was well above one. It fell substantially in
1973 — 1974, and by 1975 the response was below one, not satisfying the Taylor principle. The
response remained weak until the late 1970’s and then started to gradually increase until the mid1980’s. It eventually stabilized at a level above 2, with perhaps a mild decrease in the mid-1990’s.
Interestingly, the response to unemployment displays a quite diﬀerent pattern. It experienced a
sustained decrease throughout the 1970’s, evolving from a level above 2 to a level below 1 from
1978 onward. Concerning the persistence of the federal funds, two main observations stand out.
First, it was stable throughout the 1980’s and 1990’s at a level higher than in the 1970’s. Second,
there was a sharp reduction in the persistence of the federal funds rate in the early 1980’s; this is
in fact to be expected since this period was characterized by an atypical volatility of the federal
funds rate.
Overall, the characterization of monetary policy that emerges appears quite reasonable. In
fact, many aspects, including the timing of the changes, are consistent with existing accounts.28
parameters.
27

An Okun’s law coeﬃcient, of 2.5 say, can be used to translate γ t in terms of a response to the output gap. The

resulting coeﬃcient then varies roughly between 0.1 and 1.
28

Concerning the timing of these changes, it is important to note that given that the estimated time series of the

parameters are based on a full-sample, two-sided filter, there is no reason to expect the TVP to pick up a change

20

The behavior of policy during the early 1970’s matches Orphanides’ (2003) conjecture that the
Fed initially intended to respond aggressively to inflation, but failed to detect an adverse shift in
trend productivity. The weak response to inflation between 1975 and 1978 is consistent with the
account of Romer and Romer (1989), who argued, based on their readings of the FOMC minutes,
that “the actual commitment to combat inflation was weak” during that period. Like Clarida,
Galì and Gertler (2000) and Cogley and Sargent (2001, 2005), the actual size of the response to
inflation during this period is estimated below one. In fact, the whole time series of the response to
inflation is surprinsingly similar to the one estimated by Cogley and Sargent (2005). The fact that
such similar conclusions are obtained from a markedly diﬀerent empirical framework and diﬀerent
treatment of real time issue is reassuring. Further, the inflation response reached a temporary peak
precisely in October 1979, a date singled out by Romer and Romer (1989) as corresponding to an
unusual tightening of monetary policy. Finally, the sustained decline in the response to real activity
corroborates the recent results of Orphanides (2003).
But the TVP estimates uncovers important features which have not been detected in previous
empirical analysis. The changes in both the response to inflation and real activity are sizeable and
important to characterize the evolution of monetary policy. Moreover, the uncovered behavior of
the parameters is more complex than any of the existing split-sample estimates suggest. First, the
changes in the response to inflation and unemployment do not appear to have been synchronized.
Second, as Romer and Romer (2002) argue, this evolution does not appear unidirectional and seems,
at least in part, gradual. We see, for instance, that while some important and sizeable changes
are apparent around the appointment of Volcker, the main increase in the response to inflation
occurred during the 1980 — 1982 period. Moreover the uncovered changes are not limited to that
with some delay.

21

episode. This is consistent with evolving views and their gradual implementation within the Fed.29
Of course, precise statements about the size of the policy response need to be qualified by the
statistical uncertainty surrounding these estimates. For instance, we cannot conclude at conventional statistical level that the response to inflation is really below one between 1975 and 1978.30
It is important to stress, however, that the changes in the coeﬃcients over time are statistically
significant, as implied by the stability test reported above.31 That is, the response to inflation is
significantly smaller between 1975-1978 than anywhere else in the sample.
In light of the TVP results, it is also instructive to look more closely at the robustness of the
split-sample results. At first sight, the split-sample and TVP estimates appear to yield dramatically
diﬀerent conclusions concerning the evolution of monetary policy, particularly about the strength
of the response to inflation. However, given the nature of the changes uncovered by the TVP
estimation, this is not surprising. The long-run response to inflation varies considerably throughout
the 1970’s, being high initially and low in the mid- to late 1970’s. Other things equal, the constant
parameter OLS estimate for the pre-1979:9 sample should thus tend to be downward biased in the
earlier part of that period and upward biased in the later part. The results reported above are
certainly consistent with this explanation: the OLS estimates is 1.37, which corresponds to the
mid-range of the TVP estimates obtained for that period. To investigate this further, I re-estimate
29

It is true, as it should be clear from the description provided in the previous Section, that the TVP estimation

should tend to make discrete changes look more gradual than they really are. But that is not suﬃcient to explain the
gradual nature of the uncovered changes. In fact, the TVP estimates has no problem picking up a rapid increase in
the response to inflation in late 1979 and the changes are not limited to that period, as the behavior of the response
to unemployment makes clear. I investigate this further below by considering a specification that nests a TVP with
a discrete change in 1979:10.
30

The marginal probability that the reponse to inflation is below one at the trough is about 80%.

31

Note that the significance of the changes in the coeﬃcients cannot be formally inferred from the confidence

intervals.

22

the constant parameter model over the 1974:2 — 1979:9 period, where the starting date corresponds
to the first break date estimate reported above. The results are reported in Table 3. Note that if
the true nature of the change in policy was a discrete jump in 1979:10, starting the first sample
later or ending it earlier, should not dramatically aﬀect the results. Yet, they appear extremely
fragile: the long-run response to inflation in this case drops from 1.37 to 0.83, consistent with the
TVP estimates results. Moreover, ending this sample just one month earlier, in 1979:8, makes
the estimate drop further to 0.43. This evidence suggests that the way instability is modeled is
crucial to uncover properly the nature of the changes in monetary policy during the 1970’s. This
provides further evidence of the gradual nature of the actual changes and also of the fragility of
the split-sample estimates in the present context.

Table 3: Policy rule estimates for alternative sub-samples
α

β

γ

ρ1

ρ2

0.276

0.040

0.107

1.485

−0.533

(0.354)

(0.080)

(0.055)

(0.115)

(0.114)

0.400

0.018

0.118

1.464

−0.507

(0.375)

(0.083)

(0.056)

(0.117)

(0.117)

1974:2 — 1979:9

1974:2 — 1979:8
(Standard errors in parenthesis)

Given the behavior of the TVP estimates around 1979 and the widely held belief of a drastic
change in policy soon after Volcker’s appointment, it might still be argued that a discrete shift
would be more appropriate to describe this period. One way to check more directly if this potential
mis-specification of the TVP model is important, is to nest together the TVP and discrete change
model. In order to maintain a parsimonious specification, β t and γ t are assumed to follow driftless

23

random walks, with a potential discrete shift in 1979:10.32 Letting Dt be a dummy equal to one
for t greater than 1979:10, the estimated policy reaction function is:

Rt = αt + β t π t+hπ |t + β̃Dt π t+hπ |t + γ t xt+hx |t + γ̃Dt xt+hx |t + ρt (L)Rt−1 + εt .
This can be estimated as before, accounting for the presence of the time invariant parameters, β̃
and γ̃. The time series of the response to inflation is given by β t + β̃Dt , and to the unemployment
gap by γ t + γ̃Dt .
Figure 3 compares the resulting estimates together with the previous TVP results. There are
a few diﬀerences in the results when a discrete shift is allowed. First, the estimated persistence
of the federal funds rate is everywhere lower. Second the time variation in the response to unemployment might be partly discrete in nature and is estimated to be lower post-1980.33 Third, the
response to inflation is slightly higher in the mid-1970’s, implying a lower probability that the Taylor principle has been violated. Importantly, however, the conclusions about the general evolution
of the responses to inflation and unemployment remain intact: the changes are important, largely
gradual and the timing is essentially the same. Perhaps surprisingly, the response to inflation does
not show any important jump in 1979, even though such a discrete change is explicitly allowed.
The conclusions drawn on the basis of the TVP estimates thus appear robust to the presence of a
discrete change in 1979, if such a change indeed occurred.
32

Note that I am not arguing that the nested model is a more appropriate one. In fact, a key advantage of the

TVP estimation is that it does not rely on a choice of a simultaneous break date for all parameters. This is not the
case for the nested model.
33

Note, however, that there is no guarantee that 1979:10 is the true date for the response to unemployment.

24

5.3

Robustness

I now investigate the robustness of the previous results along three dimensions: the date at which
the variance of εt changed, the choice of the forecasting horizons and alternative measures of real
activity.

5.3.1

Heteroskedasticity

So far, the TVP estimation assumed a single change in the variance of the policy shock in 1979:10.
This has the virtue of making the TVP results directly comparable with the split-sample results,
which implicitly rely on the same assumption. It is not clear, however, that a single break in the
variance fully captures the heteroskedasticity of the policy shock. One way to gain further insights
is to look at the time series behavior of the full sample OLS residuals of (1). These are displayed in
Figure 4. Clearly, the early 1980’s period stands out. The volatility of the policy shock was a lot
larger, which might be due in part to the Fed following a diﬀerent operating procedure during that
period.34 This could have been wrongly attributed to time variation in the parameters. Outside
this period, however, there is no clear pattern.
One way to capture this behavior of the policy shock, and non-parametrically account for the
potential change in operating procedure, is to allow for three regimes in the variance of the policy
shock, with the middle one corresponding to the early 1980’s.35 Based on Figure 4, this should
be enough to capture the extent of heteroskedasticity present in these shocks. Figure 5 shows the
resulting TVP estimates, defining the 1979:10 to 1982:10 as the second of the three regimes. The
34

The federal funds rate provides probably a less adequate measure of monetary policy stance between 1979:10 and

1982:10, as non-borrowed reserves were set to achieve a level of interest rates consistent with money growth target.
But Cook (1989) argues that the fed funds rate may still provide a satisfactory indicator during this period.
35

Boivin (1999) allows explicitly for changes in the operating procedure using the Bernanke and Mihov (1998)

model. This requires a multi-variate framework which is beyond the scope of this paper.

25

second regimes corresponds to the non-borrowed reserves targeting episode. The key diﬀerence
with the previous TVP estimates is that the variation in the parameters post-1982 is much more
pronounced. This is not surprising, however: since the variance of the policy shock post-1984 is
about ten times smaller than previously estimated,36 more of the fluctuation in the federal funds
rate is attributed to variations in the parameters. In fact, much of this variation seems to be due
to the federal funds rate persistence, which induces similar movements in the long-run response to
inflation and unemployment gap. Overall, however, the conclusions about the nature of the changes
in monetary policy are unaﬀected.

5.3.2

Forecasting horizons

There is also some uncertainty about the forecasting horizons that properly characterize the Fed’s
behavior. Figure 6 reports the TVP estimates, assuming three regimes in the variance of the policy
shock, for various horizon combinations: hπ = hx = 0, hπ = hx = 1, hπ = hx = 2, hπ = hx = 3
and hπ = 3, hx = 0.37 In all cases, there is important time variation in the parameters. The
pattern of responses to real activity are similar over the whole period and the to inflation in the
1970’s are similar. For short horizons, hπ = hx = 0 and hπ = hx = 1, the response to inflation is
smaller throughout the sample, but especially in the post-1980 period. This smaller response to
current inflation is consistent with the Fed being forward-looking: loosely speaking, the estimated
coeﬃcient on current inflation should be equal to the actual response to inflation at horizon hπ ,
multiplied by a coeﬃcient, less than one, related to the degree of persistence in inflation between t
and t + hπ . But, apart perhaps for the very short horizons, the conclusions about the importance
36

In the baseline estimation, the post-1979:10 variance of the policy shock was 0.502, whereas now it is 2.271 for

the 1979:10-1982:10 period and 0.060 for the post-1982:10 period. The variance of the shock in the pre-1979:10 period
is 0.154.
37

Clarida, Gali and Gertler use hπ = hy = 1 as their baseline specification.

26

and the pattern of the changes remain essentially the same.

5.3.3

Real activity measures

Finally, perhaps the most important source of uncertainty about this specification concerns the
appropriate real-time measure of real activity. In fact, one important conclusion from Orphanides
(2003) is that to properly characterize the historical conduct of monetary policy, a proper account
of the historically perceived real activity level is essential. While the recursive average of the
unemployment rate considered so far is arguably a reasonable measure, consistent with existing
empirical applications, there is no guarantee that this, or any other measure, corresponds to the
natural rate historically perceived by policymakers. It is thus important to make sure that the
results are at least robust to other sensible alternatives.
I first consider alternative measures of the natural rate of unemployment displaying varying
degree of smoothness. Figure 7 displays the baseline measure together with three alternatives: 1)
a five year moving average as in Bernanke and Boivin (2003), 2) a three year moving average and
4) an exponential smoother obtained as:
¡
¢
u∗t = u∗t−1 + 0.075 ut − u∗t−1 ,
where u∗t denote the natural rate of unemployment. This last measure, which can be interpreted as
a constant gain update of the mean of unemployment, might be more appropriate than the moving
average measure to track the natural rate of unemployment if it is itself moving over time.38 As is
apparent from the Figure, they do considerably diﬀer and thus constitute a useful robustness check.
Figure 8 compares the resulting TVP estimates together with the baseline results. Even though
the underlying measures of the natural rate diﬀer substantially, the implied time variation is overall
38

Thanks to an anonymous referee for suggesting this measure.

27

very similar. In particular, the time path of the long-run response to inflation is essentially the
same, no matter the measure used. There might be somewhat more uncertainty about the exact
nature of the change in the long-run response to unemployment: with the exponentional smoother,
it increases more rapidly and to a higher level from the mid-1980’s onward. But for all measures,
the results suggest that the changes in the conduct of monetary policy were sizeable.
All the real-activity measures so far considered are based on the unemployment rate. As mentioned above, an advantage is that they are constructed from a time series that essentially has a
consistent definition throughout the period. This is not the case for measures based on real GNP
or GDP. As a robustness check, however, it is interesting to see if a real-time measure based on the
output gap yields similar results. I thus re-estimate the version of (1) considered by Orphanides
(2003). It is based on quarterly data, the three-quarter ahead Greenbook inflation forecast, one
lag of the federal funds rate and the real-time output gap measure he constructed.39 In a given
quarter, this alternative output gap measure is based on the headline concept of real output that
was in use during that quarter. Orphanides (2003) argues that this measure is as close as is possible
to the policymakers’ perceptions reported in the available historical record. The results from this
specification are displayed in Figure 9. Using quarterly data and this output gap measure yields
surprisingly similar results. In fact, applying a simple Okun law calculation to the estimated response to the output gap yields estimates of the same magnitude as those previously obtained for
the unemployment gap.
The characterization of the evolution of monetary policy that stems from the benchmark specification is thus robust to alternative measures of the natural rate of unemployment and Orphanides’
(2003) account of policymakers’ perceptions.
39

In this case the sample ends in 1995:4.

28

6

Conclusion

Determining whether or not the conduct of monetary policy changed is central to our understanding
of the eﬀect of monetary policy and of the root causes of the improved U.S. economic performance
of the last twenty years. Although there has been a considerable amount of research on the topic,
there are still important disagreements, even about the mere existence of these changes.
Accounting for the various issues at the center of this disagreement, the empirical investigation
in this paper led to the following conclusions:

• The conduct of monetary policy changed greatly over the last 30 years. The response to
inflation was very weak in the second half of the 1970’s, but strong elsewhere in the sample.
The response to real activity fell substantially and lastingly throughout the 1970’s. From the
mid-1980’s onward, the conduct of monetary policy appears to have been stable.
• The rich pattern of changes in the response to inflation and unemployment are not well
captured by a discrete shift, occurring in 1979. The changes are not unidirectional nor
synchronized across parameters. Moreover the transition under Volcker appears to have
taken place over a few years, with the most important changes occurring between 1980 and
1982. More than real-time data issues, the complex nature of the changes might explain why
conflicting results have been reported in the literature.

The timing of these changes is certainly consistent with monetary factors playing a role in the
improved economic outcomes of the last two decades. This confirms the view stemming from the
narrative evidence cited in the Introduction. Of course, the next step, which requires a fully specified
model of the economy, is to measure this evidence against other non-monetary sources of improved
economic performance, such as the private sector behavior or simply luck. But, beyond the timing,
29

the magnitude of the changes identified in this paper is substantial, suggesting a non-trivial role of
monetary policy.

References
[1] Abrams, Richard K., Richard Froyen and Roger N. Waud (1980), “Monetary Policy Reaction Functions, Consistent Expectations, and The Burns Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 12, 30-42.
[2] Andrews, Donald W.K. (1993), “Tests of Parameter Instability and Structural Change with
Unknown Change Point,” Econometrica, 61, 821-856.
[3] Bai, Jushan and Pierre Perron (1998), “Estimating and Testing Linear Models with Multiple
Structural Changes”, Econometrica, 66, 47-78.
[4] Barth, James, Robin Sickles, and Philip Wiest (1982), “Assessing the Impact of Varying
Economic Conditions on the Federal Reserve Behavior,” Journal of Macroeconomics, 4, 47-70.
[5] Bernanke, Ben and Alan Blinder (1992), “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of Monetary Transmission,” American Economic Review, LXXXII (1992), 901-21.
[6] Bernanke, Ben S. and Jean Boivin (2003), “Monetary Policy in a Data-Rich Environment,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 50:3, 525-546.
[7] Bernanke, Ben and Ilian Mihov (1998), “Measuring Monetary Policy,” Quaterly Journal of
Economics, 869-902.
[8] Blinder, Alan (1985), “Comment on Federal Deficits, Interest Rates, and Monetary Policy,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 17, 685-689.
30

[9] Boivin, Jean (1999), “The Fed’s Conduct of Monetary Policy: Has it Changed and Does it
Matter?” Ph.D. Thesis, Princeton University.
[10] Boivin, Jean and Marc Giannoni (2003), “Has Monetary Policy Become More Eﬀective?,”
NBER working paper #9459.
[11] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans (2000), “Monetary Policy
Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End?”, in J. Taylor and M.Woodford, eds.,
Handbook of Macroeconomics, (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
[12] Cogley, Timothy and Thomas J. Sargent (2001), “Evolving Post World War II U.S. Inflation
Dynamics,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 16, pp. 331-373.
[13] Cogley, Timothy and Thomas J. Sargent (2005), “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies
and Outcomes in the Post WWII U.S.,” Review of Economic Dynamics 8.
[14] Cook, Timothy (1989), “Determinants of the Federal-Funds Rate,” FRB Richmond Economic
Review 75(1), Jan-Feb, 3-19.
[15] Cooley, Thomas and E. Prescott (1976), “Estimation in the Presence of Stochastic Parameter
Variation,” Econometrica, 44:1, 167-184.
[16] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler (1998), “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice:
Some International Evidence,” European Economics Review, 1033-1068.
[17] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler (2000), “Monetary Policy Rule and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
[18] DeLong, J. Bradford (1997), “America’s Only Peacetime Inflation: the 1970’s,” Reducing
Inflation, NBER Studies in Business Cycles, Vol. 30.
31

[19] Froyen, Richard T. (1974), “A Test of Endogeneity of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Econometrics, 2, 175-188.
[20] Hansen, Bruce E. (1997), “Approximate Asymptotic P Values for Structural Change Tests,”
Journal of Business Economic and Statistics 15(1): 60-67.
[21] Li, Hong (2004), “The Econometrics of the Lucas Critique: Estimation and Testing of Euler
Equation Models with Time-varying Reduced-form Coeﬃcients,” unpublished manuscript,
Princeton University.
[22] Lubik, Thomas and Frank Schorfheide (2004), “Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application to
U.S. Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review 94, 190-217.
[23] Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1976), “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A critique.” Carnegie Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 1, 19-46.
[24] McConnell, Margaret and Gabriel Perez-Quiros (2000), “Output Fluctuations in the UnitedStates: What Has Changed Since the Early 1980’s,” American Economic Review, 90:5, 14641476.
[25] McNees, Stephen K. (1986), “Modeling the Fed: A Forward-Looking Monetary Policy Reaction
Function.” New England Economic Review, 3-8.
[26] McNees, Stephen K. (1992), “A Forward-Looking Monetary Policy Reaction Function: Continuity and Change,” New England Economic Review, 3-13.
[27] Orphanides, Athanasios (2001), “Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data,” American
Economic Review, 91:4, 964-985.

32

[28] Orphanides, Athanasios (2002), “Monetary Policy Rules and the Great Inflation,” American
Economic Review, 92:2; 115-121.
[29] Orphanides, Athanasios (2003), “Monetary Policy Rules, Macroeconomic Stability and Inflation: A View from the Trenches” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.
[30] Potts, Glenn T. and Dudley G. Luckett (1978), “Policy Objectives of the Federal Reserve
System,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 17, 525-534.
[31] Quandt, Richard E. (1960), “Tests of the Hypothesis that a Linear Regression System Obeys
Two Separate Regimes,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 55(290), 324-330.
[32] Reifschneider, David L., David J. Stockton and David Wilcox (1997), “Econometric models
and the monetary policy process,” Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 47,
1-37.
[33] Romer, Christina and David Romer (1989), “Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in
the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz,” in Olivier Blanchard and Stanley Fisher, eds, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual (MIT press).
[34] Romer, Christina and David Romer (2000), “Federal Reserve Information and the Behavior of
Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, 90, 429-457.
[35] Romer, Christina and David Romer (2002), “The Evolution of Economic Understanding and
Postwar Stabilization Policy,” in Rethinking Stabilization Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City.
[36] Romer, Christina and David Romer (2003), “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation
and Implications,” NBER working paper #9866.
33

[37] Sargent, Thomas (1999), “The Conquest of American Inflation”, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
[38] Sims, Christopher (1999), “Drifts and Breaks in Monetary Policy,” Manuscript, Princeton
University.
[39] Sims, Christopher (2001), “Discussion of Cogley and Sargent ‘Evolving Post World War II
U.S. Inflation Dynamics,’ NBER Macroeconomics Annual 16, pp. 373-379.
[40] Sims, Christopher and Tao Zha (2004), “Where there Regime Switches in US Monetary Policy?” Manuscript, Princeton University.
[41] Stock, James H. (2001), “Discussion of Cogley and Sargent ‘Evolving Post World War II U.S.
Inflation Dynamics,’ NBER Macroeconomics Annual 16, pp. 379-387.
[42] Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (1996), “Evidence on Structural Instability in Macroeconomic Time Series Relations,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 14, 11-30.
[43] Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (2002), “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 17, pp. 159-218.
[44] Taylor, John B. (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195-214.
[45] Taylor, John B. (1998), “Monetary policy guidelines for unemployment and inflation stability,” Inflation, Unemployment, and Monetary Policy, R.M. Solow and J.B. Taylor (eds.).
Cambridge, MIT Press.

34

Data entering the Taylor rule
20

FF
Inflation, 3-Q ahead
U-gap, 3-Q ahead

15

Unemployment and its real time natural rate estimate
12
Unemployment
Natural rate
10

10

8

5

6

0

4

-5

2

-10

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

0
1970

1995

1975

1980

Figure 1: Real-time data used in the estimation

35

1985

1990

1995

Long-run response to inflation

Long-run response to unemployment gap

4

3.5
3

3

2.5
2

2

1.5
1

1

0.5
0

0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

-0.5

1995

1970

TVP
Break Estimates (1979:10)
1 S.E. bands

Time-varying persistence
1.05

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Time-varying intercept

0.8
0.6

1

0.4
0.95

0.2

0.9

0
-0.2

0.85
0.8
1970

-0.4
1975

1980

1985

1990

-0.6

1995

1970

1975

1980

Figure 2: TVP estimates: Benchmark specification

36

1985

1990

1995

Long-run response to inflation

Long-run response to unemployment gap

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5
1.5
1
1

0.5

0.5

0
-0.5

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

0
1970

1995

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

TVP
TVP with Break in 1979:10

Time-varying persistence

Time-varying constant

0.94

1

0.92

0.8

0.9

0.6

0.88

0.4

0.86

0.2

0.84

0

0.82
0.8

-0.2
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

-0.4

1995

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

Figure 3: TVP estimates with discrete shifts in β and γ

5
0
-5
-10

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

Figure 4: Estimated policy shocks: Full sample, constant parameters

37

1995

1995

Long-run response to inflation

Long-run response to unemployment gap

4

3.5
3

3

2.5
2

2

1.5
1

1

0.5
0

0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

-0.5

1995

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

TVP
1 S.E. bands

Time-varying persistence

Time-varying intercept

1

1
0.8

0.95

0.6
0.4

0.9
0.2
0

0.85

-0.2
0.8
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

-0.4

1995

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Figure 5: TVP estimates: Alternative treatment of heteroskedasticity (Breaks in the variance in
1979:10 and 1982:10)

38

Long-run response to inflation

Long-run response to unemployment gap

2.5

3

2

2.5

1.5

2

1

1.5

0.5

1

0

0.5

-0.5

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

0
1970

[3,3]
[3,0]
[0,0]
[1,1]
[2,2]

1995

Time-varying persistence
1

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Time-varying intercept
0.8

0.98

0.6

0.96
0.94

0.4

0.92

0.2

0.9
0

0.88
0.86
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

-0.2

1995

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Figure 6: TVP estimates: Alternative forecasting horizons [inflation, gap]
5
0
Recursive historical average
60-month (Baseline)
36-month
Exp. Smoother

-5
-10

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Figure 7: Alternative moving-average measures of the natural rate of unemployment
39

Long-run response to inflation

Long-run response to unemployment gap

3

5

2.5

4

2
3
1.5
2
1
1

0.5
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

0
1970

1995

Recursive historical average
60-month (Baseline)
36-month
Exp. smoother

Time-varying persistence
0.98

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Time-varying constant

0.5
0.4

0.96

0.3
0.94

0.2

0.92

0.1
0

0.9

-0.1

0.88
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

-0.2

1995

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

Figure 8: TVP estimates: Alternative measures of the natural rate of unemployment

40

1995

Long-run response to inflation

Long-run response to output gap

4

1
0.8

3

0.6
0.4

2
0.2
0

1

-0.2
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

-0.4

1995

1970

TVP
Break Estimates (1979:3)
1 S.E. bands

Time-varying persistence
1

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Time-varying intercept

4
3

0.8
2
0.6

1
0

0.4
-1
0.2
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

-2

1995

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Figure 9: TVP estimates: Quarterly data and real-time output gap measure (Orphanides (2003))

41

