                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              FORSAKING ALL OTHERS?
                    THE EFFECTS OF “GAY MARRIAGE” ON RISKY SEX

                                          Thomas S. Dee

                                       Working Paper 11327
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w11327


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2005




I would like to thank Harrell Chesson, Amanda Bayer, Fred Pryor and participants at the 2005
meeting of the Population Association of America for comments on an early version of this research.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Thomas S. Dee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Forsaking All Others? The Effects of “Gay Marriage” on Risky Sex
Thomas S. Dee
NBER Working Paper No. 11327
May 2005
JEL No. I1, D1

                                            ABSTRACT

One of the conjectured benefits of establishing the legal recognition of samesex partnerships is that

it would promote a culture of responsibility and commitment among homosexuals. A specific

implication of this claim is that “gay marriage” will reduce the prevalence of sexually transmitted

infections (STI). In this study, I present a simple 2-period model, which provides a framework for

discussing the ways in which gay marriage might reduce (or increase) the prevalence of STI. Then,

I present reduced-form empirical evidence on whether gay marriage has actually reduced STI rates.

These evaluations are based on country-level panel data from Europe, where nations began

introducing national recognition of same-sex partnerships in 1989. The results suggest that these gay-

marriage laws led to statistically significant reductions in syphilis rates. However, these effects were

smaller and statistically imprecise with respect to gonorrhea and HIV.

Thomas S. Dee
Department of Economics
Swarthmore College
Swarthmore, PA 19081
and NBER
dee@swarthmore.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

         The issue of whether the rights and responsibilities of marriage should be

extended to homosexual couples has emerged as arguably the most contentious social-

policy debate in the United States. Over the past few years, some states and cities have

established formal recognition of same-sex partnerships or extended marriage-like

benefits to same-sex couples. These ongoing changes have included the court-motivated

introduction of civil unions in Vermont and gay marriage in Massachusetts as well as

domestic-partnership laws in Hawaii, New Jersey and California (Marech 2005).

         However, there have also been aggressive responses to these developments. For

example, during the last general election, voters in 11 states approved constitutional

amendments banning gay marriage.1 And, during his 2005 State of the Union speech,

President Bush repeated his pledge to support the Federal Marriage Amendment, a

constitutional amendment that would effectively prohibit states from issuing same-sex

marriage licenses.

         The heated debate over the proper legal status of same-sex partnerships has turned

in large part on deeply held normative values. Proponents of “gay marriage” often argue

that its prohibition violates our most basic values regarding equality and fairness.2 And

opponents often appeal to long-standing religious and cultural values that place a high

esteem on heterosexual marriage.

         However, the debate has also touched upon the possible behavioral consequences

of gay marriage. In particular, critics of gay marriage have argued that it may erode
1
  There has been some controversy over the claim that the turnout generated by these ballot initiatives,
especially the one in Ohio, may have influenced the outcome (e.g., Belluck 2004).
2
  Throughout this study, I will refer to any sort of national recognition of same-sex partnerships that has
legal and economic consequences as “gay marriage.” However, the legal recognition of same-sex
partnerships can (and typically does) confer legal rights that differ from those associated with heterosexual
marriage.


                                                                                                            2
society’s interest in and support for the institution of marriage (e.g., Wilson 1996, Kurtz

2003, Schulman 2003). For example, Wilson (1996) suggests that gay marriage would

call “into question the role of marriage at a time when the threats to it, ranging from

single-parent families to common divorces, have hit record highs.”

        In contrast, supporters of gay marriage have suggested that extending this

institution to same-sex partners will promote increased commitment and responsibility

among homosexuals (e.g., Sullivan 1995, Eskridge 1996, Brooks 2003, Rauch 2004).3

Several commentators (e.g., Posner 1992, page 311, Philipson and Posner 1993, pages

179-180, Eskridge 1996, page 120, Müller 2002 and Rauch 2004, page 79) have noted a

specific and testable implication of this claim: the introduction of gay marriage may

reduce the prevalence of the sexually transmitted infections (STI) that are particularly

common among male homosexuals (e.g., syphilis, gonorrhea and HIV).

        In this study, I examine this claim, focusing in particular on the recent

experiences within Europe, where 12 countries introduced national recognition of same-

sex partnerships between 1989 and 2003 (Table 1). This study is organized as follows. In

Section 2, I briefly discuss the same-sex partnership laws in Europe. In Section 3, I

present a simple, 2-period theoretical model to examine how the introduction of such

marriage rights might influence sexual promiscuity and STI. This model illustrates how

the economic and emotional benefits unique to marriage could reduce sexual promiscuity

and STI. However, it also provides a framework for acknowledging some less obvious

mechanisms by which gay marriage could actually lead to increases in STI. In Section 4,

I discuss the World Health Organization’s (WHO) data on STI in European countries and


3
 Some supporters make the further claim that gay marriage will also revive the social standing of marriage
among heterosexuals (e.g., Sullivan 1995, Rauch 2004).


                                                                                                         3
the STI trends in countries with and without gay marriage. In Section 5, I discuss the

econometric specifications used to evaluate the effects of gay marriage as well as a

variety of robustness checks. Section 6 presents the empirical results based on these

specifications and section 7 concludes.



2. SAME-SEX PARTNERSHIP LAWS IN EUROPE

         In 1984, the Danish Parliament established a commission that was charged with

examining the social condition of homosexuals and making proposals for improving their

well being. The legislative charge to this commission explicitly included proposals

“relevant to their permanent cohabitation” (Nielsen 1990).4 The commission published its

final report in 1988 and the resulting parliamentary debate established in 1989 the right of

homosexual couples to form “registered partnerships.” This ground-breaking law allows

homosexual couples to form a legal partnership that have virtually all the legal rights and

responsibilities of married heterosexuals, including property rights and joint income tax

assessment.

         The legal provisions for the dissolution of a registered partnership in Denmark are

also the same as those for marriage. However, the correspondence of Denmark’s

registered partnerships with conventional marriage is not an entirely complete one. The

law has residency requirements and prohibits joint custody of children, state-sanctioned

church weddings and state assistance for artificial-insemination procedures (Merin 2002).

         Several other Scandinavian nations (e.g., Norway, Sweden and Iceland) soon

followed Denmark’s example by implementing similar registered-partnership laws (Table


4
 The formation of this committee reflected a public debate over the legal status of same-sex couples that
dated back to the late 1960’s (Merin 2002, page 61).


                                                                                                            4
1).5 The Netherlands also implemented a Danish-style registered-partnership law in 1998.

However, after a subsequent revision that became effective in 2001, the Netherlands

became the first country to allow same-sex couples to marry.6 In 2003, Belgium also

introduced marriage for homosexual couples.7 Since then, other European nations have

continued to debate and implement same-sex partnership laws (e.g., United Kingdom,

Switzerland). And, more recently, the debate over “gay marriage” has extended to several

Eastern European countries (Whitmore 2004).

        Two nations, France and Germany, have introduced what Merin (2002) refers to

as “light” versions of registered partnerships. For example, under Germany’s Lifetime

Partnership Act (i.e., “Lebenspartnerschaftsgesetz”), which became effective in 2001,

same-sex couples can form registered partnerships. And these partnerships are accorded

rights that are similar to those available to married couples with respect to tenancy,

inheritance, hospital visitation and health insurance. Furthermore, the dissolution of a

registered partnership in Germany requires a court proceeding. However, critics claim

that this partnership law omits important tax and financial benefits (Merin 2002, page

147).

        In 1999, France introduced a “civil covenant of solidarity” (i.e., the “Pacte Civil

de Solidarité” or PaCS), which is available to both same-sex and opposite-sex couples.8

The PaCS provides a number of benefits previously unavailable to same-sex couples


5
  Some autonomous regions within other European countries (e.g., Spain) have also implemented laws that
recognize same-sex partnerships.
6
  However, there are some differences with respect to heterosexual marriages. For example, only the
biological mother in a lesbian marriage is the legal parent of the child (Merin 2002, page 127)
7
  Belgium also introduced a statutory cohabitation law in 2000, which was available to any two individuals
including siblings. However, it was basically symbolic, conferred few rights and could be easily dissolved
(Merin 2002).
8
  Merin (2002, page 136) notes that, five years prior to the PaCS, over 300 French towns were conducting
largely symbolic registrations of same-sex couples.


                                                                                                         5
(e.g., the right to file a joint tax return, to retain a lease if a partner dies and access to

social security benefits under a partner’s coverage). However, a PaCS does not actually

alter one’s status as single, does not address inheritance or child-related rights and can be

easily dissolved.9

         Three other European nations (Hungary, Portugal and Croatia) have taken a

different approach to recognizing same-sex partnerships by basically extending the status

of common-law marriages to same-sex couples (i.e., “unregistered cohabitation”). For

example, in 1995, the Hungarian Constitutional Court refused to extend conventional

marriage to same-sex couples but it did declare that limiting common-law marriages to

heterosexuals was unconstitutional. In the following year, the Hungarian Parliament

legalized common-law marriages for same-sex couples.10 Hungary’s Common Law

Marriage Act extends most of the rights available to married couples to same-sex couples

who share a household and live in “emotional and economic communion” (Merin 2002,

page 131).These include rights related to property, pensions and inheritance but not

parental rights. In 2001, Portugal also implemented a new law on the de facto unions of

same-sex and opposite-sex couples. It established rights that are less comprehensive than

those in Hungary but that did include property rights, housing benefits and access to

certain employee benefits (Merin 2002, page 134). In 2003, Croatia, which is being

considered for membership in the European Union, passed a “civil union” law that has

given same-sex couples living together for three years the same rights as unmarried



9
  More specifically, a partner can unilaterally terminate a PaCS by notifying their partner and the court.
Whether the PaCS should be considered “gay marriage” in the context of this study is moot. Data on the
prevalence of STI in France are unavailable and France is not included in this study.
10
   Merin (2002) argues that the Hungarian law was surprising since there had been little political
mobilization on the issue and suggests that it was instead motivated by a desire to appear socially tolerant
to members of the European Union. Hungary joined the European Union on May 1, 2004.


                                                                                                               6
heterosexual couples. These include inheritance rights, joint health coverage and some

provision for support if the union is dissolved (Agence France Presse 2003).

         This discussion underscores the fact that the rights and responsibilities of same-

sex partners in the 12 countries listed in Table 1 differ with respect to a variety of details.

However, they also share the dramatic feature of providing national recognition of same-

sex relationships in combination with non-trivial legal rights and economic benefits. An

important concern is whether the timing of these laws within countries can be reasonably

viewed as a plausible natural experiment. The available anecdotal evidence regarding the

adoption of these laws suggests that this is so. In particular, the sometimes heated public

debates surrounding these laws typically turned on conflicting concerns about fairness,

equality and morality and were possibly motivated by the similar legal developments in

like-minded countries. In contrast, these laws do not appear to have been introduced in

direct response to concerns about country-specific trends in HIV infections or other

STI.11 For example, Nielsen (1990) discusses the development of Denmark’s registered

partnership law and suggests that reductions in sexually transmitted infections were at

most a minor motivation.



3. GAY MARRIAGE AND RISKY SEX

         A number of commentators have noted that a potential benefit of gay marriage is

that it would reduce the prevalence of sexually transmitted infections by lowering the

level of promiscuity in male homosexual relationships (e.g., Posner 1992, page 311,

Philipson and Posner 1993, pages 179-180, Eskridge 1996, page 120, Müller 2002 and


11
  The robustness checks discussed later address these concerns in a number of ways including an
assessment of how changes in syphilis rates related to the timing of gay-marriage laws (Figure 6).


                                                                                                     7
Rauch 2004, page 79).12 The argument that same-sex partnership laws should reduce

sexual promiscuity and, by implication, sexually transmitted infections (STI) rests largely

on the assumption that these partnerships convey important economic and emotional

benefits that will promote fidelity.

         A simple two-period model can illustrate how the introduction of gay marriage

might reduce promiscuity among those aspiring to enter such a state as well as suggest

some potentially important caveats to this basic theoretical prediction. Consider the

decision problem faced by an individual who can only have uncommitted relationships in

the first period (i.e., a “dating” period). However, these uncommitted relationships have a

chance of developing into a committed relationship in period 2. An uncommitted

relationship conveys a basic set of net benefits, R, while a committed relationship in

period 2 adds to R several unique economic and emotional benefits measured by B. The

effects of gay marriage are viewed here as a policy-induced increase in B.

         The amount of benefits derived from a committed relationship in the second

period (i.e., B) depends in part on the “quality” of the partner. The true quality of

potential partners is not entirely known during the dating period. However, individuals

value fidelity. So those with lower levels of promiscuity in the first period (i.e., S1) can

form a better match and enjoy increased relationship benefits in the second period (i.e.,

dB( S1 )
         < 0 ). Furthermore, individuals are also more willing to form a committed
 dS1

second-period relationship with individuals that are observed with lower levels of sexual

promiscuity in the first period. In other words, the probability of forming a committed


12
  In a related argument, Epstein (2004) suggests that the promotion of sexual fidelity constitutes an
effective but underutilized way to reduce the spread of HIV in Africa.


                                                                                                        8
relationship in period 2 (i.e., P(S1)) is decreasing in the amount of sexual promiscuity

                                                   dP( S1 )
chosen by the individual in period 1 (i.e.,                 < 0 ).
                                                    dS1

        In the first period, the individual derives increased utility from promiscuity (S1)

and the other net benefits from uncommitted relationships (R) but decreased utility from

the risk of acquiring a sexually transmitted infections (i.e., I(S1)). The risk of acquiring an

                                 dI ( S1 )
STI is increasing in S1 (i.e.,             > 0 ). At the beginning of the second period, the
                                  dS1

individual knows their relationship status and then chooses S2 to maximize their utility.

The resulting indirect utility function for those in committed relationships in the second

period is V(R2 + B(S1)). For those not in committed relationships in period 2, the indirect

utility function is V(R2).

        In period 1, the individual chooses a level of S1 that maximizes the sum of period-

1 utility and the discounted (δ) value of expected utility in period 2:

(1)             U ( S1 , R1 ,I ( S1 )) + δ [P( S1 )V ( R2 + B( S1 )) + (1 − P( S1 ))V ( R2 )]

The first-order condition with respect to S1 is

                ∂U ( S1 , R1 ) ∂U ( S1 , R1 ) dI ( S1 )    dP( S1 )
                              +                         +δ          [V ( R2 + B(S1 )) − V ( R2 )]
                   ∂S1          ∂I ( S1 )      dS1          dS1
(2)                                                                                                 .
                           ∂V ( R2 + B( S1 )) dB( S1 )
                + δP( S1 )                             =0
                                  ∂B           dS1

The interpretation of this first-order condition is straightforward. The first term is the

marginal utility from S1 while the last three terms reflect the marginal cost of S1. These

costs include increased infection risk, a reduction in the likelihood of enjoying the

discounted premium associated with committed relationships and a reduction in the size

of this benefit because of reductions in partner quality.


                                                                                                        9
         How would the introduction of same-sex partnership laws (i.e., an increase in B)

influence the equilibrium choice of S1 in this model? By totally differentiating the first-

order condition and assuming the second-order conditions hold, it follows that the effect

on S1 of a change in B takes the sign of the following expression:

                      ∂P( S1 ) ∂V ( R2 + B)            ∂ 2V ( R2 + B( S1 )) dB( S1 )
(3)               δ                         + δP( S1 )                               .
                       ∂S1          ∂B                         ∂B 2          dS1

The first expression is negative and reflects the fact that S1 creates a cost by reducing the

likelihood of enjoying the benefits of a committed relationship. However, the assumption

that B has diminishing marginal utility implies that the second expression in equation (3)

is actually positive. This term reflects the fact that gay marriage lowers some of the costs

of first-period promiscuity (i.e., S1) by reducing the marginal cost of forming a lower-

quality, second-period match.13 In other words, even this simple model suggests that

increasing the benefits of a committed relationship through gay marriage will have

ambiguous effects on sexual promiscuity.14 However, this model also indicates that gay

marriage will reduce promiscuity if it creates a sufficiently large increase in the benefits

of committed relationships.

         This simple exposition also ignores a number of additional mechanisms by which

same-sex partnership laws may reduce sexually transmitted infections. For example, if

these laws lower the stigma of homosexuality, they will reduce the incentive for

homosexuals to cluster in urban areas and, by implication, raise the search costs of sexual

promiscuity (Müller 2002). Second, a policy-induced reduction in stigma will also reduce

the incentive for homosexuals to camouflage themselves in heterosexual marriages;
13
   Another way to state this is that gay marriage can increase the incentives for promiscuity by raising the
benefits associated with commitments to partners of all quality.
14
   Modeling the choice of promiscuity in the second period leads to similarly ambiguous comparative
statics.


                                                                                                           10
thereby lowering the rate at STI should spread to the wider population (Müller 2002).

Third, reductions in stigma or changes in social expectations due to gay marriage may

also lower the prevalence of drug abuse, which sometimes complements risky sexual

behavior among male homosexuals (e.g., Stall et al. 2004). Fourth, gay marriage may

also lower the supply of partners for risky sexual contact.

        Nonetheless, the results in equation (3) indicate that the effects of gay marriage on

STI should still be viewed as an open, empirical question. Posner (1992, pages 305-306)

suggests that the male “taste for variety” implies that gay marriage would have little

effect on fidelity (i.e., S1 will be inelastic with respect to changes in B).15 Similarly,

Posner (1992) also argues that children are “strongest cement of marriage” that their

relative absence in same-sex partnerships makes those relationships - and the potential

benefits of fidelity (i.e., B) - tenuous. Furthermore, Posner (1997, footnote 8) notes that

gay marriage may make male homosexuals less likely to practice safe sex with their

spouse since it would clearly indicate mistrust. The simple model presented above also

ignored a “general-equilibrium” consideration that could attenuate any increase in fidelity

due to gay marriage. If gay marriage leads to a widespread reduction in promiscuity, the

infection risk associated with promiscuity, I(S1), would be reduced, encouraging more

sexual risk taking.



4. STI DATA AND TRENDS

        The disease data used in these evaluations were collected by the World Health

Organization (WHO) in collaboration with national health authorities and made available

15
  Posner (1992, pages 305-306) argues that the biology of sex and reproduction is such that males are
naturally inclined towards promiscuity. However, Rauch (2004, page 142) discusses evidence that the
degree of (and desire for) promiscuity among male homosexuals is often overstated.


                                                                                                        11
through its Computerized Information System for Infectious Diseases (CISID). More

specifically, the annual surveillance data examined here constitute an unbalanced panel of

25 nations from what the WHO considers the western and central regions of Europe.

Annual disease counts were observed for these nations over as many as 24 years (1980 to

2003).16 Table A.1 lists each nation and the number of years for which it has valid data.

The data appendix also details several edits and imputations applied to the WHO data.

           The quality of the WHO surveillance data is likely to vary both across countries

and over time. However, because the estimates presented here condition on both country

and year fixed effects, the concern of particular relevance is whether the introduction of

gay marriage within a country might be associated with changes in the quality of its

surveillance reporting. For example, it may be that legal recognition of same-sex

partnerships coincided with public-health initiatives that targeted STI, which are

particularly prevalent among male homosexuals. In a later section, I present some

empirical evidence that suggests this did not happen. However, even if it did, such

initiatives would be expected to lead to an increase in reported STI, which would impart a

positive bias to the results presented here.

           This study focuses on five infections: syphilis, gonorrhea, human

immunodeficiency virus (HIV), tuberculosis and malaria. The first three infections are

sexually transmitted. The first of these STI, syphilis, is likely to be particularly useful

from the perspective of this evaluation. More specifically, syphilis may provide a

relatively powerful test of the putative effects of gay marriage for two reasons. First,

unlike HIV, the time that elapses between exposure to syphilis and experiencing

symptoms is often quite short. However, gonorrhea also shares this trait.
16
     The data on new HIV infections only go back to 1985.


                                                                                              12
        A second, important advantage of syphilis is its relative prevalence among men

who have sex with men (MSM). More specifically, syphilis should provide a particularly

powerful test for the existence of any gay-marriage effects because the MSM share of

syphilis cases appears to be much higher than the corresponding MSM share of

gonorrhea cases (i.e., a potentially higher signal-noise ratio). For example, in the United

States, the MSM share of gonorrhea cases among men is approximately 20 percent (CDC

2004a). However, the MSM share of syphilis cases among men is at least three times as

large (CDC 2003, Heffelfinger et al. 2004.). The pattern in Europe appears to be similar.

For example, Macdonald et al. (2004, Table 1) estimate that 16 percent of male

gonorrhea cases in England and Wales are among MSM in contrast to 56 percent of

syphilis cases. Similarly, Hopkins et al. (2004) report that, in 2000, 85 percent of all

syphilis cases in Ireland occurred among MSM. And Blystad et al. (2003) find that, in

Norway and Sweden during the 1998-2002 period, the MSM shares of all syphilis cases

were 64 and 45 percent, respectively.

        The last two infections, tuberculosis and malaria, should be largely unrelated to

the introduction of gay marriage. Some of the results presented exploit this fact to

provide ad-hoc checks of results based on the various econometric specifications

introduced in the next section. More specifically, a particular econometric specification

would be suspect if it suggested that the introduction of gay marriage was associated with

large and statistically significant changes in these infection rates.17

        One potential complication involved in identifying the effects of gay marriage on

STI is that these laws may have coincided with other changes that reduced STI (e.g., an

17
  Both of these infections are frequently reported in the CISID. And the data on malaria could provide a
useful check for whether within-country variation in immigration from or contact with Sub-Saharan Africa
biases this study’s results.


                                                                                                      13
aging population or new public health efforts aimed at reducing STI). The available

anecdote surrounding the adoption of these laws does not suggest that this was so.

However, I also attempt to assess the relevance of this concern empirically. One approach

noted above is based on assessing whether the introduction of gay marriage is associated

with changes in the prevalence of tuberculosis and malaria.

        Another approach is to evaluate the “effect” of gay marriage in auxiliary

regressions where country-year proxies of potentially confounding STI determinants are

the dependent variables. The variables used here are per capita data on real GDP per

capita, total health expenditures, the number of hospital beds, the number of doctors and

the number of nurses and the percent of the population that is elderly.18 These country-

year data were drawn from the WHO’s “Health for All” (HFA) data base. These variables

could also be used as additional controls in a regression model and doing so does not

change this study’s results. However, because of the unbalanced nature of these panel

data, that would reduce the sample size further.

        The basic research design introduced in the next section (i.e., a “difference in

differences” approach) relies on comparing the STI changes in countries that adopted gay

marriage to the contemporaneous changes in countries that did not. In Figures 1 through

5, I provide some simple graphical evidence of such comparisons. Specifically, I show

the population-weighted time-series data separately for the 10 countries that introduced

gay marriage and the 15 that did not (Table A.1).

        For example, Figure 1 shows that syphilis rates in countries without gay marriage

increased relative to the rates in gay-marriage countries over the period these laws were


18
  The WHO expresses the GDP and expenditure data in purchasing power parity using OECD and UNDP
data.


                                                                                              14
being introduced. This is consistent with the hypothesis that gay marriage reduced sexual

promiscuity. However, this graph also suggests that these relative reductions may have

begun somewhat before the widespread adoption of gay marriage. Such a pattern could

reflect the influence of unobserved determinants that might bias the econometric

evaluations discussed below. However, these evaluations address this concern in a

number of ways.19 Interestingly, the data in Figure 1 also show that there was a syphilis

outbreak in the “control” countries in 2001 and 2002.20 However, there is no evidence of

a similarly large outbreak in the gay-marriage countries during those years, an

observation consistent with the putative effects of these laws.

         Figure 2 shows the trends in gonorrhea rates across both groups of countries.

Gonorrhea rates in gay-marriage countries were higher than in the other countries in

1980. And, by the end of the sample period, they were lower. However, the sharp pre-

reform reduction in these infection rates suggests that these relative gains cannot be

wholly attributed to gay marriage. The regression models that condition on lagged

infection rates clearly suggest this as well. Figure 3 presents the trends in new HIV

infections. At the beginning of the 1990s, gay-marriage countries had higher rates of new

HIV infections.21 However, these rates converged through the 1990s, which is consistent

with the conjectured effect of gay marriage. However, the regression models discussed

below will allow us to assess whether these apparent differences are large relative to the

sampling variation.


19
   For example, these include conditioning on country-specific trends and on year fixed effects that are
specific to each of the two WHO regions in addition to evaluating dynamic panel models that accommodate
the influence of prior STI rates.
20
   Fenton and Knowles (2004) discuss how outbreaks of infectious syphilis occurred in several European
cities. Approximately 80% of diagnosed cases were among men who have sex with men (MSM).
21
   The sharp increase in infection rates in both countries prior to this period may reflect idiosyncrasies in
new HIV surveillance systems.


                                                                                                          15
         Figures 4 and 5 present the trend data for tuberculosis and malaria. The trends in

the prevalence of tuberculosis are similar across both sets of countries. However, Figure

4 provides some suggestion that gay-marriage countries may have had relative health

improvements, presumably unrelated to gay marriage, over this period. And Figure 5

shows that gay-marriage countries had mildly increasing infection rates for malaria over

this period. While in the “control” countries, the infection rates for malaria were on

average much higher and more volatile.22 The regression models introduced below

provide a more formal framework for assessing these types of comparisons.



5. SPECIFICATIONS

         The preliminary specification evaluated here is a conventional two-fixed effects

model of the following form:

(4)                                 yit = β'xit + αi + µt + εit

The variable, yit, is the dependent variable, the natural log of the relevant disease rate in

country i and year t. The terms, αi and µt, are country and year fixed effects and εit is a

mean-zero error term. The matrix, xit, includes a dummy variable for whether country has

national recognition of same-sex partnerships in year t.23 However, in some

specifications, it also includes country-specific trend variables (i.e., interactions between

αi and a trend variable).

         A recent study by Bertrand et al. (2004) has underscored the over-precision that

can occur in evaluations of this sort when there is serial correlation. They find that


22
   A closer examination of the data indicates that the two spikes in malaria are based largely on outbreaks in
Turkey. The results presented here are similar when Turkey is excluded from the analysis.
23
   In years when “gay marriage” was introduced, this variable equals the fraction of the calendar year that
the law was in effect.


                                                                                                           16
generalized White standard errors that allow for clustering at the level of the cross-

sectional unit work well for N as small as 20. Therefore, I report standard errors that

allow for such clustering at the country level.24 I also present the results of negative-

binomial models that explicitly acknowledge the count of the underlying STI data. More

specifically, I present conditional maximum likelihood (CML) estimates based on the

approach introduced by Hausman, Hall and Griliches (1984). A recent study by Allison

and Waterman (2002) criticized this model and suggested introducing cross-sectional

dummy variables as controls in a conventional maximum likelihood (ML) negative-

binomial regression. I also present the results of specifications based on that procedure.

         However, like other recent studies of sexually transmitted infections (e.g.,

Chesson, Harrison and Kassler 2000, Grossman, Kaestner and Markowitz 2004), most of

the results presented here focus on models that introduce a lagged dependent variable as a

control:

(5)                                 yit = δyi,t-1 + β'xit + αi + µt + εit

One important justification for introducing this control is that the prevalence of an

infectious disease should clearly depend in part on its prior levels. This interpretation

would lead to a distinction between the short-run and long-run effects of changes in xit.

However, another motivation is that the lagged dependent variable provides a potentially

important control for unobservable determinants of yit varying within countries over time.

Which of these two roles this additional control variable plays in a multivariate analysis

cannot be easily parsed. Therefore, I interpret estimates based on variants of equation (5)

as conservative lower bounds on the overall effect of gay marriage.

24
  Bertrand et al. (2004) also find that standard errors generated through a “block bootstrap” procedure
perform reasonably well. I found that results based on this approach were similar to those based on
clustering.


                                                                                                          17
        A fundamental and well-known problem with OLS estimates of equation (5) is

that it leads to biased estimates for small T (e.g., Hsiao 1986, Baltagi 2001). The fairly

large time-series dimension to these panel data suggests that the resulting biases may be

limited in this application. Nonetheless, I also present first-difference two-stage least

squares (FD-2SLS) estimates based on Anderson and Hsiao (1981, 1982). Specifically,

this approach is based on evaluating the first difference of equation (5):

(6)              (yit - yi,t-1) = δ(yi,t-1 - yi,t-2) + β'(xit - xi,t-1) + (µt - µt-1) + (εit - εi,t-1)

The basic approach to generating consistent estimates based on equation (6) is to

recognize that (yi,t-2 - yi,t-3) may provide a valid instrumental variable (IV) since it should

be highly correlated with (yi,t-1 - yi,t-2) but unrelated to (εit - εi,t-1). However, it should be

noted that, if the εit are serially correlated, the instrumental variable will be correlated

with (εit - εi,t-1) (Baltagi 2001, page 130).

        I also present estimates based on equation (5) and the generalized method of

moments (GMM) procedure introduced by Arellano and Bond (1991). In some

specifications, I also introduce a second lagged dependent variable as a control. The AB-

GMM approach is more efficient than FD-2SLS because it exploits all the instrumental

variables generated by the assumption that there is no serial correlation in equation (5)

(Baltagi 2001).25 Furthermore, Arellano and Bond (1991) outline a statistical test for this

critical assumption. Specifically, they present a test for the lack of second-order serial




25
  And in the presence of unbalanced panel data, the AB-GMM approach is also more efficient because it
uses more of the available data (Arellano and Bond 1991, page 281).


                                                                                                         18
correlation in the differenced residuals, which would imply the absence of serial

correlation in the level residuals (Arellano and Bond 1991, page 282).26



6. RESULTS

         In Table 2, I present the key results from OLS versions of equations (4) and (5).

The results in column (1), which condition only on country and year fixed effects,

suggest that gay marriage led to large and statistically significant reductions in STI rates.

And the same specifications suggest gay marriage had no effect on tuberculosis and

malaria. However, the effect sizes (i.e., reductions of 49 to 85 percent) appear

suspiciously large. The remaining models in Table 2 examine the robustness of these

results by introducing region-specific year fixed effects, lagged dependent variables and,

finally, country-specific trend variables as controls. The estimated effects of gay marriage

on gonorrhea and HIV rates are much smaller and statistically insignificant in these

specifications.27

         However, these models also suggest that gay marriage led to significant

reductions in syphilis rates of roughly 26 to 29 percent. Are such large percent reductions

really plausible? The high variance in syphilis rates suggests that they are. In particular,

the frequently rapid expansion of STI outbreaks indicates that large percent changes in

STI rates are actually quite common. For example, in describing recent syphilis outbreaks

in Europe, Fenton and Lowndes (2004, Table 3) document 1995-2000 country-specific


26
   Arellano and Bond (1991) also discuss how the Sargan test of overidentifying restrictions can be used in
this context. However, they find that this test over-rejects in the presence of heteroscedasticity. Because
heteroscedasticity is quite likely in this setting, I report robust standard errors.
27
   These changes are driven by reductions in the absolute value of the point estimates. The standard errors
for these estimates generally become much smaller after conditioning on these variables. However, it
should still be noted that the confidence intervals associated with the HIV and gonorrhea estimates include
fairly large negative effects.


                                                                                                         19
increases that range from 24 to 336 percent. A more formal way to frame this is to

consider how large this estimate is relative to the standard deviation of syphilis rates (i.e.,

the effect size). The standard deviation in syphilis rates over this period is approximately

45 percent larger than the mean. Therefore, a 29 percent reduction in syphilis rates

implies a change of only 0.2 standard deviations.

       The high variance in syphilis rates reflects in part the velocity with which the

infection can move through high-risk populations. However, it is important to note that,

because the prevalence of syphilis is relatively low, large percent reductions in syphilis

could also be generated by quite modest amounts of behavioral change. More

specifically, in 1988, the gay-marriage countries averaged only 353 syphilis cases. A 29

percent reduction from this base would imply only 102 fewer syphilis cases a year, an

improvement that could be due to behavioral changes among relatively few high-risk

individuals.

       In the remaining tables, I present a variety of evidence on the robustness of the

results in Table 2. For example, in Table 3, I present the key results from CML and ML

versions of negative-binomial models. These models condition on country fixed effects,

region-specific year fixed effects and country-specific trends. These approaches explicitly

acknowledge the count nature of the underlying STI data. The results are similar to the

OLS estimates of a semi-log model, indicating that gay marriage reduced syphilis counts

by 23 to 30 percent but had smaller and statistically insignificant effects on the other

infections.

       In Table 4, I present the key results from specifications that accommodate a

lagged dependent variable as a control. Specifically, column (1) presents the basic OLS




                                                                                             20
estimates conditional on a lagged dependent variable (as in column (3) of Table 2). The

remaining results in Table 4 rely on instrumental variables to accommodate the bias

introduced by a lagged dependent variable. The results of the FD-2SLS procedure are

similar to the prior results. They indicate that gay marriage led to a large but weakly

significant reduction in syphilis rates of 53 percent. The effects on the other infections

were small and statistically insignificant.

         The AB-GMM results presented in the last 3 columns of Table 4 provide a more

efficient approach to evaluating these dynamic panel specifications. The first AB-GMM

estimates in column (3) suggest that gay marriage reduced syphilis rates by 35 percent.

However, the corresponding p-value indicates that the key identifying assumption for this

model (i.e., the lack of serial correlation) is rejected. In the next model, which conditions

on a second lagged dependent variable, this hypothesis cannot be rejected. This model

suggests that gay marriage reduced syphilis rates by 29 percent but had small and

statistically insignificant effects on the other regressions.28 The estimates in the final

column of Table 4 condition on country-specific trends. These results suggest that gay

marriage reduced syphilis rates by 24 percent but had smaller and statistically

insignificant effects on the other infections.

         One alternative explanation for the results in Tables 2, 3 and 4 is that the within-

country timing of gay marriage was correlated with syphilis reductions because of some

other unobserved but contemporaneous changes. These could include changes in income,

the age composition of each country and changes in available health resources. The

auxiliary regression results in Table 5 examine these possibilities by identifying the

28
  Both lags had positive, statistically significant and plausibly monotonic effects on syphilis rates. The
estimated effect of gay marriage on syphilis rates is also similar in models that introduce a third lagged
dependent variable.


                                                                                                             21
“effect” of gay marriage on such variables in specifications that control for country and

year fixed effects. The results in the first column of Table 5 indicate that gay marriage

was associated with significant reductions in the elderly share of the population, real

health expenditures and the availability of doctors. However, in models that condition on

country-specific trends, only the reduction in health expenditures was significant. These

results suggest that changes in the age composition of society or in available health

resources cannot readily explain the identified decline in syphilis rates. In particular, the

signs on these effects is opposite of what would be expected if they were a source of

confounding, omitted-variable biases.

       A related approach to identifying the potential presence of omitted variables bias

is to examine directly how the within-country variation in syphilis rates related to the

timing of gay-marriage laws. Specifically, using the AB-GMM model with country fixed

effects, region-specific year fixed effects and two lagged dependent variables, I estimated

the effects on syphilis rates of dummy variables that represented annual leads and lags of

gay marriage laws. The reference category is countries that are 9 or more years prior to

gay marriage while the final lag variable is a dummy variable for countries observed 5 or

more years after introducing gay marriage. The results of this exercise are presented in

Figure 6. It should be noted that these point estimates are highly imprecise. Nonetheless,

they suggest that in the years prior to gay marriage, syphilis rates varied both positively

and negatively by relatively modest amounts. However, the syphilis rates became

consistently more negative beginning with the year that gay marriage was introduced.

These results suggest that the adoption of gay-marriage laws were not related to prior

syphilis trends or its unobserved determinants.




                                                                                              22
        The results in the remaining tables examine the robustness of the syphilis results

to changes in the construction of the sample. For example, one plausible concern is that

the syphilis results are biased by idiosyncratic STI trends in the “control” countries. For

example, some of what the WHO designates as “central” European countries were

undergoing social upheaval associated with their transition from Communist rule. To the

extent that such nations experienced unique increases in syphilis, the results presented

here would overstate the reductions associated with gay marriage. In Table 6, I examine

this issue by presenting the AB-GMM estimate for models that exclude Communist

nations when observed prior to 1992. I also examine the syphilis results in models that

include only the Western European nations. These models suggest that the reductions in

syphilis rates generated by gay marriage were actually somewhat larger and still

statistically significant.

        The panel data examined here extend as far back as 1980, nine years prior to

Denmark’s pioneering registered-partnership law. Another reasonable concern is that the

syphilis results presented here are biased by the existence of country-specific trends

during this fairly long pre-reform period. The use of country-specific trend variables

addresses this issue somewhat as did the results in Figure 6. However, an additional

approach is to replicate the results in specifications that exclude some of the data from

pre-reform years. The results of such models are also reported in Table 6. They indicate

that the estimated reductions in syphilis are quite similar in models that exclude these

pre-reform data. Another concern is that these results might reflect social changes that are

unique to one of the gay-marriage countries (Table 1). The results in Table 7 examine this




                                                                                            23
concern by replicating the syphilis evaluations in models that exclude each of the 10

“treatment” countries. The results are generally similar across these specifications.



7. CONCLUSIONS

       The opinions of many supporters and opponents of gay marriage turn almost

exclusively on their most deeply held convictions. However, the views that others have

about gay marriage depend in large part on its likely effects on values and behavior.

Some opponents of gay marriage suggest that its introduction will have a corrosive effect

on a vitally important social institution. In contrast, supporters suggest that gay marriage

will have a “civilizing” effect on homosexuals, encouraging them to form the emotional

and legal commitments inherent in companionate marriage. An important conjecture

based on the latter view is that gay marriage will promote sexual fidelity and possibly

reduce the prevalence of STI.

       The simple theoretical model introduced here suggests that gay marriage could

actually influence STI rates in a number of potentially contradictory ways. However, the

empirical evidence presented here is consistent with the view that gay marriage reduces

risky sexual behavior. Specifically, panel-based evaluations using data from European

countries suggested that national recognition of same-sex partnerships led to large and

statistically significant reductions in syphilis rates of approximately 24 percent. The

estimated effects of gay marriage on gonorrhea and HIV were smaller and statistically

insignificant.

       These results suggest that gay marriage might reduce, perhaps dramatically, the

social costs associated with STI like syphilis. In the United States, over 34,000 cases of




                                                                                             24
syphilis were reported in 2003 (CDC 2004b). And the direct and indirect annual costs of

syphilis have been estimated at nearly $1 billion, which reflects in large part, the role that

syphilis plays in spreading HIV (CDC 1999). However, the policy relevance of these

results probably extends beyond the issue of improvements in public health. For many

who are debating the desirability of gay marriage, these results may be more important

because of what they suggest about the likely effects of gay marriage on the degree of

personal commitment in same-sex relationships.




                                                                                            25
REFERENCES
Allison P.D. and R.P. Waterman “Fixed-effects negative binomial regression models.”
      Sociological Methodology 32, 2002, pages 247-265.
Agence France Presse. “Croatian gay couples get equal rights as unmarried
      heterosexuals,” July 15, 2003.
Belluck, Pam. “Maybe Same-Sex Marriage Didn’t Make the Difference.” The New York
      Times, November 7, 2004, Section 4, Page 5.
Brooks, David A. “The Power of Marriage.” The New York Times, November 22, 2003,
      Page A15.
Blystad, Hans, Oivind Nilsen, Torsten Berglund, Anders Blaxhult, Preben Aavitsland and
      Johan Giesecke. “Syphilis outbreak in Norway and Sweden among men who have
      sex with men 1998-2002,” Eurosurveillance Weekly 7(24), June 12, 2003,
      http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ew/2003/030612.asp#2.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The National Plan to Eliminate Syphilis
      from the United States. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human
      Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, October 1999.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Primary and Secondary Syphilis – United
      States, 2002. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 52(46), Atlanta, GA: U.S.
      Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
      Prevention, November 21, 2003.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance
      2003 Supplement: Gonococcal Isolate Surveillance Project (GISP) Annual Report -
      2003. Atlanta, Georgia: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, November
      2004a.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance
      2003 Supplement, Syphilis Surveillance Report. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of
      Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, December
      2004b.
Chesson, H., P. Harrison and W.J. Kassler. “Sex Under the Influence: The Effect of
      Alcohol Policy on Sexually Transmitted Disease Rates in the U.S.” Journal of Law
      and Economics 43:1, 2000, pages 215-238.
Epstein, Helen. “The Fidelity Fix” The New York Times Magazine, June 13, 2004, page
      54.
Eskridge, W. The Case for Same Sex Marriage: From Sexual Liberty to Civilized
      Commitment. New York: The Free Press, 1996.
Fenton K.A. and C.M. Lowndes. “Recent trends in the epidemiology of sexually
      transmitted infections in the European Union.” Sexually Transmitted Infections
      80(4), August 2004, pages 255-63.
Grossman, Michael, Robert Kaestner and Sara Markowitz. “An Investigation of the
      Effects of Alcohol Policies on Youth STDs,” NBER Working Paper No. 10949,
      December 2004.
Hausman, J., B.H. Hall, Z. Griliches. “Econometric Models for Count Data with an
      Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship." Econometrica, 52(4), July 1984,
      909-938.




                                                                                   26
Heffelfinger JD, Swint EB, Weinstock HS. 2004. “Estimates of the number of cases of
       primary and secondary syphilis occurring among men who have sex with men in the
       United States, 1999-2002.” 2004 National STD Prevention Conference;
       Philadelphia. March 8-11, 2004. Abstract P143.
Hopkins, S., F. Lyons, C. Coleman, G. Courtney, C. Bergin, F. Mulcahy. “Resurgence of
       Infectious Syphilis in Ireland: An Epidemiological Study,” Sexually Transmitted
       Diseases 31(5), pages 317-321.
Kurtz, Stanley. “Beyond Gay Marriage,” The Weekly Standard 8(45), August 4, 2003.
Macdonald, N., S. Dougan, C.A. McGarrigle, K. Baster, B.D. Rice, B.G. Evans and K.A.
       Fenton. “Recent trends in diagnoses of HIV and other sexually transmitted
       infections in England and Wales among men who have sex with men,” Sexually
       Transmitted Infections 80, 2004, pages 492-497.
Marcus, U., V. Bremer and O. Hamouda. “Syphilis Surveillance and Trends of the
       Syphilis Epidemic in Germany since the mid-90s,” Eurosurveillance Monthly 9(12),
       December 2004, pages 9-10.
Marech, Rona. “The Battle over Same-Sex Marriage: One Year Later,” The San
       Francisco Chronicle, February 12, 2005, page A1.
Merin, Yuval. Equality for Same Sex Couples: The Legal Recognition of Gay
       Partnerships in Europe and the United States. Chicago, University of Chicago Press,
       2002
Müller, Christina (2002). "An Economic Analysis of Same-Sex Marriage", German
       Working Papers in Law and Economics: Vol. 2002: Article 14.
       http://www.bepress.com/gwp/default/vol2002/iss1/art14
Nielsen, Linda. “Family Rights and the Registered Partnership in Denmark.”
       International Journal of Law and the Family 4, 1990, pages 297-307.
Philipson, Tomas and Richard A. Posner. Private Choices and Public Health: The AIDS
       Epidemic in an Economic Perspective. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Posner, Richard A. Sex and Reason. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1992.
Posner, Richard A. “Should there be homosexual marriage? And, if so, who should
       decide?” Michigan Law Review 95 (6), May 1997, pages 1578-1587.
Rauch, Jonathan. Gay Marriage: Why it is good for gays, good for straights, and good for
       America. Times Books, 2004.
Schulman, Sam. “Gay Marriage – and Marriage” Commentary 116(4), November 2003,
       page 35.
Stall, Ron, Thomas C. Mills, John Williamson, Trevor Hart, Greg Greenwood, Jay Paul,
       Lance Pollack, Diane Binson, Dennis Osmond and Joseph A. Catania. “Association
       of Co-occurring Psychosocial Health Problems and Increased Vulnerability to
       HIV/AIDS Among Urban Men Who Have Sex With Men,” American Journal of
       Public Health 93(6), June 2003, pages 939-942.
Sullivan, Andrew. Virtually Normal: An Argument about Homosexuality. Knopf, 1995.
Whitmore, Brian. “Marriage Debate Spreads to Eastern Europe.” The Boston Globe, June
       13, 2004, page A7.
Wilson James Q. “Against Homosexual Marriage,” Commentary 101(3), March 1996,
       page 34.




                                                                                       27
               Table 1 – European countries with national recognition of
                          same-sex partnerships, 1980-2003

                         Country               Effective year

                         Denmark                    1989
                         Norway                     1993
                         Sweden                     1995
                         Iceland                    1996
                         Hungary                    1996
                         Netherlands                1998
                         France                     1999
                         Germany                    2001
                         Portugal                   2001
                         Finland                    2002
                         Belgium                    2003
                         Croatia                    2003

Sources: Merin (2002) and Lexis-Nexis searches of newspaper articles




                                                                           28
                               Figure 1 - Average Syphilis Rates by Year & Law Status

                14

                12

                10
Rate per100k




                8

                6

                4

                2

                0
                  80


                         82


                                84


                                        86


                                               88


                                                        90


                                                                92


                                                                            94


                                                                                   96


                                                                                          98


                                                                                                     00


                                                                                                            02
                19


                       19


                              19


                                      19


                                             19


                                                      19


                                                              19


                                                                          19


                                                                                 19


                                                                                        19


                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                          20
                                                               Year

                                                Gay Marriage              No Gay Marriage




                              Figure 2 - Average Gonorrhea Rates by Year & Law Status

                140

                120

                100
Rate per 100k




                80

                60

                40

                20

                 0
                  80


                         82


                                 84


                                        86


                                               88


                                                        90


                                                                92


                                                                            94


                                                                                   96


                                                                                              98


                                                                                                     00


                                                                                                            02
                19


                       19


                               19


                                      19


                                             19


                                                      19


                                                              19


                                                                          19


                                                                                 19


                                                                                            19


                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                          20




                                                                   Year

                                                    Gay Marriage          No Gay Marriage




                                                                                                                 29
                                       Figure 3 - Average HIV Rates by Year & Law Status

                7

                6

                5
Rate per 100k




                4

                3

                2

                1

                0
                        1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
                                                                       Year

                                                        Gay Marriage          No Gay Marriage




                                  Figure 4 - Average Tuberculosis Rates by Year & Law Status

                40

                35

                30

                25
Rate per 100k




                20

                15

                10

                    5

                    0
                  80


                               82


                                       84


                                               86


                                                       88


                                                               90


                                                                         92


                                                                                  94


                                                                                          96


                                                                                                  98


                                                                                                         00


                                                                                                                02
                19


                             19


                                     19


                                             19


                                                     19


                                                             19


                                                                       19


                                                                                19


                                                                                        19


                                                                                                19


                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                              20




                                                                       Year

                                                        Gay Marriage          No Gay Marriage




                                                                                                                         30
                                          Figure 5 - Average Malaria Rates by Year & Law Status

                     30

                     25


                     20
Rate per 100k




                     15


                     10

                       5


                       0
                       80


                               82


                                           84


                                                  86


                                                         88


                                                                  90


                                                                              92


                                                                                       94


                                                                                              96


                                                                                                      98


                                                                                                                 00


                                                                                                                          02
                     19


                             19


                                         19


                                                19


                                                       19


                                                                19


                                                                            19


                                                                                     19


                                                                                            19


                                                                                                    19


                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                        20
                                                                             Year

                                                             Gay Marriage            No Gay Marriage




                                 Figure 6 - Estimated Change in Syphilis Rates Relative to Timing of Gay Marriage

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                       0
                     -0.1   -9      -8     -7    -6     -5     -4      -3      -2     -1     0     1       2        3     4    5
 Change in ln rate




                     -0.2
                     -0.3

                     -0.4
                     -0.5

                     -0.6
                     -0.7
                                                                             Years




                                                                                                                                   31
         Table 2 – OLS estimates of the effect of gay marriage on infection rates

   Dependent variable                    (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)

                                       -.755†       -.552†        -.287†        -.258*
   Syphilis
                                       (.325)       (.218)        (.114)        (.151)
      R2                               .7728        .8129          .8881        .8989
      Sample size                        439          439           407           407

                                       -.847†       -.872†        .-.070         .138
   Gonorrhea
                                       (.302)       (.345)        (.080)        (.152)
      R2                               .8676        .8888         .9625         .9692
      Sample size                        431          431          404           404

                                       -.489†       -.328†         -.068         .076
   HIV
                                       (.221)       (.158)        (.112)        (.110)
      R2                               .8936        .9263         .9428         .9507
      Sample size                        363          363           339          339

                                        -.126         -.108        -.105         -.206
   Tuberculosis
                                       (.178)        (.169)       (.150)        (.138)
      R2                               .8973         .9004        .9067         .9311
      Sample size                        632           632          592           592

                                        .276          .197         .177          -.001
   Malaria
                                       (.171)        (.149)       (.141)        (.165)
      R2                               .9772         .9800        .9809         .9886
      Sample size                       648           648          614            614

   Region-specific year FE?             No            Yes          Yes           Yes
   Lagged dependent variable?           No            No           Yes           Yes
   Country-specific trends?             No            No           No            Yes


The dependent variable is the natural log of new cases per 100,000 in the population. All
models include country and year fixed effects. The models for HIV, tuberculosis and
malaria also condition on a dummy variable for country-year observations with a zero
count for that particular infection. Heteroscedastic-consistent standard errors adjusted for
clustering at the nation level are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level




                                                                                          32
  Table 3 – Negative-binomial estimates of the effect of gay marriage on infection rates

            Dependent variable                ML-NBREG         CML-NBREG

                                                 -.227*            -.296†
            Syphilis
                                                 (.132)            (.147)

                                                   -.053           -.185
            Gonorrhea
                                                  (.111)           (.148)

                                                   .069            -.046
            HIV
                                                  (.154)           (.113)

                                                   -.115           -.106
            Tuberculosis
                                                  (.122)           (.076)

                                                   .025             .103
            Malaria
                                                  (.103)           (.071)

All models include country fixed effects, region-specific year fixed effects, and country-
specific trends.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level




                                                                                         33
   Table 4 – Dynamic panel-based estimates of the effect of gay marriage on infection rates

                                                   FD-          AB-         AB-          AB-
Dependent variable                    OLS         2SLS         GMM         GMM          GMM

                                     -.287†       -.528*       -.347‡      -.290‡       -.239‡
Syphilis
                                     (.114)       (.271)       (.101)      (.099)       (.093)
   Sample size                         407          356          380         356          356
   p-value                              -            -         .0087       .3843         .9121

                                      -.070       -.048         -.067       .020         .224
Gonorrhea
                                     (.080)       (.267)       (.088)      (.160)       (.256)
   Sample size                         404         358           380        358          358
   p-value                               -           -         .2334       .1065        .0796

                                      -.068        .145         .154        .193         .018
HIV
                                     (.112)       (.232)       (.171)      (.185)       (.092)
   Sample size                         339         291          315         291          291
   p-value                               -           -         .1517       .5045        .5740

                                      -.105        .025         .089        .010        -.175
Tuberculosis
                                     (.150)       (.455)       (.190)      (.167)       (.138)
   Sample size                         592         519          554         519          519
   p-value                               -           -         .2266       .0934        .1172

                                      .177        -.116         .136        .145         .090
Malaria
                                     (.141)       (.181)       (.167)      (.164)       (.129)
   Sample size                        614          549          581         549          549
   p-value                              -            -         .9924       .7523        .7331

2nd lagged dependent variable?         No           No          No           Yes         Yes
Country-specific trends?               No           No          No           No          Yes

  The dependent variable is the natural log of new cases per 100,000 in the population. All
  models include country fixed effects, region-specific year fixed effects, and a lagged
  dependent variable. The models for HIV, tuberculosis and malaria also condition on a
  dummy variable for country-year observations with a zero count for that particular
  infection. Heteroscedastic-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. The
  standard errors for the OLS and FD-2SLS models are adjusted for clustering at the
  country level. The p-value refers to a test of the null hypothesis that there is no second-
  order autocorrelation (Arellano and Bond 1991)
  * Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
  † Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
  ‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level




                                                                                           34
             Table 5 – OLS estimates of the effect of gay marriage on other
                            economic and health variables

                                                                                 Sample
       Dependent variable          Estimate      R2       Estimate      R2        size

 Real GDP per capita                -.037       .9767       .002       .9927       576
                                    (.044)                (.0164)

 Percent elderly                    -.008†      .9574       -.003      .9917       590
                                    (.002)                 (.002)

 Real health expenditures per       -.099*      .9774      -.045*      .9941       510
 capita                             (.054)                (.0241)

 Hospital beds per 100,000 in       -.092       .9550       -.049      .9835       583
 population                         (.067)                 (.041)

 Doctors per 100,000 in             -.058*      .9590       .003       .9885       624
 population                         (.029)                 (.021)

 Nurses per 100,000 in               .038       .9511       .032       .9868       482
 population                         (.066)                 (.039)

 Country-specific trends?            No                     Yes

The dependent variable is the natural log of indicated variable except for percent elderly.
All models condition on country fixed effects and region-specific year fixed effects.
Heteroscedastic-consistent standard errors adjusted for clustering at the nation level are
reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level




                                                                                          35
         Table 6 – AB-GMM Estimates of the effect of gay marriage on syphilis rates by
                             alternative sample construction

                                                                                           Sample
Sample                                   Estimate     p-value     Estimate     p-value      Size

Full Sample                                -.290‡      .3843       -.239‡       .9121        356
                                           (.099)                  (.093)

Excluding formerly Communist               -.353‡      .1452       -.281‡       .4755        311
countries when observed before 1992        (.086)                  (.057)

Excluding all Eastern & Central            -.423‡      .0648       -.329‡       .1996        232
European countries                         (.082)                  (.112)

Excluding 1980-1982 observations           -.290‡      .3843       -.239‡       .9121        356
                                           (.099)                  (.093)

Excluding 1980-1985 observations           -.242†      .3335       -.413‡       .7479        310
                                           (.098)                  (.103)

Excluding 1980-1988 observations           -.293†      .2280       -.457‡       .7788        260
                                           (.120)                  (.163)

Country-specific trends?                    No                       Yes

   The dependent variable is the natural log of new syphilis cases per 100,000 in the
   population. All models include country fixed effects, region-specific year fixed effects,
   and two lagged dependent variables. Heteroscedastic-consistent standard errors are
   reported in parentheses. The p-value refers to a test of the null hypothesis that there is no
   second-order autocorrelation (Arellano and Bond 1991)
   * Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
   † Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
   ‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level




                                                                                              36
     Table 7 – AB-GMM Estimates of the effect of gay marriage on syphilis rates by
                        alternative “treatment” groupings

Sample                        Estimate     p-value     Estimate     p-value     Sample Size

Full Sample                    -.290‡       .3843       -.239‡       .9121          356
                               (.099)                   (.093)

Excluding Denmark              -.310‡       .3225       -.293†       .8382          335
                               (.112)                   (.117)

Excluding Norway               -.277‡       .4099       -.241‡       .9803          335
                               (.112)                   (.115)

Excluding Sweden               -.343†       .7472       -.275†       .5852          335
                               (.121)                   (.115)

Excluding Iceland              -.241†       .8347       -.271*       .8989          335
                               (.113)                   (.145)

Excluding Hungary              -.363‡       .2993       -.298‡       .7651          337
                               (.087)                   (.083)

Excluding Netherlands          -.257†       .4451       -.165*       .9487          345
                               (.103)                   (.094)

Excluding Germany              -.312‡       .4150       -.232‡       .9413          342
                               (.094)                   (.090)

Excluding Portugal             -.262‡       .4958       -.187        .7751          337
                               (.100)                   (.117)

Excluding Belgium              -.261†       .2690       -.265†       .3614          337
                               (.115)                   (.119)

Country-specific trends?         No                      Yes

The dependent variable is the natural log of new syphilis cases per 100,000 in the
population. All models include country fixed effects, region-specific year fixed effects
and two lagged dependent variables. Heteroscedastic-consistent standard errors are
reported in parentheses. The p-value refers to a test of the null hypothesis that there is no
second-order autocorrelation (Arellano and Bond 1991)
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level




                                                                                           37
                                     DATA APPENDIX
        The World Health Organization’s (WHO) Computerized Information System for
Infectious Diseases (CISID) contains annual surveillance data on several infectious
diseases for the 52 countries in the “WHO European region.” The WHO coordinated the
standardized collection of these data with representatives from each of the member states.
Table A.1 lists the 25 nations included in these evaluations as well as the number of years
for which there is available data from each nation with respect to each of the three STI as
of April 2005.
        I applied several edits and imputations to the WHO data to generate this sample of
25 nations. For example, I excluded the “eastern” European countries since their
changing health and economic circumstances during the sample period may make them a
particularly poor control group.29 A similar concern applies to the central European
countries and the results in Table 6 explicitly addressed this concern.
        Three small nations (Andorra, Monaco and San Marino) were also deleted
because they were missing key data. I also deleted observations of Yugoslavia and its
republics. I set counts of new HIV infections to missing when they were based on
retrospective reporting, sub-national data or mother-child transmissions only. I also set
STI counts to missing when a country had observations for only one or two years. I also
set Germany’s syphilis counts to missing beginning in 2001 when they introduced a new
syphilis surveillance system that led to a sharp increase in reported cases (e.g., Marcus,
Bremer and Hamouda 2004). And, finally, Albania reports 0 syphilis cases in its first five
years of reporting syphilis data (i.e., 1990-1994) and zero HIV cases in its first year of
reporting HIV data. I code these observations as missing.30
        There were some seemingly valid instances where a country reported zero STI
cases in a particular year: 2 with respect to HIV, 10 with respect to tuberculosis and 43
with respect to malaria. In these instances, I assigned each of these observations 1 case
and created a dummy variable equal to 1 for the imputation and included it as an
independent regressor in the subsequent least-squares regression models (e.g., Hausman,
Hall and Griliches 1984). This imputation makes it possible to evaluate semi-log
specifications, which appear appropriate in light of the positive skewness in the disease
data. However, models based on rates lead to results similar to those reported here as do
count-data specifications (i.e., a negative binomial model), which do not rely on this
imputation (Table 3).




29
   Many of these countries were experiencing social turmoil and deteriorating health outcomes while other
countries (Table 1) were introducing gay marriage. Not surprisingly, including the Eastern European
countries in these evaluations exaggerates the effects of gay marriage in some specifications. However, in
the preferred specifications (i.e., those that condition on country-specific trends and lagged dependent
variables), the results are similar.
30
   I found that the results based on specifications excluding Albania and Germany are similar to those
reported here.


                                                                                                        38
  Table A.1 – Years of WHO surveillance data on sexually transmitted infections (STI)
                              by country and STI,

                                                   By STI
                                  Gonorrhea        Syphilis           HIV
           Country               (1980-2003)     (1980-2003)      (1985-2003)
           Albania                   20               7                11
           Austria                   23              23                 6
           Belgium                   18              22                18
           Bulgaria                  15              12                17
           Czech Republic            22              22                19
           Denmark                   24              24                14
           Finland                   24              na                18
           Germany                   20              20                11
           Greece                    na               9                 4
           Hungary                   22              22                19
           Iceland                   24              24                19
           Ireland                   12              14                 4
           Israel                    24              24                19
           Luxembourg                na              na                19
           Malta                     na              na                19
           Netherlands               17              16                na
           Norway                    24              24                18
           Poland                    24              24                19
           Portugal                  23              23                 3
           Romania                   24              24                11
           Slovakia                  na              21                19
           Sweden                    24              24                19
           Switzerland               24              19                19
           Turkey                    na              19                19
           UK                        23              22                19

           Sample Size                431            439             363
Countries that have national recognition of same-sex partnerships over this period are in
bold.




                                                                                        39
