NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF RISK ON ThE FIRM'S
OPTIMAL CAPITAL STOCK: A NOTE

Kevin

William

J. Maloney
J. Marshall

Jess B. Yawitz

Working Paper No. 1132

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

May

1983

The authors wish to acknowledge helpful comments from David Baron,
Thons Gilligan, Edward Greenberg, Ira Horowitz, James Little, and
an anonymous referee. The research reported here is tart of the
NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1132
May 1983

The Effect of Risk on the Firm's
Optimal Capital Stock: A Note

by
Kevin 3. Maloney
William 3. Marshall
Jess B. Yawitz

ABSTRACT

In this paper we extend the recent work on the choice of

input mix under uncertainty. In particular, we demonstrate that
the qualitative nature of the disturbance term, along with the
decision sequence, is a crucial determinant of the overall

effect of uncertainty on the optimal input mix of a firm. Using
general demand and production functions in conjunction with a
mean-variance framework for financial valuation, we demonstrate
the differential effects of systematic and non-systematic risk

on the firm's choice of an optimal input mix. Consistent with
earlier work in economics, this analysis demonstrates that
uncertainty, regardless of the source, has important implications
for the firm's choice of technology.

Institute of Banking and Financial Markets
School of Business Administration
Washington University
St. Louis, Missouri 63130
(314) 889—6340

I.

Introduction

Much of the recent work in financial economics can be viewed as an
attempt to synthesize contemporary financial market theory with the theory

of the firm under uncertainty. This line of research analyzes firm behavior
using models that explicitly incorporate the capital market's valuation of

risk. The early results indicate that this basic approach holds great promise
in

its

ability to consider the financial market effects on a host of deci-

sions made at the firm level.

In this paper we extend the recent work of Greenberg, Marshall, and
Yawitz [1] and Shrieves [31 on the choice of input mix under uncertainty.

In particular, we demonstrate that the qualitative nature of the disturbance
term, along with the decision sequence, is a crucial determinant of the over-

all effect of uncertainty on the optimal input mix of a firm. Using general
demand and production functions in conjunction with a mean-variance framework for financial valuation, we demonstrate the differential effects of
systematic and non-systematic risk on the firm's choice of an optimal input

mix. Consistent with earlier work in economics, this analysis demonstrates
that uncertainty, regardless of the source, has important implications for

the firm's choice of technology.1 When the source of the uncertainty is
firm specific, there is no need to take account of any reaction in the capital
markets; the risk-free rate of interest is the only relevant financial market

variable. We refer to the relationship between this type of uncertainty and
the choice of an optimal input mix as the "technical effect." However, when
the uncertainty is of the type that affects all firms in the economy, the
technology decision must also explicitly recognize the reaction of the financial markets.

In a rate of return framework, this market feedback will serve

to alter the firm's (or project's) required capitalization rate. This "finan—

-2cial effect will, for the majority of firms, partially reverse the technical effect.

II.

Sources of Risk and the Optimal Capital Stock

In this paper we analyze the input choices of a firm that faces un-

certain demand for its product. The model is attractive in that it captures

two very important features of firm behavior. First, the uncertainty is the
result of demand disturbances. This specification seems reasonable since
the firm presumably has more information about technological and cost factors

than it has about consumer behavior. Second, the model affords the firm
flexibility in its production decision. In particular, we assume that the
firm is allowed to choose its variable factor inputs after demand is revealed.
The particular model used in this paper assumes that the firm produces
its output using capital (K) and labor (L) according to the following production function.

(1) q = F(K,L)

FK, FL >

0

FKK,FLL < 0

The choice of output and input levels proceeds in two stages. Prior to the
revelation of the actual demand for its product, but with the knowledge of

the distribution of demand, the firm must choose its capital stock. The
demand curve is then revealed and the firm selects the quantity of labor
(and consequently the price and quantity of its output) that maximizes

profit.2 The only decision made under uncertainty (ex ante) is the choice
of K. This choice is made so as to maximize the net present value of the
cash flows. Under the assumptions of the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM),
the value of the cash flows is given by equation (2).

-3(2)

V. =

..L [E(x.)

-

F

=

Acov(x.,xM )1

value of the firm

RF = one plus the risk free rate of interest

X. = net
Xm =
=

A

cash flow of firm i

net cash flow to the market portfolio

the

market price of risk.

The net cash flow is defined as revenue minus the variable costs of pro-

duction. The net present value of these cash flows is simply V1 minus
the acquisition cost of the capital, where p

is the price of capital goods.3

V. -

(3) NPV.

From this perspective, it is clear that the cash flow variable in equation
(2) must incorporate this conditional optimization. To analyze the effects
of demand uncertainty we assume that the firm faces an inverse demand function

of the form

(1+)

where

p(q) +

p =

has zero mean, and c and XM are jointly normal variables with

variances

and a, respectively. Defining q(K,) as the optimal condi-

tional output, X is given by

(5) X. =

[p(q*(K,c))+E]q*(K,c)

-

C(q(K,C),K)

=

X.(K,e),

where C(q"(K,c),K), the variable cost of production, is an increasing
2
0. From Hoelling's Lemma it follows that
convex function of q with

-4X.(K,c)

is an increasing function of c. Using this relationship, we

are able to determine the effect of uncertainty on the choice of an optimal
capital stock.

into

Substituting equations (2) and (5)

(6) NPV. =

—
[E[X?(K,)]
F

—

equation (3), we obtain

Acov[x?(K,c),xMl]

—

I

Note that COV(X(K,c),XM) will be non-zero only if c is correlated with XM.
Thus, there are valuation effects associated with systematic disturbances

that are not associated with firm specific disturbances.5 The implication
of this distinction for the choice of an optimal capital stock will now
be analyzed.

The first order condition for the maximization of net present value is
given by
aNPV.
[E[

3K

RE

ax(K,c)
3K

'

- xcov[

aX(K,c)
x4I]

-

=0

3X' (K,c)

C0v[ K ,

Xx],

the covariance between the incremental cash flows and

the cash flows to the market portfolio, will be of the same sign as COV(c,XM),
except if the demand disturbance is firm specific in which case this term

vanishes.6 In that case the optimal capital stock, K*, is defined implicitly by
3X.(K,c)
(8)

—E[
F

K

I

-=o.

Note that K is also the solution that would obtain if risk neutrality were
assumed, since in a risk neutral world X
Since A > 0 the optimal capital stock in presence of systematic risk,

K"', will be lower (higher) than K' if COV(e,XM) > 0

(

< 0).

This follows

because the covarinace of the incremental cash flows and XM has the same

-5sign

as COV(c,XM), and because the second order condition for yalue maxi-

mization implies that NPV must be concave in K.

The intuition here is straightforward. Holding constant total demand
variability, an increase in the systematic component will reduce the optimal

capital stock since "flexibility in the production process becomes increasingly important. By replacing fixed costs (capital) with variable costs
(labor), the firm

is

able to dampen the procyclical nature of its profit

stream, and thereby reduce the penalty for positive coyariance. At the same
time this reduces expected profits. This substitution of labor for capital
continues to the point where the valuation effect from an additional reduction in profit variability is exactly equal to the yaluation effect frojn an
additional decrease in expected profit.

Given the above results, one can also demonstrate that

< 0.

for the

positive covariance firm, indicating that further substitution of labor for
capital is justified for the reasons cited above.

We have demonstrated that a systematic demand disturbance leads to a
lower optimal capital stock than does an equal size non-systematic distur

bance. We emphasize that this does not imply that non-systematic risk has
no effect on the capital stock decision of a firm. To the contrary, there
are technical effects that accompany both systematic and non-systematic risk.

An increase in the variance of c whether systematic or non-systematic
will affect the optimal capital stock, independent of any financial effect.
Equivalently, even in a risk neutral world the optimal capital stock of a

firm will depend upon the variance of demand. The basic argument is as fol

lows. Since marginal costs are a positive function of output, X(K,c). is
convex in

for any giyen level of K.8 Thus, the expected value of X1(K,c),

-6and therefore expected profit, is a decreasing function of the variance of E.

If

it is possible to alter the convexity of X1(K,) by adjusting K, then the

firm will have an incentive to change K when the variance of

changes.

Stated alternatively, if substitution of labor for capital flattens the
firm's marginal cost curve, it will also change the sensitivity of expected

profits to the variance in demand. Given the general nature of the demand
and cost function assumed, it is impossible to determine whether an increase
in

induces the firm to choose a higher or lower capital stock. A positive

technical effect (> 0) will occur if two conditions are met. First, exdci

pected profits must be concave in K. This will be met If the second order
sufficiency condi tion for expected profit maximiation is satisfied. Second,
the convexity of the relationship between

and c must be increasing in K.9

It is this latter condition that cannot be signed for general demand and cost

functions. However, it is quite reasonable to believe that an increase in

K will flatten the marginal cost curve for most cost functions. This in
conjunction with a marginal revenue curve that is linear or convex is sufficient to ensure that the technical effect is positive.10

III. Conclusions

We have demonstrated that even under risk neutrality demand uncertainty

will affect the optimal capital stock. We term this the technical effect
and have shown it is present regardless of whether the risk is systematic or

non-systematic in nature. We have also demonstrated that systematic risk
causes the typical (positive covariance) value maximizing firms to choose a
smaller capital stock than would be selected if only the technical effect

were considered. That is, for firms whose income is positively correlated

—7with

the market as a whole, the financial effect induces a decreased demand

for capital in an amount depending on the size of the covariance between the
incremental cash flow to the firm from a given increase in capital and the
returns to the market portfolio.

•Appendi x

In this Appendix we prove formally that a sufficient condition for a
*
positive technical effect is that the convexity of X.(K,c) in E must be
I

ax(K,c)

, and

increasing in K. Let f(K,) =

let K be the optimal capital stock

when c = 0 with certainty. By Taylor series expansion f(K,c) can be expressed
as follows

(Al) f(K,) =

f(K,0)

+

+

(K—K)

and K =

where the derivatives are evaluated at c

8K+(.l-)K

for 0 < z,8 < 1.

An expected profit maximizer will set the expected value of (Al) equal to

By construction f(K,0) will also equal URF. Therefore, the optimal capital stock
of an expected profit maximizer can be related to K as follows

-.

(A2) K =

ince

K -

E(K]
11

__________ = K

L 3K

'

2
-

E(3fd 3
________

c is normally distributed. The numerator of (A2) is negative from the

second order condition for expected profit maximization. Therefore, the

2

technical effect will be positive (K > K) if E(3 uiK.tj ? 0. But this is
precisely the condition reported in the text and in footnote 10.

covariance of incremental cash flows and the cash flows of the market will

Since q is defined implicitly by the con-

depend on the sign of

dition that marginal revenue (MR) equal marginal cost (MC), this derivative
must be positive.

,dMC

•

ag (K,c)

(F2)

=

aK

,dMR

'dq

>o

dMC

dq'
ax.

Thus, for our representative firm COv(

,

X)

is positive.

7Since K" is the solution that obtains when systematic risk is not
present, one would expect the same solution for an expected profit maximizer.

This is indeed the case. Multiplying equation (8) through by RF, we obtain
a condition that states that the marginal contribution of a unit of capital
to the expected value of revenues minus labor costs must equal the implicit

rental rate of capital. This is precisely the condition one obtains when
maximizing expected profits.

8

ax(K,c)
From Hotelling1s Lema we know that

defined implicitly by the condition that MR

ac

.'

= q (K,c). Since q

is

MC, the derivative of q with

respect to c is given by

*

lF2

..aq

(K,c)

=

()

de
,dMR - dMC

—

'dq

Thus, x'

(K,c)

—I

=

dMR -

dMC

'dq

dq

is a convex function of c.

formal proof of this is given in the Appendix.

As demonstrated in the Appendix, whether the convexity of the relationship between X? and e is a positive or negative function of K hinges on the

the sign of

=
2

ac aK

a

2

Differentiating

the expression for

from footnote (8)• with respect to K, we obtain

Footnotes

1While this paper analyzes the choice of an optimal stock of physical

capital, our approach is generalizable to other decisions including advertising expenditure, research and development, etc.

2The model is sufficiently general to include both competitive and non-

competitive structures in the output market. However, we assume that the
input markets are competitive. Where appropriate, we will discuss the influence of product market structure on the results of the paper.
Since we are using an explicit valuation framework, the input price
of capital need not include a capitalization rate.
The assumption of additive uncertainty is made simply for convenience.
The qualitative results remain if the uncertainty is multiplicative.
5Th1s statement needs to be qualified slightly. Since this firm is a

part of the market portfolio, even firm specific disturbances will appear in

XM. However, given the large number of firms in the economy, this effect will
be of such a small magnitude for the average firm in the capital market that it

can be essentially ignored. In any event, it is clear that the covariance between the cash flows of a particular firm and the market is usually dominated
by system wide disturbances.

6The covariance between the incremental cash flows to this firm and the
cash flow to the market portfolio will be positive if c and XM are positively

correlated. The following argument demonstrates this point. Since c and X are
joint normal variables1,

3X.(K,)

(F) cov(x(K,), XM)
ax(.K,c)

&ince

E[

I

COv(c,xM) =

*
q (K,c) by Hotelling's Lemma.

Ei"(.Kc)JCOv(c,x),

Therefore, the sign of the

rd MR
L

2*,
a

g tK,c,

dg

—

(k,c)

dMR

g'(K,c)

.

.

.

d MC

dMC1

'dq

Since

-

aK ddK

2

dq

.

.

is positive, a non-negattve second derivative for the marginal

revenue curve and a marginal cost curve that is flatter the higher K are sufficient to make this derivative positive, and yield a positive technical effect.

'Loist1 (1976) discusses the conditions under which this is a valid procedure. Basically, the requirements are that the partial derivatives of f(K,c)
between K and K, and between e and 0 must all exist and be continuous.

References

(1) E. Greenberg, W. Marshall, and J. Yawitz, "The Technology of Risk
and Return." American Economic Review, June 1978, 241-51.
(2) 0. Loisti, "The Erroneous Approximation of Expected Utility by Means
of a Taylor's Series Expansion: Analytic and Computational
Results." American Economic Review, December 1976, 904-10.
(3) R. Shrieves, "Uncertainty, the Theory of Production, and Optimal
Operating Leverage." Southern Economic Journal. January 1981,
690- 702.

