                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               PATENTS, PRICE CONTROLS AND ACCESS TO NEW DRUGS:
                   HOW POLICY AFFECTS GLOBAL MARKET ENTRY

                                             Jean O. Lanjouw

                                          Working Paper 11321
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11321


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jean O. Lanjouw. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Patents, Price Controls and Access to New Drugs: How Policy Affects Global Market Entry
NBER Working Paper No. 11321
May 2005
JEL No. L1, I1

                                            ABSTRACT

Efforts to strengthen the global patent system for pharmaceuticals continue to be controversial, and

what will likely be a similarly fraught international debate over price controls has begun. The

outcome of international negotiations and the resulting policy decisions made by each country will

have many ramifications – influencing the size of future investment in medical research, the

availability of the resulting therapies, how the financial burdens are distributed across countries, and

finally the health of consumers.     This paper considers how legal and regulatory policies affect

whether new drugs are marketed in a country, and how quickly. Less than one-half of the new

pharmaceutical molecules that are marketed worldwide are sold in any given country, and those that

are sold are often available to consumers in one country only six or seven years after those in

another. Both price regulation and intellectual property rights influence these outcomes. The

analysis covers a large sample of 68 countries at all income levels and includes all drug launches

over the period 1982-2002. It uses newly compiled information on legal and regulatory policy, and

is the first systematic analysis of the determinants of drug launch in poor countries.

Jean O. Lanjouw
Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
lanjouw@are.berkeley.edu
Introduction

       The pharmaceutical industry faces a rapidly evolving legal and regulatory environment.

Governments, drug companies and advocacy groups continue to engage in a decade-long battle

over the type of patent rights that will be available to industry, particularly in poor countries.

Particular criticism has focused on the intellectual property standards required of members of the

World Trade Organization—standards known as Trade-Related aspects of Intellectual Property,

or TRIPS, rules. International drug pricing is also coming under the spotlight. Americans have

accused the Europeans and Canadians of using their price control systems to free-ride on U.S.

consumers, and the United States is starting to push for regulatory changes in bilateral trade

negotiations.2 These pressures may well generate future reforms on a broad scale.

       The choices made by each country about its patent system and price regulation will have

many ramifications – influencing the size of future investment in medical research, the

availability of the resulting therapies, how the financial burdens are distributed across countries,

and finally the health of consumers. We focus here on how policy choices affect whether new

drugs are marketed in a country, and how quickly. Because there are fixed costs associated with

launching new products, it would seem intuitive that both weaker price regulation and stronger

intellectual property would facilitate entry by virtue of increasing firm profit.3 However, what

makes this an interesting economic problem is that intellectual property can have a second

2
  See, for example, the speech by Mark McClellen, then Commissioner of the U.S. FDA, before the First
International Colloquium on Generic Medicine. September 25, 2003, Cancun, Mexico. Available at
http://www.fda.gov/oc/speeches/2003/genericdrug0925.html (accessed 12/28/03). Most recently, the U.S.
insisted that reforms to Australia’s domestic price and reimbursement system be a part of the AUS Free
Trade Agreement (see www.aph.gov.au/Senate/committee/freetrade_ctte for details and discussion.
Accessed 1/24/05). Suggesting a future agenda, see “Ten Questions,” Pfizer Annual Review 2004: “We
believe Americans carry an unfair share of the global cost of biomedical research. We think that’s a
serious issue that should be near the top of the global trade agenda.”
important effect. While patents indeed make local markets more attractive, they also convey

control over launch decisions to multinational firms with global interests.4 Multinationals may

delay or even avoid launching drugs in lower-priced countries because they are concerned about

the implications for pricing in other markets. If they hesitate, and patent rights block otherwise

willing local entrants, then strong patent rights may actually reduce product entry.

        Although the pricing of patented pharmaceuticals has attracted a great deal of attention

recently, the question of whether new drugs are marketed at all, remarkably, has not.5 This is

significant given that less than one-half of the new pharmaceutical molecules marketed

worldwide are sold in any given country – whether rich or poor. Even those drugs that are

eventually marketed in one country frequently appear on pharmacy shelves only six or seven

years after becoming available to consumers elsewhere.6 Both price regulation and intellectual

property rights influence these outcomes.            The CEO of Pfizer, Hank McKinnell, frankly

acknowledged this point some years ago when he threatened that the company would withhold

new treatments from France unless the government allowed higher drug prices (Financial Times,

December 10, 2001).

        When considering the effect of patent rights it is important to distinguish two main types:

those that protect of methods of manufacture (“process patents”) and those that protect

3
   Local fixed costs include obtaining marketing approval from the country regulatory authority and
educating doctors and patient groups about the drug’s benefits. These costs can be sizeable, particularly for
the first entrant.
4
  While in principle smaller local firms could develop new drugs, in fact multinationals hold almost all
product patents. Some 86% of the applications for product patents in India in 1995 were submitted by
inventors with a non-Indian address (CDRI, 1996) and in most developing countries the share is far
higher. As firms based in developing countries also begin to invest in the development and patenting of
new products they will have the same global marketing incentives and constraints faced by the current
multinationals.
5
  Although when Gilead Sciences recently offered to expand to 95 the number of countries eligible to
receive its key anti-retroviral drug “at cost”, the offer was called “disingenuous” by the NGO Doctors
without Borders because the firm has been supplying only 22 of the original 68 eligible countries. San
Francisco Chronicle, March 18, 2005.


                                                     2
pharmaceutical products (“product patents”).7 Process patents are relatively weak. While one

firm’s patents on methods for producing a molecule might give it a monopoly for a time, a

second firm can legally devise (and patent) a new method and come into the market.                 Indeed,

countries have purposefully chosen a “process-only” patent regime for pharmaceutical

innovations in order to foster a domestic industry based on inventing around originators’

manufacturing processes.8         Although relatively weak, process patents may nevertheless

encourage product entry by slowing down the arrival of competitors, allowing firms to cover

fixed entry costs.

        The ambiguity arises with product patents because these concentrate control in the hands of

a single innovating firm. In the debate preceding the TRIPS Agreement it was argued that

countries refusing to grant product patents were failing to get many newer drugs precisely

because of the threat of follow-on imitative competition. If innovator firms could be assured of a

local monopoly, it was suggested, they would find it attractive to launch more products. In the

presence of externalities, however, this argument is no longer obvious.

        Several mechanisms can generate international pricing externalities. Some developed

country price regulators explicitly use cross-country comparisons to establish ceiling prices.

U.K. drug prices, for example, are used as an international reference by regulators in Austria,

Canada, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands and Portugal (Bloom and van Reneen,

1998; see also Jacobzone 2000). Physical arbitrage across country borders can also erode prices

in higher-priced markets. Arbitrage is legal among E.U. member countries, which pushes prices

6
  A “drug” refers to a chemical entity in any of its presentations – e.g. tablets, capsules, liquid.
7
  Some countries also give additional protection to new formulations and new uses of existing products.
8
   India’s rejection of its adopted colonial British patent code in 1972 in favor of a system allowing only
short (5-7 year) process patents for drugs provides an example. With only process patents available, the
multinational subsidiary Glaxo India faced several local competitors from the first day that it marketed its



                                                     3
in the direction of uniformity although it has not resulted in a single price across markets

(Kanavos, et. al., 2004; Ganslandt and Maskus, 2004). Arbitrage between most countries is

illegal. Nevertheless there are concerns about black market movements, with occasional high-

profile stories involving developing countries and a soaring trade between the U.S. and Canada.9

       The behavior of political interest groups can also push prices toward uniformity.

Consumers forcefully object to paying prices that are higher than those they see being charged to

consumers elsewhere, giving firms and their regulators reason to fear a political backlash if

obviously different prices are in place.    A growing literature examines how firms may distort

behavior to avoid the imposition of regulation or soften its effect. Glazer and McMillan (1990),

for example, model pricing by a monopolist where the firm may choose to forestall regulation by

setting a price closer to that desired by the regulator. Erfle and McMillan (1990) find that oil

firms limited their price increases during the 1979 oil crisis.           Price restraint was more

pronounced on more visible fuels like home heating oil and more likely among large and visible

firms. Ellison and Wolfram (2004) show that pharmaceutical firms acted collectively to restrain

price increases during a period of intensive political discussion of health care reform in the U.S.

Firms identified as particularly vulnerable to regulation were more likely to engage in price

restraint and lobbying. Examining the stock prices of credit card firms, Stango (2003) finds that

announced rate cuts were less damaging to returns when the announcements followed a

regulatory threat. Again this result was more pronounced for politically visible firms.10




blockbuster drug ranitadine (Zantac); while Cipla was manufacturing a version of the Pfizer drug Viagra
shortly after the drug’s global launch (Wall Street Journal, July 10, 1998).
9
   For example, “HIV Drugs For Africa Diverted to Europe,” The Washington Post, October, 2002;
“Europeans Investigate Resale of AIDS Drugs,” New York Times, October 29, 2002.
10
   Behavior beyond pricing may also be affected. For example Maxwell, Lyon, and Hackett (2000)
examine firm efforts to deter consumer mobilization, and thereby government-imposed regulation, by
voluntarily limiting their pollution output.


                                                  4
        Identifying the precise mechanisms generating pricing externalities across markets is not

the goal of this paper. Rather, the concern here is whether product patents can reduce access to

new drugs by making firms that care about externalities – whatever the source – more important

players.   Whether access is, in fact, limited is also a key question for interpreting the welfare

implication of firms’ inability to fully price discriminate across countries.11

        Two examples of firm behavior in this environment are instructive. In the late 1980s,

Bayer chose not to introduce its new antibiotic ciprofloxacin in India. To do so it would have

needed to price the product very low to be competitive in that market, at a time when the firm

was negotiating prices in its more important markets. Instead, ciprofloxacin was introduced in

India three years after its world launch by the Indian firm Ranbaxy. However, eight years after

the drug’s global launch and long after the entrance of a multitude of local producers, Bayer

finally entered the Indian market (interview with Bayer executive, India, 1997). More recently,

GlaxoSmithKline and Pfizer have cut back supplies of their products to Canada to prevent drugs

from leaving for the United States – where they damage the higher prices that the firms enjoy in

that country.12   In both of these situations the multinationals found it profitable to engage in a

local market at a low price. Their reluctance to do so clearly stemmed from the potential

implications for their profits in other markets. What is particularly notable in the story of




11
   Maleug and Schwartz (1994) show that uniform pricing by a monopolist yields lower global welfare
than third-degree price discrimination when demand dispersion is such that many markets are left
unserved under uniform pricing. See also Scherer and Watal (2002). This result is accentuated if one
allows for global equity concerns and differences in the marginal utility of income across consumers (See
Jack and Lanjouw, 2005, where they apply many-person Ramsey pricing to the problem of global
pharmaceutical pricing.)
12
   Wall Street Journal, January 22, 2003; “Pfizer Cuts Supplies to Canadian Drugstores,” The Washington
Post, April 5, 2005.


                                                   5
ciprofloxacin is the further suggestion that pricing externalities may become less acute later in

the product lifecycle.13

       Given the considerations raised here, one would expect to see three types of entry into

poorer country markets. Firms interested in producing only for the local or regional market

should be willing to enter at any time, assuming that expected returns in the local market at least

cover the fixed costs of entry. Multinationals might enter poorer markets quickly in situations

where they can set a price that is close to their target price in the major markets. Sales would

then be limited to the local elite. Finally, one might see multinationals waiting for some time

after the global launch of a new product, and then entering developing country markets with a

low price that allowed them to capture market share. Which of these strategies are feasible and

likely will be influenced by price regulation and the intellectual property regime.

       To date there has been little analysis of the determinants of international drug launches.

Danzon, Wang and Wang (2005) examine launch data from 25 major markets for the years 1994-

1998, and a selected sample of 85 new chemical entities (NCE). They are specifically concerned

with the effects of price regulation. Rather than trying to summarize differences in price control

systems directly, they use the price for a standard unit in a drug’s therapy class in an earlier year

as indicator of the intensity of regulation. A similar variable is constructed for expected market

size. Both higher prices and larger markets are found to have a significantly positive effect on

the likelihood and speed of launch.

       Kyle (2004a and 2004b) analyzes 21 OECD countries and much larger set of drug

launches, including 1577 molecules developed during the period 1980-2002. She focuses

primarily on how firm characteristics affect launch timing and finds, for example, that domestic


13
  One candidate explanation is the fact that controlled prices set in high-income countries in the early
entry years are typically not renegotiated over time (Jacobzone, 2000).


                                                   6
firms have a 5 times higher probability of launching at home (with domestic status most

important in Japan and Italy). A dummy for price regulation has a significantly negative effect

and she finds that firms are less likely to follow launch in a low-price country with launch in a

high-price country.

       None of these papers consider intellectual property (IP) as a determinant of marketing

decisions. McCalman (2004) provides an econometric analysis of how intellectual property

might influence launch decisions – of American Hollywood movies. His data are from 1997-99

covering 37 countries, and he estimates hazard models for the effect of IP strength on the speed

of film launches across countries. He finds a non-monotonic relationship with moderate IP

associated with the most rapid diffusion. There is, in his context however, no scope for pricing

spillovers across countries.

       This paper analyzes launch patterns across a very large sample of 68 countries over the

period 1982-2002. The paper provides descriptive statistics; and probit and hazard analyses of

the likelihood and speed of launch.       Explanatory variables include those related to the

attractiveness of markets and local technical capacity. Those of primary interest are newly

constructed policy variables for the availability and strength of patent protection and the

stringency of price control. This is the first analysis of pharmaceutical launch patterns that

includes developing countries. Their experience is of independent interest and provides more

variation in the policy variables than is found among OECD members.



I. The Timing of Drug Approvals and Patent Protection

       To understand how market entry relates to price regulation and the patent system it helps

to have in mind a clear idea of timing. Figure 1 illustrates with a stylized example. We assume




                                               7
that there are two countries, the United States and a lower-income country called “Other”. An

innovator firm discovers a promising new molecule and patents it in the United States. The top

half of the first timeline corresponds to this patent, with time zero being the date at which the

U.S. patent application was made. Following application it typically takes about 1.5 years before

a patent is granted (King, 2003). Until recent harmonization to the 20 year standard agreed

under TRIPS, the United States had a statutory patent term of 17 years from the grant of the

patent. This would give a total expected patent term of 18.5 years.          In addition, however, the

U.S. has a provision to allow for an extension of the patent term on pharmaceutical products to

compensate for time spent in the testing and regulatory review process.14 The average extension

during the period of our data was about 2 years (Grabowski and Vernon, 2000), pushing the

expected expiration date out to 20.5 years after application as indicated.

       After having applied for a patent on its new molecule in the United States, the innovator

firm has up to 12 months to submit its corresponding patent applications in other countries.15

The bottom half of the patent timeline tracks the firm’s product patent in “Other”, assuming that

product patents are available there. Again time zero is the date when that the application is

submitted and it falls one year later than for the U.S patent.

       Applications to protect manufacturing processes may be, and often are, submitted some

time after initial product patent applications. Thus there may be additional patents associated

with the new product. These patents would have timelines shifted to the right of the one shown,



14
   Introducing the option for a patent extension was one part of a larger political agreement that
also allowed generic firms to enter the U.S. market by showing equivalence to an existing
approved product and without repeating full clinical trials (the Drug Price Competition and
Patent Term Restoration Act or “Hatch-Waxman Act” of 1984).
15
   This period may be extended via a PCT application, but most subsequent applications are
made a year later almost to the day (based on data from the Thomson Derwent World Patent
Index).

                                                  8
with expiration dates further out in time. An innovative firm can effectively extend the number

of years that it controls the marketing of a product if it can successfully patent all commercially

feasible methods to manufacture it.16

       Typically a pharmaceutical product patent application is made early in the R&D process.

Thus, in the years following its U.S. patent application the innovator firm develops the potential

product. If this stage is successful, the firm develops a dossier that describes the drug’s quality

and characteristics and contains reports on tests of safety and efficacy. The completed dossier is

submitted to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (U.S. FDA) for marketing approval.

During the mid-1900’s, the regulatory approval process took, on average, about 1.5 years

(various sources in the policy references). Although there was considerable variation, during our

period of analysis the average total time elapsed to final approval in the United States was about

9 years after the initial patent application (based on the 18.5 year pre-extension term and Figures

3 and 4 in Grabowski and Vernon, 2000). Following approval, drugs enter the market directly,

as indicated on the figure.17

       The date of entry into the U.S. market represents the first global launch of the product in

this illustration. The first global launch in any market is time zero in the econometric analysis

and starts the lower “launch lag” timeline in the figure.




16
   This may difficult. For example, in 1991 Eli Lilly was losing molecule protection in the U.S. on
its major drug cefaclor, but anticipated extending the protection of its drug on the basis of a large
number of U.S. process patents. At the same time, however, the Indian firm Ranbaxy found an
unpatented manufacturing process that undermined this strategy. In the words of a Ranbaxy
executive, “56 processes were under patent (by Lilly in the U.S.) and we found the 57th” (personal
interview, 1997).
17
   Competitiveness and Performance Indicators 2001. Pharmaceutical Industry Competitiveness
Taskforce. Available at http://www.advisorybodies.doh.gov.uk/pictf/cpi2001.pdf (accessed
1/3/05).

                                                 9
       When the product enters the market in “Other” depends upon the firm attempting to

market it. Most developing countries will give regulatory approval to a drug largely on the basis

of a product’s acceptance by the U.S. FDA or similar E.U. authority. Thus our originator firm

could submit its dossier when it makes its submission to the U.S. FDA and expect approval at

more or less the same time.      A generic applicant, on the other hand, would need to show

equivalence to the already approved product, and this might delay its submission. On average

the approvals process in developing countries during the mid-1990s was also on the order of 1.5

years (policy references). Thus, assuming a firm makes the effort to enter quickly, we indicate

approval in “Other” as one to 1.5 years after the U.S. approval date.

       In most countries, marketing approval is followed by a period during which the firm

negotiates the conditions of entry with a government body charged with regulating

reimbursement and pricing. This process can naturally vary in length depending on the stances

taken by the negotiating parties and the procedural framework. A study of developed country

markets found that the average additional delay due to price negotiations was relatively short – a

few up to about ten months.18 Assuming that negotiations might be somewhat more protracted

in developing countries, we indicate market entry in “Other” at year 10. This implies entry two

years after the first global launch, as shown on the bottom timeline.

       What these timelines highlight is that the effective life of a patent – the number of years

during which a patent protects a product that is out in the market generating revenue – is

typically nine or ten years shorter than the statutory term of the patent. We refer to this figure

when interpreting the results below.




18
   ibid. Consultant and industry sources cited in Danzon et al (2003) suggest somewhat longer
delays due to price negotiation.

                                                10
II.    The Drug Launch Data

       The launch data are drawn primarily from the December 2002 “LifeCycle: Drug

Launches” database constructed by the private vendor IMS Health. The database identifies the

month and year that a product first has retail sales in a given country, and indicates which entries

represent first world launches of new chemical entities (NCE).19 For each product launched, it

gives the tradename, the Anatomical Therapeutic Classification (ATC) code, active ingredient,

composition, and firm making the launch. Coverage includes entry during the 21 years 1982-

2002 in the retail sector and, for some countries, the hospital sector also. The Indian market was

not covered by IMS during this period so we incorporate similar information obtained from the

Indian market research company, ORG-MARG. The Indian data cover a partial, but broad, set

of therapeutic classes – including launches of all antibiotics, ulcer and cancer drugs – and

includes all products in those classes launched in the Indian market during the period 1986-98.

The combined dataset covers 68 countries or country groups, 60% of which have at least twenty

years of information.20

       Because the brand names given to the same product change across countries, and may

include generics, common products must be linked across countries on the basis of active



19
    In some cases the same chemical was indicated as being ‘new’ more than once, or was
identified as ‘new’ at a country launch later than the first launch in the world. In these cases the
first appearance is taken as the global launch date.
20
   French West Africa (Benin, Cameroon, Congo, Cote d’Ivoire, Gabon, Guinea, Senegal) and
Central America (Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatamala, Honduras, Panama) are aggregated by
IMS because they are very small markets. During the period 1982-1992 we have data for “West
Germany”, which overlaps with data for “Germany” beginning in 1989. Inspection of the entries
for these two “different” countries during the overlap period reveals some drugs released in both
countries and others in one or the other. These observations are treated as a single market during
the overlap period. For the 1982-1988 period, IMS also reports launch information for
“Malaysia”, “Singapore”, and a “Malaysia, Singapore” hybrid. Drugs released as “Malaysia,
Singapore” are treated as having been launched in each country and the observations are
replicated.

                                                11
ingredients. Although (active) “ingredient” is a variable field, it is incomplete in the IMS data,

with a sizable share of the observations missing active ingredient information altogether.21 We

assume that drugs having a tradename that is the same as one of the NCE chemicals are generics

and assign to them their tradename chemical as an ingredient. After having made this change,

about 10% of the observations were left with missing ingredient information. The share of

launches missing this key linking variable differs considerably across countries but is not

obviously related to language or income. For example, 18% of U.S. launches are missing

ingredient but only 9% of Japanese and Swedish launches.

       The IMS data contains a field “Composition” which includes both active and inert

ingredients. Two-thirds of the observations with missing information in the ingredient field had

information in the composition field. This field revealed that many of products missing

information are not likely to be NCEs (for example, “charcoal”, “calf blood extract”, “acne acid

detergent”). While the ingredient field typically had chemicals listed in the common chemical

nomenclature, those listed in the composition field were more often in the language of the

country of release (for example, “pirodoxina chlorhidrato”, “rosskastanien samen-trokenextrakt”,

“prodotto a base di aglio”). To avoid introducing new noise and probably a bias associated with

language, no attempt was made to use the composition field to identify active ingredients where

they were missing. Observations that do not have identified ingredients are dropped from the

analysis except in Table 4 below.

       To improve the links between common products for those observations that do have

identified ingredients, we constructed a set of chemical “equivalent names” for each of the



21
  There was considerable improvement in reporting over time: about 1/3 of the 1980’s launch
observations are missing ingredient, while the data are complete for launches in the last five
years.

                                               12
NCEs. Most of the equivalent names came from a search of an online chemical database called

ChemID Plus.22 This yielded 5,374 synonyms. In addition, we found the original tradename

under which each NCE was first launched, identified all products launched under each of those

tradenames, and the products’ ingredients. Whenever a given NCE tradename had different

ingredients listed for products in different countries, these were scrutinized to find different

spellings due to language or misspellings. This resulted in a further 61 equivalent names to use

for matching.

         Drugs assigned to an ATC code beginning with “T” (diagnostic agents and testing

devices) or “V” (various, including dietetic supplements and similar products) were dropped.

         Appendix Table A1 gives an example of a launch pattern for the pharmaceutical

ciprofloxacin. Countries are ordered by date of market entry. Ciprofloxacin was first marketed

in the Philippines in October of 1986, so this date is time zero. The number of months between

the date of the first global launch of a drug and its launch in a given country is the launch lag.

These are given in the last column of the table.



III.     Description of Global Launch Patterns

         Table 1 gives the number of NCE’s with a first appearance (global launch date) in each

year. The first column indicates the number of new “blockbusters”. These are drugs that were

found among the top 200 in terms of world revenue in 1998 or 2003, or among the top 100 U.S.

revenue earners in 1995 and 1993 (Med Ad News, various issues). The second column includes

all drugs. There was an increase in the number of new chemical entities launched in the mid-

1980’s, with some fall off in the numbers in the early 2000’s (perhaps due in part to data



22
     at http://chem.sis.nlm.nih.gov/chemidplus/cmplxqry.html (accessed March, 2003).

                                                   13
processing delays). On the whole, however, the number of NCE’s appearing each year was

fairly similar over the period.

        There were 836 new pharmaceuticals first marketed during the period 1982 – 2002.

Table 2 indicates the location of these first launches. The table includes countries having at least

one first launch, ordered by income class.23 To give an accurate picture of the actual importance

of countries as a location of first launch, these figures must be adjusted to account for the

incomplete coverage of some countries over the period (see column 2). For example, Russia

appears as the location of first launch only twice, but this is due in part to our having only eight

years of information. Adjusted shares are in column 3. They are constructed as follows. Let djt

be the observed number of first launches in country j in year t and Dt the observed first launches

in year t worldwide. Let sj0 be an estimate of country j’s share of first launches based on data

from the seven-year period 1995-2001 when information was available for all countries. For the

                                                                                     Dt
remaining years, first estimate the true number of first launches as Dt* =                          , where Jt is
                                                                                     j∈J t
                                                                                             s j0

the set of all countries having data in year t. Then, for each country j∈ Jt construct estimates of

                                        d jt
the country’s annual shares as s jt =          . Each country’s adjusted share of first launches over the
                                        Dt*

entire period is a weighted average of sj0 (the share over 1995-2001) and the other annual

estimates sjt available for that country.

        Two points stand out in this table. First, firms almost invariably launch products first in

rich country markets. Second, a very large share of all drugs is launched first in Japan (and only

there – see below).




                                                      14
       Figure 2 gives an idea of the number of countries that an NCE typically reaches. It is

based only on the 300 NCEs with global launch dates early in the period (1982-1988) to avoid

truncation. We see that just a very few drugs from that time period were launched worldwide.

The mean number of countries is 20, the median is 9, and almost 20% of new drugs are marketed

in just a single country.   Of the 54 single-market drugs represented in this figure, 23 were sold

only in Japan, 13 only in Italy, with the rest scattered across countries. Japan is clearly distinctive

– it is the location of 24% of all drug launches, but 43% of those marketed in a single country.

From 1995 there was a marked increase in the number of countries reached within a short span

after global launch, so it is likely that today the distribution shown in Figure 2 has shifted

rightward.

       Table 3 indicates how long it takes for a drug to become available to a country’s

consumers. Calculations in this table are restricted to the 122 NCEs first launched 1986-92 and

assigned to therapy classes for which the Indian data are available. There is some truncation for

drugs entering after a long delay because the data end at 2002, but each NCE has at least 120

months of information. It is evident that lags tend to lengthen as one goes down the income

rankings. The group summary at the bottom of the table shows that differences are most

pronounced between the high-income countries and the rest.24 However, there is also clearly a

great deal of variation across individual countries: median launch lags range from months (Japan,

Switzerland) to over eight years (Latvia, Lebanon). There is also considerable variation across

products within countries: For example, the difference between the 10th and 90th percentile of the

23
   The income classes follow those in the World Bank 2002 World Development Indicators
Report. The ranges for GNI per capita measured in 1999 U.S. dollars are: Low ≤ $755 < Lower
≤ $2995 < Middle ≤ $9265 < High.




                                                  15
lag distribution is over 10 years in Morocco and Peru and over 7 years in some of the OECD

countries.

       To avoid differing degrees of truncation across years, Table 4 restricts attention to

launches that occur within 10 years of the first global launch of each NCE. The ten-year span

includes most market entry, as shown in the previous table.             Table 4 includes the 91

“blockbuster” and 462 total drugs in all therapy classes first launched during 1982-92 (so India is

dropped). The first column, on the left side of the table gives the percentage of all drugs that was

eventually launched in the row country at any point within a ten year lag. The second column

gives the same statistic but grossed up as though products missing ingredient information are, in

fact, NCE products. As discussed in the previous section, this is clearly not the case so these

values would be generous upper bounds. The third column gives the percentage of blockbusters

eventually launched in each country.

       Considering the first column, the percentage of drugs launched within a ten year lag

ranges from lows of 19% and 22% (Egypt, Malaysia) to highs of 49% and 53% (Italy, Japan).

Thus, no consumers anywhere have access to more than about one-half of the new

pharmaceuticals that enter the world market. The mean (unweighted) percentage is 34.8% for

the high-income countries, and 29.9% and 28.4% for the middle- and low-income countries,

respectively. As expected, “blockbuster” drugs that experience high sales revenues in the

developed world are also launched more frequently in the poorer countries than drugs overall,

although in no country is the rate for even this more select group close to 100%. The fact that




24
   The difference for high income countries is not driven by the fact that Japan has a large
number of unique drugs. Dropping Japan lowers the average number of drugs to 40 and increases
the median lag to 28 months.

                                                16
drugs are not launched more widely can be due to the availability of substitutes, differences in

disease patterns across countries, and rejection by some local regulatory authorities.

       The remaining columns of Table 4 give the cumulative distribution of drug launches at

different lags from one year to nine years. Thus the column headed “3” indicates the percentage

of all NCE launched within ten years in a given row country that arrived in that market within

three years. Countries are listed by income group and, looking down this column, we again see

that drugs are more likely to be launched within three years in the richer countries than in the

poorer countries. This is highlighted in Figure 3, which shows unweighted averages for each

income group. However, the pattern is not strong. Israel, at 27%, for example, has a smaller

share on the market this quickly than either the Philippines or Thailand (44% and 41%

respectively). Again we see the large range of experience overall. Germany has 75% of its

drugs on the market within three years of the global launch, Saudi Arabia just 16%.

       Most global market entry is done by the “first” firm, defined as the firm that makes the

first global launch of an NCE in a high-income country, or any country for the few NCE

launched exclusively in the poorer countries. This firm almost surely holds most of the patents

associated with an NCE and is typically a multinational. A smaller share is done by “other”

firms – which may in many cases be entry done under license as part of a marketing arrangement

and thus effectively controlled by the first firm (the data do not allow one to distinguish).

“Other” firms may also be multinationals.

       Shares for the low- and middle-income countries are shown in Table 5, broken down by

type of patent regime.    Moving from left to right, a stronger patent regime is associated with

more of the drug launch in a country being done by the first firm. Overall, two-thirds of all drug

launches and three-quarters of blockbuster launches are done by the first firm. These firms are




                                                17
responsible for about 80% of all new drug launches in the poorer countries that occur within the

first 3 years. That these firms tend to enter markets more rapidly is also clear in Figure 4, which

shows the timing of drug entry in high or lower-income countries conditional on launch being

done by the “first” or “other” firm.



To summarize the descriptive statistics:

      •   Only 20% to 50% of all drugs launched globally are on the market in any country after 10

          years. This rises to 60% to 85% for high revenue blockbuster drugs.

      •   Across countries there is considerable variation in how quickly drugs arrive on the

          market given that they are ever launched.

      •   There is some indication that countries with higher GDP per capita tend to obtain new

          drugs more quickly, but the pattern is not strong.

      •   Within any given country there is also considerable variation in how quickly individual

          drugs are launched – ranging from a few months to over a decade.

      •   On average, the firm associated with the first marketing of a new chemical entity is

          responsible for most of the subsequent launches of that product and tends to enter drugs

          more quickly than other firms launching the same product.



IV.       The Explanatory Variables

          Annual series were constructed to describe each of the main policy areas:

          Intellectual Property Protection: These include indicator variables for the availability of

patents on innovative methods of manufacture for pharmaceuticals (process patents), and on new

pharmaceutical compounds (product patents). Historically, countries have offered either no



                                                   18
protection in the area of pharmaceuticals, process patents only, or both process and product

patents. The data include the statuary term of each form of protection, and information about

whether a country allows for an extension to the patent term to compensate for time spent in the

marketing approvals process.

       How a country interprets and enforces its patent laws clearly affects how meaningful any

patent “rights” are to their owners. Unfortunately this is a difficult characteristic to capture in

data. We use one variable, “strong,” falling between 0 and 1, which takes on a higher value as a

country limits how patent rights can be curtailed. Specifically, it is the average of non-missing

values for three other 0/1 indicators: the first equals one if a country will not impose compulsory

licensing until three years after patent grant; the second equals one if the country has no formal

obligation to “work” a patent (supply the market); and the third equals one if the country does

not revoke patents for failing to work if there is such a requirement. This variable was devised

by Walter Park, who provided the data required for its construction for most countries for each

five years beginning in 1980 (see Ginarte and Park, 1997, for details). For missing countries, his

data were supplemented assuming current values throughout the period based on the legal texts

referenced below. A similar variable composed of enforcement-related indicators was not found

to have any explanatory power and therefore was not included in the estimations.

       Price Control: There is bewildering variety in the ways in which different countries

approach the control of pharmaceutical prices. We consider systems of explicit price regulation

and summarize the variation across countries with two dummy variables – one for the existence

of “some” price control regulation and the second for “extensive” price control. A price regime

is label “extensive” if all drugs are regulated, rather than just a subset of the market, or if a




                                                19
country’s price regulation is identified by commentators as being particularly rigorous. The set of

reports consulted in making this determination is given in the policy section of the references.

          The legal and regulatory policies of a country result from some process, and this makes

endogeneity an obvious concern when trying to understand the effects of any policy regime. In

our case, one might expect firms to lobby hardest to obtain strong patent protection in countries

viewed as attractive markets for entry, potentially creating a positive bias in estimated

relationships.25 However, a consideration of history suggests that substantive within-country

changes in the patent law can reasonably be treated as exogenous for our purpose – certainly in

their timing. Such changes tend to be forced by the rules of entry into new political groups (e.g.,

Portugal and Spain joining the EU in 1992); by newly negotiated standards created at an

international level (e.g., many poor countries and TRIPS, Mexico and NAFTA); or a

vulnerability to trade pressure and the political dynamic of bilateral negotiations (Korea, Brazil,

and Jordan in the 1980s and 1990s). (See Sell, 2003.) The link to the dynamic of trade

negotiations is reflected in comments by the body that advises the U.S. Congress and

administration on IPR and trade, the Industry Functional Advisory Committee on IPR for Trade

Matters (IFAC-3), in its reports to the US Trade Representative:



          CAFTA (the Central American Free Trade Agreement) “mirrors, as closely as possible,

          the Singapore and Chile FTAs in order to establish clear precedents in most key areas of

          intellectual property protection for future FTA negotiations.”

And




25
     And lobby they do. For a candid discussion see historical issues of the PhRMA annual report.

                                                  20
       “IFAC-3 is particularly gratified that….with high-level agreements with both small

       developing countries in the CAFTA and a strong and mature developed country like

       Australia, it will prove much easier to convince future FTA countries that strong

       intellectual property protection is in the interests of all countries regardless of their

       economic circumstances.” (Italics mine).26



       Price regulation is more likely to be endogenous. While patent laws change only rarely,

and then in fairly specific and major ways, governments may more flexibly adjust price controls.

In particular, a government might be willing to limit the scope or intensity of an existing system

even where it would not dismantle it altogether. Weaker regulation might be associated with

pressure from an industry with an eye on entry for other reasons.     There are, however, strong

countervailing forces that limit industry influence, such as budgetary pressures and vigorous

lobbying by patient groups and the retired elderly.

       Control Variables: To mitigate potential endogeneity concerns and remove noise, we

construct controls for other characteristics that one might expect to influence pharmaceutical

marketing. Some of these control variables are of independent interest.     Given our hypothesis

that multinationals might be reluctant to launch in poor countries when they face price

competition, and that local firms could be an alternative source of new drug entry, the presence

of a competitive local industry should be relevant. The finding in Section 3 that innovator firms

are responsible for most global marketing suggests that the price effect of local competition

26
   Industry Functional Advisory Committee on IPR for Trade Matters (IFAC-3) in reports to the
USTR:                          http://www.ustr.gov/assets/Trade_Agreements/Bilateral/CAFTA-
DR/CAFTA_Reports/asset_upload_file571_5945.pdf                                           and
http://www.ustr.gov/assets/Trade_Agreements/Bilateral/Morocco_FTA/Reports/asset_upload_fil
e164_3139.pdf



                                                21
could be particularly important. Country R&D expenditure (in all areas) as a share of GDP is

included as a regressor to capture local technical capacity and thus the potential for imitative

competition. High tariffs in a country may also make entry less attractive to multinationals that

would anticipate importing supplies from centralized production facilities.        High-income

countries have zero rates on pharmaceuticals, but in the poorer countries there is considerable

variation, with rates as high as 35%.27

       Differences in market opportunities are captured by the demographic indicators

population size and the percentages of the population aged 0-14, 15-64, 65+ years. Economic

variables include the level of GDP per capita. The Gini coefficient of inequality, and asset

ownership, provide some measure of differences in income distributions. We also control for the

share of health expenditure in GDP, and the share of health expenditure that is private, and the

share of doctors in the population.

       Characteristics of the regulatory process can also influence market entry. Health

authorities differ in their standards and some may reject a new drug even when it is on the

market elsewhere. Delays in the marketing approvals process can take the speed of drug launch

at least partially out of the hands of firms.28 The observed timing of market entry reflects some

combination of the decisions of firms and the complexity and efficiency of a country’s regulatory

process. Thus, the estimations include other elements of government policy that might directly



(both accessed 12/06/04).
27
   The data used here were drawn from the UNCTAD database and kindly supplied by Adrian
Otten. See European Union (2003) in the policy references for a description of these regulations.
28
   Firms are able to influence how quickly a given drug moves through the approvals process.
They can work with more institutions and offer greater compensation to participants in order to
rapidly reach required sample sizes for clinical trials. They can direct more resources to
interacting with the authorities during the approvals process. Dranove and Meltzer (1994)
provide evidence from the United States that firm work harder to speed the approval of drugs
that are later successful in the market.

                                               22
affect or proxy for other conditions that influence entry timing, beyond our key variables of

interest. These include whether a country has adopted an essential drug list, standard treatment

guidelines or a national formulary. For E.U. members we include an indicator for the 1995

establishment of the European Medicines Evaluation Agency. This agency offers a centralized,

and thus potentially more rapid, approvals procedure within the European Union.

       Many of the explanatory variables are available annually and others are in one or several

cross-sections. All variables used in the estimations presented below are defined in Appendix

Table A2 with summary statistics in Table A3.



V. Econometric Analyses of Launch Determinants

       This section describes the probit and hazard model estimations used to analyze the

probability and speed of drug launch. Results are discussed in the following section.

        All estimations are done separately for the high-income countries and for a combined

low-and middle-income grouping. We consider four different subsets of the NCE in the data.

The base estimations include all drugs. However, some drugs launched in one location fail to

reach other county markets because they do not meet those countries’ local health standards for

safety or efficacy. We want to distinguish between firm’s decisions not to launch, and a failure to

fulfill marketing requirements. Thus, for the high-income countries we also estimate the models

on a “high quality” subset of NCEs, defined as those that obtain marketing approval and are

launched in either the U.S. or the U.K within 2 years. This follows Danzon, et. al. (2005), who




                                                23
argue that these two countries have the most stringent regulation and that therefore approval for

their markets implies a minimum quality standard.29

       For the low- and middle-income group we focus on the set of “blockbuster” drugs – those

of greatest commercial importance as measured by sales revenue. The group includes drugs of

great medical importance and also some major “lifestyle” drugs. We examine the launch of

blockbuster drugs in the low and middle-income group only, because one could expect drugs in

this group to be launched extensively in the rich countries (although see the third column of

Table 4.)

       Finally, when examining launch in the lower-income group we consider separately NCE

in therapy classes that have sales relatively more concentrated in developing countries: class A

(alimentary tract and metabolism) and class J (systemic anti-infectives). The sales of drugs in

class A and J were 23.6% and 23.0% of all sales in India in 2000, while only 10.4% and 18.1%

of the NCE in our data fell in these therapy classes (sales figures from Chaudhuri, et. al., 2004).

Firms might have stronger incentive to enter poorer markets with products in these classes.30

       Tables 6-8 and Tables 10-11 contain the estimation results for probit models of the

probability that a new drug is launched in a given country within either two years or ten years of

the drug’s first appearance in the global market. Observations are at the level of a country/NCE

and the dependent variable takes on the value one if the NCE was marketed within the indicated



29
   Unlike Danzon, et. al., we drop the U.S. and the U.K. as launch countries when analyzing this
subset since their launch probabilities are biased upwards by construction. Another way to
approach the quality issue is to restrict attention to drugs known to satisfy a given country’s
standards because they are observed entering its market within ten years, and analyze the
probability that those drugs are launched within two years (analogous to Table 4). Unreported
estimates on this subset support the results discussed below.
30
   Virtually all drugs are also marketed in the high-income countries. Of the over four hundred
NCE launched through 1992, only eight were launched exclusively in the low- and middle-
income countries and only one of these in more than a single country.

                                                24
period of time. A 24-month lag is below the median lag for high-income countries, and below

the 10th percentile for low- and middle-income countries (see Table 3). Thus, product entry

within this timeframe represents relatively rapid launch, particularly in the poorer countries. As

discussed in Section I, the procedural steps associated with market entry should not typically

require a delay longer than two years, particularly for the originator firm (see Figure 1). Thus, if

a launch fails to happen within two years one can fairly assume that this failure involved at least

some element of firm choice to delay, or that a decision was made to enter but the product was

rejected by the health authority. The descriptive statistics presented above suggest that a lag of

ten years is a reasonable indicator of whether a drug is “ever launched”.

       Table 9 contains estimation results for a log-logistic hazard model of the time path of

country launches.31 The log-logistic model implies that the probability of failing to have a new

drug on the market t months after the global launch is

                                                                        −1
                                                         t
                                       S (t ) = 1 + (          )1 / γ        .
                                                      exp{xβ }

This functional form allows for increasing and then decreasing hazards rates through the

parameter and was preferred over other frequently used specifications such as Cox proportional

hazard or Weibull models for all subsets of the data. Comparing the empirical cumulative hazard

rates and the Cox-Snell residuals revealed predicted hazards that were too high in the later years.

This is reasonably explained by the fact that for each country the sample is a combination of

drugs that are eventually launched – hence which are well described by the model – and those

that never will be. To accommodate this unobserved heterogeneity across drugs, the estimations

also allow for a multiplicative factor on individual hazards having a Gamma distribution with


31
  Global launches are defined as being a launch in the first month to avoid those observations
being dropped.

                                                  25
mean one and variance . This standard form yields a convenient analytical expression for the

likelihood function.

       In all specifications, countries enter the estimation for a given NCE only if the NCE’s

global launch precedes the entry of the country into the database. To avoid truncation, the

hazard estimations include NCE first launched 1982-2001, the probit estimations for a two-year

lag include those first launched 1982-2000, while those for the ten-year lag include only NCE

with first launch 1982-1992. All estimations include full sets of dummy variables for both the

date of NCE first global launch and the fourteen ATC therapeutic classes. Country fixed effects

are also included in some of the probit estimations – as indicated in the column headings – and in

the hazard estimations. Their inclusion implies the loss of all information available from cross-

country variation in the key policy variables; but focusing on within-country changes over time

has the advantage of controlling for any unobserved market characteristics that might be

correlated with those variables. Appendix Table A4 indicates the countries that saw changes in

their policy variables during relevant time periods. Time, therapy class, and (where included)

country fixed effects are each jointly significant in all cases. Where country fixed effects are not

included in the model, the estimations allow for a country random effect.

       Explanatory variables are dated by the year of the first global launch. For example, if an

NCE is first marketed in 1990 then it is a country’s population size in the year 1990 that is

considered as a determinant of drug launch in the period two or ten years after 1990. This is not

obviously the right assumption – one might expect that the relevant characteristics would be

those for a later period, particularly for the probability of launch within ten years. However,

experimentation showed that both policy and market variables dated after the global launch

(either two or four years) have weaker explanatory power in models of new product launch. It




                                                26
may be that worldwide launch decisions for a new drug are taken at the time of first marketing

and do not readily respond to subsequent changes in the policy environment.



VI. The Estimation Results

        We now examine the determinants of drug launch. Coefficient estimates on the patent

regime and price control variables are discussed in detail, followed by a brief discussion of other

estimates.

Low- and Middle-income Countries

        Results of probit estimations for the low- and middle-income countries are presented in

Tables 6 through 8, with corresponding hazard model estimates in Table 9.

        The type of patent protection offered by a country in this income grouping is

characterized by a set of five dummy variables (see the first rows of Table 6). Information on

the length of protection is collapsed into indicator variables for whether the statutory patent term

is short vs. long. This distinction has explanatory power whereas the specific term length in

years does not. While somewhat surprising, launch decisions are made by managers who must

synthesize different types of information and it is quite plausible that the simpler breakdown is

the way in which they think about country patent policies when making their choices.

        The first of the five dummy variables indicates whether a country offers at least short-

term process protection for pharmaceuticals versus no protection at all (see the diagram below).

For the lower-income countries “short” refers to a statutory term of 14 years or less.32 Recalling

Figure 1, a term of 14 years would imply that, on average, about four years of effective

protection would be conveyed by a patent on the product molecule and perhaps a few more years



32
     Experimenting sequentially with cutoffs from 12 to 17 years, 14 gave the highest pseudo-R2.

                                                27
                           N o P rotection

                              1
                                             3   S hort P rocess
                          S hort P rocess        & P roduct

                              2                    4


                           L ong P rocess        L ong P rocess
                                                 & P roduct




by associated process patents because of their later application dates. Of the periods in which

countries in the data offered a short term of protection, in about 25% of cases the term was 14

years. In about 50% the term was 12 years, implying an average effective patent life of only a

few years. In the remaining cases the term was just 7 years.

       The next two variables capture the incremental effect of moving to either to long process

protection ( 15 years), or alternatively adding short product protection. The forth variable

indicates the additional effect of going from short protection of both products and processes to

long protection of both. (One never observes a country with short product protection and long

process protection.) The final dummy variable indicates whether the country will grant an

extension on product patents to compensate for marketing time lost during the approvals process.

       Table 6 presents results for the full set of drugs. The first model, shown in column one,
                                                                           33
includes country fixed effects, while the second model does not.                Because the latter




33
   Because there is limited variation in the policy variables – particularly when country fixed
effects are included – a jackknife procedure was used to look for potential overfitting of the data.
Countries were dropped in turn, the model re-estimated and the resulting coefficient estimates
checked for stability.

                                                 28
specification includes the Gini coefficient as a control, a number of countries are lost due to

missing information.

        The estimates are quite robust to the assumption of fixed or random country effects,

which lends empirical support to the argument that the set of policy variables can be treated as

exogeneous. As noted above, the decision whether to maintain an extensive price control system

in the face of international corporate or governmental pressure is the policy choice most likely to

be problematic. To test whether endogeneity in this variable might be influencing the results, we

also estimate a two-stage conditional maximum likelihood version of the model in column two

that includes the residual from a first-stage regression for extensive price control (Rivers and

Vuong, 1988).      Significant instruments in the first-stage regression include the economic

orientation of the ruling executive party, its tenure in power, and the overall budget balance.34

First-stage estimates are provided in Appendix Table A5. The exogeneity of the extensive price

control variable in the probit for launch is not rejected (null hypothesis that the residual
                       2
coefficient is zero:       (1) = 0.42, p-value = 0.52). The coefficients in the launch model change

little so they are not reported.

        Given the historical link between changes in patent law and trade agreements, one might

also be concerned that what looks like a positive role for stronger patents could be due to other

changes in the trade regime facilitating market interaction. To test this, annual exports was

included as a control variable in unreported estimations. Its inclusion had little effect on the

estimated coefficients on the policy variables.



34
   Budget stress could increase the stringency of price regulation as countries that cover
pharmaceuticals though general expenditure strive to control costs (for many specific incidents in
the E.U., see Jacobzone, 2000). Because it could conceivably have a direct effect on the
government’s willingness to approve relatively expensive new drugs we also run the two-stage
estimations dropping this variable. The results are the same.

                                                   29
       The observed probability that a drug is launched in a low- or middle-income country

within two years is about 9%. The estimates in Table 6 suggest that going from a regime with

only short process patents to one with long process patents significantly encourages rapid entry.

A long process patent regime still allows for possible generic entry and this appears to be

important. The marginal effect is to raise the probability of launch within two years by 2-3

percentage points (or about 30%). There is little evidence, however, that offering any form of

protection to new pharmaceutical products enhances the likelihood of quick entry into these

markets. The individual incremental effects of adding short and then long product protection are

insignificant in both specifications, and the joint marginal effect is weakly significant only in the

random effects model (0.021 + 0.008, p-value 0.08).

       Extensive price control clearly lowers the probability that new pharmaceuticals reach

consumers quickly in lower-income countries, as expected.        The predicted effect is similar in

magnitude to that of the change to a longer term on process patents – in this case lowering the

probability of rapid entry by some 30%. That a country has an essential drugs list is also

associated with a lower likelihood that new drugs are launched quickly and may indicate more

focused efforts by the government to ensure that drug purchases are cost effective. Moderate

price control, on the other hand, does not appear to have a significant influence on entry in these

specifications.

       The first two columns of Table 7 present the main results for estimates when additional

variables are included in the random effects specification. The first adds a country’s R&D share

and its level of tariff protection (which together lead to a sizable drop in the number of

observations due to missing data).      We again find that having a long process patent regime

significantly encourages rapid drug launch. A new finding is that countries with a high technical




                                                 30
capacity as measured by R&D expenditure are far less likely to see new pharmaceuticals in the

market quickly. Starting from no R&D and then increasing R&D to the mean level of one-half

of one percent of GDP drops the probability of rapid launch by an estimated 13.6 percentage

points. This negative effect of local capacity, however, is significantly offset if a country offers

the strongest level of patent protection. Although the effect of a higher R&D share remains

negative even when interacted with strong patent protection, its marginal effect is diminished by

a third (joint marginal effect = -0.19, p-value = 0.01, versus -0.28).

       As in the simpler specification, extensive price control has a significant negative effect on

the probability of rapid launch. Moderate regulation of prices is also found to have a negative

effect now that the specification allows for its interaction with GDP per capita. The impact of

having any price regulation is sizable for the poorest countries, and is only fully absent at a GDP

over $11,000, or higher than cutoff for this country group. That price regulation has a larger

effect in the poorest countries may reflect firm choices. It might also result from low-income

countries having less efficient regulatory procedures that slow price negotiations. There is some

suggestion of the importance of variation in regulatory efficiency within the lower-income

countries in the fact that the coefficient estimate on having a national formulary is significantly

positive (which is not the case for the higher-income countries, see below). One would expect its

direct effect to be negative, but within the lower-income country group this variable may be

acting as a proxy for bureaucratic competence.

       The specification shown in the second column of Table 7 includes interactions between

short and long product patent variables and the indicator “Strong” that indicates limits on how

patent rights can be curtailed. There is some weak evidence from these interactions that short

product patents may encourage rapid entry when they are held in a legal environment more




                                                 31
generally supportive of patentee rights. It may be, for example, that in such an environment the

patent holder feels able to simply import product rather than go through the time consuming

process of finding local producers and/or distributors to license.

         The third and forth columns of Table 7 correspond to the same random effect model as in

column 2 of Table 6, but for the NCE subsets indicated in the column headings. As found for all

drugs, the NCE most relevant to poor countries (“LDC concentrated”) are more likely to be

launched quickly when a country offers only long process patent protection. In addition, for this

subset of NCE there is also evidence that offering long protection on pharmaceutical products

can encourage rapid entry. The incremental effect of long product protection is positive and

weakly significant and the estimated coefficient on having a patent term extension provision is

both significant and sizable. Results for the other policy variables are similar to those for all

drugs.

         The last set of estimates given in Table 7 is for the high revenue “blockbuster” drugs.

For a low- and middle-income country the probability that one of these drugs is launched within

two years is considerable higher than is the probability for all NCE (24% vs. 9%). That said,

there is no evidence that offering any form of patent protection – whether long or short – speeds

the arrival of the worlds’ blockbuster drugs to their markets. This finding does not seem to be an

artifact of the smaller sample size, since other estimations showing significant effects of the

patent variables have even smaller sample sizes.       Further, the other policy variables remain

significant and are estimated to have a similar-sized effect on the launch of blockbusters (relative

to the observed probability) as they do for other sets of NCE.

         Table 8 compares results for the probability of launch within two years (“rapid”) and ten

years (“ever”) using only NCE launched globally by 1992 in both cases so as to enable




                                                 32
comparisons across a common sample of drugs. Considering first the within 2 year results, as in

the full period data there is evidence that a long process patent regime – possibly supporting

generic entry – is conducive to rapid drug launch. However, unlike in the full period data, in this

earlier subset of NCE a long patent regime also including products – possibly encouraging entry

by innovator firms – gives significant support to rapid entry.     Both patent regimes offering a

long period of protection are estimated to have similar-sized marginal effects: 0.086 without

product patents and 0.070 when products are included (as compared to a short process-only

regime). Interestingly, the R&D share and its interaction are not significant in the earlier time

period. The fact that we observe less benefit from product patents in the full period data and a

more negative effect associated with local R&D activity (compare Tables 6, 7 and 8) may be due

to innovator firms feeling increasingly less able to make use of patent rights in developing

countries to protect against local competition.

       Policy choices have remarkably different effects on whether drugs are “ever” launched.

Contrary to the finding for rapid launch, there is only weak evidence that moving from a short to

a long process patent regime increases the likelihood of a drug being marketed ever. Instead,

there is a significant benefit in the longer term associated with giving short-term protection to

innovative products, increasing the estimated probability that a drug is ever launched in a lower-

income country by 7.5 percentage points or 25%.

       Most interestingly, there is a significant, sizable, and now positive benefit associated with

having local technical capacity. Moving from no local research activity to the mean R&D share

in this sample of 0.38 increases the probability that a new NCE is ever launched in a country by

an estimated 9.7 percentage points or 32%. Further, in contrast to our finding for rapid launch

that strong patent protection partially and positively offsets the harmful effect of local capacity,




                                                  33
when it comes to the question of whether new drugs are ever marketed, we find that strong patent

protection negatively offsets the otherwise beneficial effect of having local capacity. Further, the

offset is no longer partial. The joint marginal effect of R&D capacity when combined with

extensive IP protection is a statistically insignificant 0.07 (p-value 0.256). Consistent with this

contrast in the direction of effects across time lags, we also find here that offering a patent term

extension has a weakly significant negative effect on whether new drugs are ever launched,

whereas for rapid launch this policy was found to be either insignificant or positive.

       One surprise in Table 8 is that price regulation, which has a large and consistently

negative effect on the likelihood that a drug is launched quickly, is estimated to have a weakly

positive effect on whether drugs are ever launched. This is difficult to explain either as a direct

effect, or as the result of policy endogeneity, both of which would give a negative effect. Nor is

it consistent with the idea that regulators lower price demands if firms hold out long enough to

entice them into the market, since such behavior would, at best, make regulation neutral. At the

very least, it does not appear that price regulation is severely limiting the ultimate entry of new

products.

       Taken together, the findings in column two of Table 8 suggest that innovator firms are an

important source of drug entry (hence product patents matter for eventual launch) and that these

firms are willing to enter poorer markets at low prices with only a few years of effective patent

protection – after some delay. They also suggest that local firms can be a significant source of

market entry, and that their ability to actively enter could be slowed by stronger patent rights.

Given this, unless speed of access is paramount, a lower-income country would not seem to

benefit in terms of greater product availability from offering a long term of product patent

protection or from limiting its price control regulation.




                                                 34
         Finally, Table 9 presents hazard model estimates. There are in an accelerated failure

time form which means that a negative coefficient is associated with shorter launch lags and thus

corresponds to a positive coefficient in the probit estimations. The hazard model summarizes the

effect of policy on launch behavior at all monthly lags after global launch and thus incorporates -

within a specific structure – both the “within two year” and “within ten year” launch

probabilities. Thus it is not surprising to see in the first column of Table 9 that both increasing

the term on process patents and making short protection available on new products speed drug

launch.35 We find that while extensive price regulation slows launch, moderate price regulation,

on average, has no effect in this group of low- and middle-income countries.

High-income Countries

        There is less variation in the patent regimes observed in the high-income countries. For

example, all of the countries in this group offered at least protection on pharmaceutical processes

over most of the period. Thus, for this group of countries the set of indicator variables is limited

to three: a dummy for whether a country protects pharmaceutical products, another for the

incremental effect of having a long statutory term on either form of protection, and finally a

dummy variable indicating whether a patent term extension is available.           For this group of

countries, “Short” refers to a statutory term of less than 20 years, the distinction preferred by the

data.

        The estimations in Table 10 for the high-income countries and the full set of NCE follow

the same format as Table 6. For this set of countries the estimates on the policy variables are less




35
  From Table 8 it is clear that a model allowing for changes in the relative effect of policy
variables at different lags would be desirable. A Cox proportionate hazard specification
accommodates this easily but the underlying proportionality assumption is resoundingly rejected
by the data.

                                                 35
robust to the choice of fixed or random country effects (compare models one and two).36 It may

be that the policy variables are picking up some the effect of other country level characteristics in

the random effects specification. However, it is also the case that among the high-income

countries there is more limited within-country variation in the policy variables (see Table A4).

As a result the countries contributing to the estimation of policy effects across the two

specifications are quite different and this makes some divergence in the point estimates less

surprising. We also test formally, as above, the hypothesis that the extensive price control

variable is exogeneous and again cannot reject the null ( 2(1) = 0.84, p-value = 0.36). First-stage

estimates are in Appendix Table A5.

       The results in Table 10 consistently indicate that adding the protection of new products to

an otherwise “Short” patent regime gives the greatest incremental boost to rapid market entry.

For the specification with country fixed effects, shown in column one, we also find a significant

additional benefit from moving to a longer patent term. However, in no specification is there any

evidence that having a drug patent extension affects the market entry of new pharmaceuticals

within high-income countries.

       All price regulation – whether moderate or extensive – tends to reduce the probability

that a drug is launched in a high-income country within two years. However, as for the poorer

countries, the effect of moderate price regulation depends on the income level of a country. The

estimates here indicate that moderate price control no longer lowers the probability of rapid entry

once a country reaches a GDP per capita of about $12,088, slightly below the median level for

the group.




36
  However, the standard errors are sizable so the estimates are statistically indistinguishable at
conventional levels.

                                                 36
        The first column of Table 11 contains estimation results for the “high quality” subset of

NCE using the country fixed-effects specification. The overall probability of a high quality drug

being launched within 2 years is over fifty percent higher than for an average NCE (33% vs.

20%).    As for all drugs, short-term product patent protection encourages the launch of

blockbusters. In contrast to all drugs, however, there is no incremental benefit from having the

longest term of protection. Having any price control lowers the likelihood of entry and extensive

price control is particularly problematic. The latter lowers the probability of rapid launch by 10.7

percentage points, or 33%.

        The last results in Table 11 are within 2 and within 10 year estimates for the early (1982-

92) period NCE. Because of the limited within-country variation in the policy variables during

this shorter period, we use the random effects specification corresponding to column three in

Table 10.

        A high-income country increases the probability that new drugs are available to its

consumers quickly by offering at least short-term protection to pharmaceutical products, as

before, but for this early period there is an even larger incremental effect from moving to a

longer term of protection (column 2). Moderate price control is weakly significant and extensive

price control significantly diminishes the likelihood of rapid entry.

        When considering whether drugs are “ever” launched in the high-income countries both

patents and price regulation continue to have a role. In this longer time span, however, it is only

long-term patent protection that is found to make a positive contribution. Recall from Figure 1

that later market entry implies a shorter effective patent life. Thus, the statutory term may need

to be long if it is to create a period of exclusivity sufficient to allow a firm to cover the higher

costs of entry into high-income countries. It is somewhat surprising, then, to continue to find




                                                 37
that offering a patent term extension has no discernible effect on eventual market entry nor on its

timing.     Finally, and again as we found for the poorer countries, extensive price control is far

less damaging to the likelihood that a drug is ever launched than it is to the likelihood that it is

launched quickly.

          Maintaining an essential drugs list was found to have a significant dampening effect on

market entry in the poorer countries in most specifications. We see the same negative effect

within the high-income countries when considering all drugs, and of a similar relative

magnitude. Having a national formulary is also associated with less rapid entry. Finally there is

some evidence that the establishment of the European Medicines Evaluation Agency in 1995 as a

centralized mechanism for obtaining marketing approvals within Europe has succeeded in

speeding access to new drugs for consumers there. In specifications where the estimated effect

of the EMEA is significant it is also large – increasing the probability of launch within 2 years by

25-30%.

Income Distribution and Demographic Characteristics

          As one would expect, having a larger population and higher level of GDP per capita

increases the likelihood that a country will have more drugs on the market and that they will

become available quickly. In the estimations that include the Gini coefficient as a measure of

income inequality, we find that the distribution of income is always also a significant

determinant of market entry. The Gini coefficient, and its interaction with the log of GDP per

capita, are statistically significant and show a pronounced pattern across the two income groups.

As noted in the introduction, when an innovator firm considers launching products in one of the

poorer countries, it may follow a strategy of setting low prices with small profit margins in an

attempt to achieve extensive market penetration. Alternatively it may opt for higher prices with




                                                 38
the expectation of reaching just the top of the market. We find that a lower-income country is

more likely to get new drugs if it is unequal – ensuring that it has a wealthy “elite”. On the other

hand, a high-income country is better off with a more equal distribution as this generates the

largest “middle class”.   Equality becomes less important as average income increases. These

findings are consistent with the idea that there is a threshold level of income that makes an

individual a potential consumer of new drugs. For countries with an average income below that

threshold, inequality increases market size. For those above, inequality decreases market size –

unless average income is so high that even when it is unequally distributed most consumers are

above the threshold.

       The age composition of a country’s population also appears as a very significant

determinant of the speed and extent of drug launch. In the low- and middle-income countries,

drugs are more likely to reach the market in countries with many children and those with a high

proportion of elderly. In the high- income countries, having a larger proportion of children

seems to be most important.



VII. Policy Simulations

       This section gives a sense of the empirical implications of the econometric results

discussed above. Table 12 gives the predicted probability that a drug arrives in a given country

market within two years of its global launch. The predictions are for 1995 and the anti-infectives

therapy class. They are based on the estimation of country fixed-effects models, using the high

quality NCE for the high-income countries (Table 10, column 1) and the blockbuster sample for

the low- and middle-income countries (unreported). The columns on the left hand side indicate a

range of different policy choices, while those on the right show how the predicted probabilities




                                                39
vary with these choices. The last row gives selected estimated standard errors – to give a sense

of the precision of the predictions. Because the predictions are highly correlated across rows

within a given column, and across columns within income groups, these should not be used to

formally assess the statistical significance of differences. Bold typeface indicates changes that

are significant.

        The first three rows change the patent regime, while the last three rows change price

regulation. It is apparent from this table that a country’s choices regarding intellectual property

and price regulation can have a substantial impact on the likelihood that new pharmaceuticals are

available to consumers quickly. In both lower- and high-income countries there appears to be

scope to alter the probabilities by some 20-30% or more by virtue of these policy decisions.

        Figure 5 presents this finding in another form using the hazard model estimates in Table

9. It gives predicted cumulative hazard rates for India. Each line represents the time path of

market launches assuming different combinations of intellectual property and price control (PC)

policies. As in Table 12, the predictions are for 1995 and the anti-infectives therapy class. The

pair of policies indicated in the top row change the patent term, while the pair in the second row

change the degree of price regulation. These two changes generate similar-sized shifts in the

cumulative hazard curves.

        The vertical axis indicates the predicted share of drugs launched in the given market by

the lag indicated on the horizontal axis. Considering the upper dashed and dotted lines that

overlay each other, for example, we see that if India were to have some price control and also

offer long ( 15 years) patent protection, a predicted 20% of all NCE would be marketed there

within about five years of their global launch dates.    Suppose that India then kept the longer

term of patent protection but moved to more extensive price regulation (the lower solid line).




                                                40
One can ask the question: how many fewer drugs would arrive within five years with the new

policy? Looking vertically at five years, the answer is that just 15% of all drugs – rather than the

previous 20% - would be launched within this period as a result of the change in policy. One can

also ask the question: with the new policy, how much longer would it take for 20% of all drugs

to be launched? Looking horizontally, the answer is that it would take some six and a half years

– rather than five – as a result of the change in policy. Irrespective of policy regime, ten years

after global launch no more than 40% of all drugs are predicted to be on the Indian market.



VII.    Concluding Comments

       Much attention has been paid to how price controls and the patent system determine

pharmaceutical prices. We find that countries’ choices about how to regulate pharmaceutical

prices and protect innovation also have a significant influence on whether drugs become

available to their consumers and how quickly.         Short-term patent protection that includes

products, or long protection only of manufacturing processes, are both patent regimes that tend to

encourage more or faster launches in the developing world. Increasing the strength of a patent

system to include long-term protection on pharmaceutical products appears to spur market entry

– among the high-income countries. For the low- and middle-income countries that are currently

being encouraged to move to stronger protection through trade policy, the evidence that

extending protection enhances access to new pharmaceuticals is mixed. There is some evidence

that high levels of protection might encourage more frequent entry of innovative products in the

short term, particularly in countries where multinationals might otherwise hesitate because local

technical capacity might create competitive pressures. On the other hand, in the longer term that

same domestic capacity could be an alternative source of entry, and we find that a country




                                                41
offering extensive patent protection may lose the benefits of that activity and have fewer new

products in the market overall as a result.

       The fact that patent laws in the low- and middle-income countries are shown to matter at

all is also of significance. Intellectual property holders frequently assert that the poor quality of

enforcement in developing countries undermines the value of their patent rights. With the patent

variables significant in various estimations, and entering with different and plausible patterns

across subsets of the NCE, it is evident that patent laws in these countries are at least broadly

meaningful.

       Like intellectual property, the standard argument regarding price regulation – that it will

dissuade market entry – appears to have more relevance among the high-income countries. For

these countries, extensive price control is always found to lower the probability of market entry,

and moderate regulation appears to do likewise, even in the long run. Not so for the poorer

countries. There we find that while price regulation makes it less likely that new drugs will be

available quickly, it does not appear to prevent new products from being launched eventually.

       As they stand these results might temper some of the arguments made in the course of

future international negotiations. Interpreting what they imply for public health and social

welfare will require further analysis. If, for example, ten percent of new drugs are no longer

marketed in a country due to a policy change, this may be damaging or not depending on what

was in that ten percent. Pharmaceuticals often have acceptable substitutes, and some “lifestyle”

drugs may not be of great medicinal importance. Future research will explore the therapeutic

significance of the pharmaceuticals that are launched slowly, or not at all, and the extent to

which this failure is associated with there being substitutes available in the market.




                                                 42
       A very poor country may also be quite willing to accept some delay in the arrival of

innovative new pharmaceuticals as a result of regulation if it means that the drugs are priced

within reach of more of the population when they finally reach the market. With cross-country

data on product prices, this tradeoff could be assessed. Finally, giving innovators the strongest

patent protection might be viewed as worthwhile irrespective of its effect on entry, on the

grounds that it might boost R&D and the discovery of new NCE.




                                               43
                              Submission        M arketing A pproval         Expiration
                              Of D ossier       and Entry in the U.S.        O f Protection

U.S.
Patent      0   1                     7.5   9                                     20.5


Patent in       0                                9 10                   14
O ther
Country
                                            Approval
                                                         and Entry
                                                                                         Y ears
                                            In Other



                         Launch Lag
                                            0        2                  6    10



                                           Figure 1
                    Tim elines of Patenting and W orldw ide D rug Launch




                                                44
              Table 1
    NCE Global Launches per Year

               Annual           Total
   Year      Blockbusters     New Drugs

   1982            4              36
   1983            4              29
   1984            2              34

   1985            8              58
   1986           10              45
   1987            9              55
   1988            7              43
   1989            6              38

   1990           12              42
   1991            5              39
   1992            4              43
   1993            6              37
   1994            9              41

   1995           13              39
   1996           13              42
   1997           13              43
   1998           13              39
   1999            6              44

   2000            5              35

Note: Blockbuster drugs are NCE among
the top 200 drugs in terms of world revenue
in 1998 or 2003 or among the top 100 in
U.S. revenue in 1993 or 1995.




                                        45
                               Table 2
       Location of First Launch: Distribution Across Countries
                                                       Pct. Of First
                           No. First       Years        Launches
       Country             Launches       of Data    (Adjusted Share)
High Income Countries
AUSTRALIA                        3           21              0.28
AUSTRIA                         12           21              1.28
BELGIUM                          6           21              0.54
CANADA                          10           21              1.02
DENMARK                         18           21              1.82
FINLAND                         12           21              1.19
FRANCE                          44           21              4.38
GERMANY                         74           21              7.36
GREECE                           1           21              0.10
HONG KONG                        1           21              0.09
IRELAND                         15           21              1.53
ISRAEL                           1           21              0.10
ITALY                           61           21              6.08
JAPAN                          231           21             23.99
NETHERLANDS                     26           21              2.89
NEW ZEALAND                      7           19              0.80
NORWAY                           6           10              1.33
PORTUGAL                         3           21              0.30
PUERTO RICO                     16            9              3.68
SINGAPORE                        6           19              0.70
SPAIN                           23           21              2.38
SWEDEN                          26           21              2.66
SWITZERLAND                     36           21              3.67
UK                              72           21              7.30
USA                            163           21             16.95
Upper Income Countries
ARGENTINA                       7            21              0.72
BOLIVIA                         1            11              0.24
BRAZIL                          3            21              0.26
CHILE                           1            21              0.10
CZECH REPUBLIC                  1            10              0.20
MALAYSIA                        5            21              0.53
MEXICO                         16            21              1.66
POLAND                          1            11              0.20
SOUTH AFRICA                    6            21              0.65
SOUTH KOREA                     1            15              0.11
TURKEY                          1            21              0.09
VENEZUELA                       6            21              0.58
Lower Income Countries
COLOMBIA                        1            21              0.07
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC              1            17              0.10
PERU                            1            21              0.12
PHILIPPINES                     4            21              0.45
RUSSIA                          2             8              0.56
THAILAND                        2            21              0.19
Low Income Countries
BANGLADESH                      1            10              0.19
FRENCH WEST AFRICA              2            11              0.40
PAKISTAN                        1            21              0.08
Note: Total number of drugs launched = 836; launched 1995-2001 = 337.


                                       46
                                                                             Figure 2
                                                   Geographic Spread of New Drugs: Number of Countries Reached


                    20


                    18


                    16


                    14
  Percent of NCEs




                    12


                    10


                    8


                    6


                    4


                    2


                    0
                     1

                         3

                             5

                                 7

                                     9
                                         11

                                              13

                                                   15

                                                        17

                                                             19

                                                                  21

                                                                       23

                                                                            25

                                                                                 27

                                                                                      29

                                                                                           31

                                                                                                33

                                                                                                     36

                                                                                                          38

                                                                                                               40

                                                                                                                    42

                                                                                                                         45

                                                                                                                              47

                                                                                                                                   49

                                                                                                                                        51

                                                                                                                                             53

                                                                                                                                                  55

                                                                                                                                                       57

                                                                                                                                                            59

                                                                                                                                                                 61

                                                                                                                                                                      63

                                                                                                                                                                           65

                                                                                                                                                                                67
                                                                                       Number of Countries

Note: This figure includes the 300 drugs first launched 1/82 through 12/88.




                                                                                                 47
                                            Table 3
                     Launch Lags for NCEs that were First Marketed 1986-1992
                                           (Months)

                      Percentiles                                            Percentiles
Country       # Drugs 10th Median       90th    Country              # Drugs 10th Median 90th
High Income                                     Upper Income
AUSTRALIA       28       15      46.5    111    ARGENTINA               49      8    36    110
AUSTRIA         46       12      28.5     73    BRAZIL                  43     22    52    131
BELGIUM         40       6.5      23     90.5   CHILE                   39     13    41    104
CANADA          34        4      32.5     69    LEBANON                 26     46   106    157
DENMARK         40       0.5      18      68    MALAYSIA                26     26   50.5   138
FINLAND         38       11      27.5     85    MEXICO                  44      8    29    102
FRANCE          41        0       19      62    POLAND                   6     34   43.5    98
GERMANY         54        0      18.5     45    SAUDI ARABIA            29     32    51    107
GREECE          44       13       37     120    SOUTH AFRICA            37     10    30    100
HONG KONG       37       13       27      88    SOUTH KOREA             53     24    49    110
IRELAND         38        0      22.5     88    TAIWAN                   5     55    83    116
ISRAEL          29       28       52     102    TURKEY                  40     23   55.5    95
ITALY           57        0       24      74    VENEZUELA               38     17   35.5   115
JAPAN           77        0       0       85    Lower Income
NETHERLANDS     47        4       22      49    CENTRAL AMERICA         43     18    46    136
NEW ZEALAND     36        5      26.5     79    COLOMBIA                42     17   44.5   104
                                                DOMINICAN
PORTUGAL        33        20     49       88    REPUBLIC                35     25    49    111
SINGAPORE       33        18     45      109    ECUADOR                 37     20    55    118
SPAIN           37        18     30      111    EGYPT                   30     37   73.5   133
SWEDEN          46         0     17       86    LATVIA                  20     63   99.5   142
SWITZERLAND     46         2     14      66     MOROCCO                 29     14    45    140
UK              50         0     16       51    PERU                    36     24   57.5   159
USA             46         0     20      69     PHILIPPINES             49     6     35     98
                                                THAILAND                48     16   41.5   99




                                                               48
                           Table 3: Continued

                                                Percentiles
Country                           # Drugs       10th   Median        90th
Low Income
FRENCH WEST AFRICA                    10         19         47         131
INDIA                                 14         46         58          84
INDONESIA                             42         22         43          97
PAKISTAN                              38         23         57         118

(Unweighted) Means
High Income                          42.5       7.4        26.8       81.2
Upper Middle Income                  33.5       24.5       50.9       114.1
Lower Middle Income                  36.9       24.0       54.7       123.9
Low Income                           26.0       27.5       51.3       107.5

Notes: The sample includes the 122 NCE from the therapy classes A2B,
C, J for which Indian data are available and, for a given country, only those
NCE first marketed after the country entered the database.




                                                                            49
                                       Table 4: The Arrival of New Drugs

Percent Released:                               Percentage Marketed - Years After Global Launch:
       Upper Block-
All    Bound Buster                               1        2      3       4       5       6       7       8       9
25%      28%       67%          AUSTRALIA       5%     18%      39%    57%     68%     74%     83%     88%     98%
 38       43        81             AUSTRIA       13      30       51     66      74      83      87      94      98
 31       36        67            BELGIUM        19      40       61     72      79      85      91      94      97
 30       35        81             CANADA        19      34       56     65      78      89      91      96      97
 36       39        81           DENMARK         26      48       65     75      84      89      93      95      97
 33       37        78             FINLAND       11      33       54     67      74      80      87      93      96
 37       43        71              FRANCE       35      49       62     70      79      85      91      94     100
 44       57        86           GERMANY         32      60       75     83      87      91      94      98      94
 34       36        84               GREECE       6      23       41     56      69      78      85      91      97
 29       33        73         HONG KONG         13      37       62     70      76      79      86      93      97
 32       36        75             IRELAND       28      50       60     69      77      83      88      94      98
 26       30        75                ISRAEL      3      17       27     52      69      74      83      93      98
 49       54        82                 ITALY     33      46       60     71      78      86      92      95      97
 53       59        68                 JAPAN     64      68       73     78      83      88      91      93      98
 37       42        79       NETHERLANDS         31      53       68     79      84      90      92      94      94
 28       30                 NEW ZEALAND         20      41       53     65      72      81      86      91      97
 29       34        69           PORTUGAL        11      23       40     47      65      76      84      91      98
 26       26        56          SINGAPORE        14      35       53     66      76      82      89      95      96
 36       40        80                  SPAIN    12      28       48     61      70      78      85      92      98
 34       37        78              SWEDEN       30      48       57     70      76      83      88      94      96
 36       48        80       SWITZERLAND         35      56       70     79      83      87      90      92      98
 40       45        84                     UK    44      60       72     79      86      91      95      97      98
 38       46        90                    USA    34      48       62     71      78      89      93      94      93

 42       47        84         ARGENTINA         13        27    44      60      70      76      80      84      92
 32       36        76             BRAZIL         7        20    34      50      62      70      76      85      95
 30       35        77              CHILE         7        25    43      53      65      74      83      91      99
 22       24        55          MALAYSIA         13        33    56      76      83      88      91      94      98
 35       38        79             MEXICO        14        33    47      60      73      81      87      93      95
 23       26        70       SAUDI ARABIA         1         5    16      33      50      65      75      89      98
 29       31        74       SOUTH AFRICA        15        35    53      63      69      77      84      91      96
 31       34        81            TURKEY          1        10    24      35      52      64      76      88      94
 26       28        77         VENEZUELA          4        21    38      50      64      75      84      90      95

                                  CENTRAL
 31       35        82            AMERICA         3        19    35      46      63      72      81      88      97
 31       35        82           COLOMBIA         6        15    30      47      59      67      79      85      91
 27       30        74            ECUADOR         3        10    25      35      53      67      78      82      90
 19       21        62               EGYPT        0         2     7      19      29      48      63      74      94
 25       28        67                PERU        3        11    26      37      51      62      73      80      93
 36       44        81          PHILIPPINES       8        25    44      58      67      74      83      86      93
 34       35        80           THAILAND         5        23    41      55      63      71      80      88      96

 26       28        75           INDONESIA        0         9    30      45      57      68      80      88      92
 26       28        66            PAKISTAN        2        10    18      34      49      61      69      78    95%

Notes: “Percent Released” is the share of global NCE launched in the row country within 10 years. “Upper Bound”
assumes all observations with missing ingredient information are NCEs and grosses up the total launches accordingly.



                                                      50
                               Figure 3: Timing of Launch for NCEs Marketed within 10 Years

                      1

                     0.9

                     0.8

                     0.7
Percentage of NCEs




                     0.6                                                                      High Income
                                                                                              Upper Income
                     0.5
                                                                                              Lower Income
                     0.4                                                                      Low Income

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                      0
                           1        2     3      4        5         6   7   8     9
                                                     Lag in Years




                                                              51
                                            Table 5
                      Percent of NCE Launches 1982-92 done by “First” Firm
                                    By Type of Patent Regime


Group              Short Process      Short Product      Long Process      Long Product      All
(No. launches)     or None            and Process        Only              and Process       Countries
All Drugs           54.8%              67.5%              68.0%             71.7%             61.6%
                    (5,430)            (332)              (842)             (2,963)           (9,567)
Blockbusters        65.6               75.1               72.2              76.9              72.3
                    (1,154)            (189)              (461)             (1,577)           (3,381)

Notes: The “first” firm is defined as the one making the first launch in a high-income country. The
number of observations in each cell is in parentheses. A “short” patent regime is one with a statutory
term of less than 15 years.




                                                    52
                                           Figure 4: Timing of Launch
                                   Among NCEs Marketed by "First" or Other Firm


                      1

                     0.9

                     0.8

                     0.7
Percentage of NCEs




                     0.6                                                          High Income/First
                                                                                  High Income/Other
                     0.5
                                                                                  Low Income/First
                     0.4                                                          Low Income/Other

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                      0
                           1   2    3      4        5         6   7   8    9
                                               Lag in Years




                                                        53
                          Table 6: Low- and Middle-Income Countries
                            Probability of Launch within Two Years

                               With Country Fixed Effects         Without Country FE
                               Marginal                         Marginal
Policy Variables                Effect    Estimated S.E.         Effect    Estimated S.E.
Short process patent
 (< 15 years)                 -0.010         0.011             -0.011           0.010
  Add long process
   (only) patents              0.034         0.015              0.033           0.016
  Add short product
   patents (< 15 years)        0.010         0.015              0.021           0.014
    Add long process &
     product patents           0.006         0.012              0.008           0.009

Some price control            -0.005         0.012              0.014           0.011
Extensive price control       -0.028         0.010             -0.029           0.013

Essential Drug List           -0.017         0.007             -0.017*          0.009*

Other Variables
Health expenditure share
   Of GDP 1995/97                                               0.272           0.246
Private share of all
   Health expenditure                                           0.041*          0.022*
LnPopulation                  -0.257         0.120              0.024           0.005
LnGDPcapita                   -0.063         0.020              0.109           0.028
Gini Coefficient                                                0.016           0.006
Gini*LnGDPcapita                                               -0.002           0.0007
Pct 65 yrs +                   0.877         1.746              0.567           0.265
Pct 15-64 yrs                  0.219         0.246             -0.279           0.119
Population Growth                                              -0.401           0.430
GDP Growth                                                      0.022           0.056
Radios per capita 1990                                         -0.004           0.003
Growth Radios 90-95                                            -0.004           0.005
Doctors/1000 in 1990                                            0.011           0.005
Growth Doctors 90-95                                           -0.0007          0.002
 No. Obs./ Observed P                  19901/0.089                       17917/0.091
        Pseudo R2                         0.155                             0.132

Notes: All specifications control for year of first launch and therapy class. Huber-White
robust estimated standard errors allow for heteroscedasticity; and intra-country correlation in
the disturbances in specifications without country fixed effects. Bold typeface and * indicate
coefficients significant at α = 0.05 and 0.10, respectively. Marginal effects estimated at
variables means (all data) and for a discrete change in the case of dummy variables. As a
result of missing inequality information, Lebanon, Puerto Rico, Saudi Arabia and Taiwan are
dropped in estimations without country FE.




                                                     54
                                                  Table 7: Low- and Middle-Income Countries
                                                    Probability of Launch within Two Years

                                                       All Drugs                             LDC Concentrated               “Blockbusters”
                                 Marginal       Estimated    Marginal        Estimated      Marginal Estimated           Marginal    Estimated
Policy Variables                  Effect           S.E.        Effect           S.E.         Effect     S.E.              Effect        S.E.
Short process patent
 (< 15 years)                   -0.013          0.016         -0.003         0.011           0.004         0.019         -0.031          0.034
  Add long process
   (only) patents                0.021          0.012          0.021*        0.013*          0.041         0.024         0.044           0.039
  Add short product
   patents (< 15 years)         -0.001          0.013          0.003         0.015           0.002         0.021         0.048           0.044
  Add short * strong                                           0.053*        0.030*
    Add long process &
     product patents            -0.012          0.019          0.018         0.014           0.024*        0.014*        0.034           0.036
    Add long p & p
     * strong                                                 -0.045         0.031
Drug patent extension           -0.010          0.009          0.011         0.011           0.057         0.017         0.001           0.030
R&D share                       -0.279          0.100
long p & p * R&D share           0.093          0.046

Some price control              -0.466          0.232         -0.172         0.092           -0.265        0.121         -0.587          0.164
Extensive price control         -0.027          0.007         -0.034         0.010           -0.047        0.018         -0.123          0.035
Some price control
   * lnGDPcapita                 0.050          0.020          0.023         0.011           0.033         0.013         0.088           0.028
Tariff rate                     -0.003          0.001

Essential Drug List             -0.037           0.010         -0.029            0.009          -0.038        0.015       -0.093          0.029
Standard Treatment
   Guidelines                    0.017           0.014           0.035           0.011           0.074        0.019        0.117          0.037
National Formulary               0.027           0.013           0.015           0.008           0.023        0.009        0.061          0.029
   No. Obs./ Observed P                12828/0.097                     17917/0.091                    4499/0.110                 4046/0.238
          Pseudo R2                       0.155                            0.136                         0.181                      0.216
Notes: See notes to Table 1 and 6. All specifications control for year of first launch and therapy class. “LDC Concentrated” includes only NCE
from the therapy classes A (Alimentary tract and metabolism) and J (Systemic anti-infectives).



                                                                        55
                                        Table 8
                         Low- and Middle-Income Countries
                    Probability of Launch within Two and Ten Years

                                      Within 2                        Within 10
                              Marginal       Estimated         Marginal      Estimated
Policy Variables               Effect           S.E.            Effect          S.E.
Short process patent
(< 15 years)                 -0.003            0.020           -0.012           0.035
  Add long process
   (only) patents            0.086             0.020           0.035*           0.019*
  Add short product
   patents (< 15 years)      0.018*            0.010*          0.075            0.022
    Add long process &
     product patents          0.052            0.033            0.035           0.041
Drug patent extension        -0.009            0.014           -0.051*          0.026*
R&D share                     0.055            0.073            0.255           0.100
long p & p * R&D share       -0.095            0.075           -0.185*          0.105*

Some price control           -0.002            0.129           0.402*           0.220*
Extensive price control      -0.018*           0.011*          0.040*           0.024*
Some price control *
lnGDPcapita                  -0.0002           0.016           -0.038           0.026

Essential Drug List          -0.024            0.023           -0.075*          0.042*
Standard Treatment
   Guidelines                0.025              0.022          0.089            0.041
National Formulary           0.045              0.013          0.032            0.029
  No. Obs./Observed P                  7099/0.057                        6963/0.303
        Pseudo R2                        0.089                             0.051

Notes: See notes to Tables 6 and 7. These estimations include only NCE first launched in
1992 or earlier.




                                                   56
                                   Table 9: Hazard Estimations
                                Low- and Middle-Income Countries
                                               All Data                    “Blockbusters”
                                                      Estimated                     Estimated
Policy Variables                      Coefficient        S.E.         Coefficient      S.E.

Short process patent (< 15 years)     0.066           0.103           0.144          0.112
 Add long process
  (only) patents                     -0.226           0.103           -0.208*        0.111*
 Add short product
  patents (< 15 years)               -0.243           0.121           -0.125         0.127
   Add long process &
    product patents                   0.053           0.095            0.022         0.101
Drug patent extension                -0.003           0.094           -0.052         0.107

Some price control                    0.133           0.103           0.024          0.115
Extensive price control               0.343           0.097           0.345          0.108

Essential Drug List                   0.111*          0.061*          0.065          0.063
Standard Treatment Guidelines         0.020           0.070           0.100          0.073

Control Variables
LnPopulation                          3.466           1.023            3.182          1.130
LnConsumption                         0.526           0.178            0.154         0.188
Pct 65 yrs +                         22.823*          13.239*         24.838         14.982
Pct 15-64 yrs                        -6.303            1.996          -5.719         2.210

                                      0.556           0.012           0.481          0.012
                                      3.275           0.160           0.214          0.047

         No. Observations.                        21116                          4708
           Log likelihood                       -17966.4                        -5397.2
Notes: See notes to Tables 1 and 6. Both specifications use a log-logistic hazard function with a
gamma distributed multiplicative factor to capture unobserved heterogeneity. They include country,
year, and therapy class fixed effects.




                                               57
                                                 Table 10
                                         High-Income Countries
                                 Probability of Launch within Two Years
                          With Country Fixed Effects           Without Country Fixed Effects
                             Marginal    Estimated     Marginal    Estimated Marginal Estimated
Policy Variables               Effect       S.E.        Effect        S.E.      Effect       S.E.
Short product patents
 (< 20 years)                 0.091       0.013        0.050       0.020       0.057     0.020
  Add long process            0.031       0.013        0.064       0.039       0.059     0.045
  and/or product patents
Drug patent extension                                                          0.006     0.021

Some price control            -0.038      0.014        -0.053      0.024      -0.667     0.243
Extensive price control       -0.058      0.020        -0.127      0.025      -0.124     0.026
Some price control
   * lnGDPcapita                                                               0.071*    0.036*

Essential Drug List           -0.025      0.019        -0.068      0.017      -0.084     0.033
Standard Treatment
   Guidelines                                                                  0.029     0.086
National Formulary                                                            -0.039     0.026
EMEA                          0.034       0.017        0.026       0.042       0.041     0.043

Other Variables
Health expenditure share
   Of GDP 1995/97                                     -2.602        1.012     -2.393     1.038
Private share of all
   health expenditure                                  0.205        0.178       0.184      0.179
LnPopulation               0.436        0.129          0.041        0.006       0.043      0.006
LnGDPcapita               -0.154        0.056         -0.673        0.346      -0.766      0.359
Gini Coefficient                                      -0.256        0.111      -0.273      0.116
Gini*LnGDPcapita                                       0.025        0.011       0.027      0.011
Pct 65 yrs +              -3.519        0.470         -0.617        0.572      -0.534      0.628
Pct 15-64 yrs             -0.544        0.382         -1.610        0.435      -2.097      0.477
Population Growth                                     -1.781*       0.987*     -1.811      0.932
GDP Growth                                             0.265        0.364       0.282      0.336
Doctors/1000 in 1990                                  -0.008        0.015      -0.012      0.016
Growth Doctors 90-95                                  -0.052        0.044      -0.047      0.044
 No. Obs./ Observed P           18889/0.205                15383/0.225              15383/0.225
        Pseudo R2                  0.104                      0.090                    0.091
Notes: See notes to Table 6. As a result of missing inequality information,   Kuwait, New Zealand,
Singapore and UAE are dropped from the estimations without country FE.




                                                  58
                                                    Table 11
                                             High-Income Countries
                                             Probability of Launch

                             “High Quality Drugs”                                  All Drugs
                               With Country FE
                                    Within 2                     Within 2                      Within 10
                             Marginal     Estimated        Marginal   Estimated          Marginal    Estimated
Policy Variables              Effect         S.E.           Effect        S.E.            Effect         S.E.
Short product
 patents (< 20 years)        0.188           0.025          0.042         0.013          -0.011          0.014
 Add long process
  and/or product patents     0.035           0.028          0.087         0.022          0.053           0.021
Drug patent extension                                      -0.013         0.020          0.025           0.021

Some price control           -0.056          0.029         -0.379*        0.172*         -0.638          0.128
Extensive price control      -0.107          0.040         -0.095         0.017          -0.055*         0.029*
Some price control
  * lnGDPcapita                                             0.041*        0.023*         0.077           0.024

Essential Drug List          0.005           0.039         -0.057         0.023          -0.089          0.019
National Formulary                                         -0.022         0.018          -0.010          0.028
EMEA                         0.088           0.031
 No. Obs./ Observed P                 7951/0.335                  9258/0.166                      9258/0.371
       Pseudo R2                        0.113                       0.058                           0.030

Notes: See notes to Tables 6. “High Quality” is the subset of NCE that are marketed in either the U.S. or the
U.K. within 2 years of first global launch. The U.S. and U.K. are not included in these estimations. Results for
“All Drugs” are based only on NCE first launched in 1992 or earlier and do not include country fixed effects.




                                                                59
                                                                Table 12
                                           Predicted Probability of Launch within Two Years
                                                “Blockbuster” or “High Quality” Drugs

                        Policy Scenario                                                              Country
                                                     Extensive
  Product          “Long”           Any Price          Price           Brazil         Egypt         Thailand         France         Canada
   Patent        Patent Term         Control          Control
    No               No               Yes               No              55.7            16.6           25.8            27.2           34.3
    No               Yes              Yes               No              66.3            24.5           35.5
    Yes              Yes              Yes               No              71.6            29.5           41.2            54.5           64.2
    Yes              Yes               No               No              73.0            30.9           42.9            60.7           68.3
    Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes             53.0            15.1           23.8            42.2           50.3
                                                                                                                        \
                    S.E. on final prediction                            11.3            8.4             8.5            6.4             5.0

Note: All scenarios assume that at least short process patents are available. “High Quality” (high-income group) and “Blockbuster” (low-
and middle-income group) are defined in notes to Tables 1 and 11. The predictions given are based on a model with country fixed effects
and use time-variant country characteristics for 1995, and the anti-infectives therapy class. A “long” statutory term is > 14 years for Brazil,
Egypt, and Thailand; > 19 years for France and Canada. Bold typeface indicates comparisons that likely represent statistically significant
differences.




                                                                         60
                                       The Effect of Policy: India
                        Estimated Share of Drugs Launched within Different Time Spans
         .5        .4
  Cumulative Hazard
.1   .2      .3




                                  2            4              6             8            10
                                         Years following global launch
                              Some PC/Short process              Some PC/Long process
                              Some PC/Long product               Extensive PC/Long product



                                                Figure 5




                                                   61
                      Table A1
             Launch Path for Ciprofloxacin
            Launch Within 2                       Lag
PHILIPPINES               10/1986                  0
GERMANY                    2/1987                  4
UK                         2/1987                  4
CENTRAL AMERICA             9/1987                11
FINLAND                    9/1987                 11
AUSTRIA                    9/1987                 11

USA                        11/1987                13
SWITZERLAND                11/1987                13
CHILE                      12/1987                14
MEXICO                     12/1987                14
AUSTRALIA                   1/1988                15
SWEDEN                      2/1988                16
NEW ZEALAND                 3/1988                17
DENMARK                     4/1988                18
JAPAN                       7/1988                21
INDONESIA                   8/1988                22
SPAIN                       8/1988                22
THAILAND                    8/1988                22
NETHERLANDS                 9/1988                23
PERU                       10/1988                24
            Launch Within 10
HONG KONG                  11/1988                25
GREECE                     12/1988                26
CANADA                      1/1989                27
ISRAEL                      2/1989                28
IRELAND                     4/1989                30
ARGENTINA                   4/1989                30
ITALY                       5/1989                31
COLOMBIA                    5/1989                31
ECUADOR                     6/1989                32
TURKEY                      6/1989                32
PORTUGAL                    8/1989                34
BRAZIL                      9/1989                35
VENEZUELA                   9/1989                35

FRANCE                      2/1990                40
MALAYSIA                    3/1990                41
BELGIUM                     3/1990                41
SOUTH AFRICA                6/1990                44
INDIA                       8/1990                46
PAKISTAN                    3/1991                53
SAUDI ARABIA                12/1991               62
SINGAPORE                   7/1993                81
EGYPT                       10/1994               96




                                             62
                                   Table A2: Variable Definitions

                          Dummy = 1 if country protection only on pharmaceutical processes. When the
Short process patent      statutory term is defined to end “X years after grant,” the granting process is
 (< 15 years)             assumed to take 2 years. As is appropriate for some countries, we take the min or
                          max of “years from grant” and “years from filing” to estimate the statutory term.
Short product
   patents (< N years)    Dummy = 1 if product patents are offered.
Long process              Dummy = 1 if country offers only process patents with a statutory term 15
   (only) patents         years.
Long process &            Dummy = 1 if both product and process innovations covered and term is at least
product patents           15 years.
Long process and/or       Dummy = 1 if either process or both process and product protection is offered and
product patents           the term is at least 20 years.
                          “Strong” is a variable that takes on values between 0 and 1, with a higher value
Strong                    indicating that a country has more limits on how patent rights can be curtailed.
                          Dummy = 1 if firms may apply for an extension of the statutory term of patent
Drug Patent Extension     protection to compensate for time taken in the marketing approvals process.
                          Dummy = 1 if country has a formal price control mechanism but it is not
Some Price Control        extensive.
                          Dummy = 1 if price control covers most of the market and/or is viewed as
Extensive Price Control   particularly restrictive.
Tariff
Essential Drug List       Dummy =1 for national adoption of an EDL
Standard Treatment
Guidelines                Dummy = 1 for national adoption of standard treatment guidelines
National Formulary        Dummy = 1 for having a national formulary
                          Dummy = 1 for years when a country is a member of the European Medicines
EMEA                      Evaluation Agency
Health Expenditure
Share of GDP 1995/97      Mean annual total health expenditure during the years 1995-97 in 1995 U.S. $
Private Share of All      Mean private health expenditure for 1995-97 as a share of mean total health
Health Expenditure        expenditure 1995-97
R&D share                 Country R&D expenditure in all fields as share of GDP
LnPopulation              Log of population
LnGDPcapita               Log of GDP per capita in 1995 U.S. $
                          Estimated Gini coefficient of inequality (of household per-capita income in most
Gini Coefficient          cases) taken as close as possible to early 1990 but ranging from years 1987-99.
Pct 65 yrs +              Percentage of total population aged 65 and older
Pct 15-64 yrs             Percentage of total population aged 15 through 64
Population Growth         Pct. Growth in total population over previous year
GDP Growth                Pct. Growth in GDP over previous year
Radios per capita 1990    Average radios per person in 1990
Growth Radio 90-95        Percent increase in radios per 100 between 1990 and 1995
Doctors/1000 in 1990      Doctors per thousand people as of 1990/2 (1990 if available)
                          Percent increase in doctors per thousand between 1990/2 and 1995/7 (1990 and
Growth Doctors 90-95      1995 if available)



                                                  63
                                   Table A3: Variable Distributions

                                      All Data                         Early Period (1982-93)
                           Low/Middle                             Low/Middle
                              Income         High Income             Income           High Income
Policy Variables          Mean     S.D.     Mean     S.D.        Mean       S.D.     Mean     S.D.
Process patent            0.853    0.345                         0.752     0.422
Short product             0.536    0.492    0.880    0.326       0.334     0.463     0.837    0.370
   patents (< N years)
Long process              0.614     0.487                        0.407     0.492
   (only) patents
Long process & product    0.473     0.499                        0.263     0.441
patents
Long process and/or                           0.779    0.415                        0.693    0.461
product patents
Drug patent extension     0.614     0.487     0.856    0.352     0.407     0.492    0.819    0.386
Some price control        0.833     0.372     0.784    0.412     0.319     0.466    0.347    0.476
Extensive price control   0.397     0.489     0.349    0.477     0.462     0.499    0.379    0.485
Tariff                    9.657     8.114                         7.94      5.38
Essential Drug List       0.415     0.490     0.921    0.270     0.131     0.335    0.884    0.321
Standard Treatment        0.178     0.373     0.972    0.164     0.082     0.272    0.957    0.204
Guidelines
National Formulary        0.173     0.371     0.755    0.430     0.070     0.252    0.623    0.485
EMEA Member                                   0.177    0.382

Control Variables
R&D share                  0.487     0.449                        0.382    0.342
LnPopulation              17.205     1.255   16.398    1.317     17.384    1.158    16.518   1.241
LnGDPcapita                7.661     0.840    9.950    0.407      7.570    0.840     9.875   0.394
LnPop*LnGDPcapita         131.49     13.74   163.31    15.74     131.20    13.22    163.23   15.23
Gini Coefficient          43.677    10.235   32.453    6.188     45.530    9.402    32.710   6.217
Gini*LnGDPcapita          334.43     95.99   322.84    58.41     345.98    95.07    322.79   57.66
Pct 65 yrs +               0.053     0.031    0.128    0.033      0.043    0.017     0.125   0.027
Pct 15-64 yrs              0.600     0.005    0.666    0.027      0.582    0.035     0.665   0.028
Population Growth          0.018     0.010    0.008    0.012      0.021    0.009     0.007   0.010
GDP Growth                 0.015     0.053    0.022    0.026     0.0109   0.0648     0.020   0.025
Radios per capita 1990     0.331     0.203    0.824    0.385      0.301    0.180     0.848   0.386
Growth Radios 90-95        0.136    0.425     0.139    0.934      0.157    0.474     0.039   0.067
Doctors/1000 in 1990       1.343    1.037     2.432    1.063      1.345    1.018     2.474   1.077
Growth Doctors 90-95       0.601     1.842    0.158    0.273      0.469    1.448     0.154   0.279
Health Expenditure        0.054     0.019     0.080    0.019      0.053    0.019     0.081   0.018
Share of GDP 1995/97
Private Share of All      0.531     0.170     0.309    0.146     0.551     0.152    0.311    0.127
Health Expenditure




                                                64
               Table A4: Changes in Price Control and Patent Protection
                 Early Period (1982-92) and Late Period (1993-2000)

               Any Price      Extensive      Process        Product       Statutory
               Control        Control        Patents        Patents       Term
               Early Late     Early Late     Early Late     Early Late    Early Late
ARGENTINA                       0                                          +     +
BANGLADESH       +              +      0
BOLIVIA                                                                          +
BRAZIL                                 0              +              +
BULGARIA                               0
CENTRAL
AMERICA          +      0       +      0         +            +      +
CHILE                                            +            +
COLOMBIA                        0                             +            +     +
CZECH
REPUBLIC                        0
DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC                        0
ECUADOR                                                                    +     +
EGYPT
FRENCH WEST
AFRICA                          0
HUNGARY                         0                                    +           +
INDIA                                  0
INDONESIA        +                               +            +
JORDAN                                                               +           +
LATVIA           0      +       0
LEBANON                                                              +           +
MALAYSIA                                                                   0
MEXICO           +              +      0         +            +
MOROCCO                                                              +
PAKISTAN                                                             +           +
PARAGUAY
PERU                            0                             +            +     +
PHILIPPINES      +                                                               +
POLAND                          0                                    +           +
PUERTO RICO                                                                      +
RUSSIA           0      +       0
SAUDI ARABIA                                     +            +
SLOVAK
REPUBLIC         0      +       0
SOUTH AFRICA            +              +
SOUTH KOREA                            0
TAIWAN           +                                                               +
THAILAND                                                      +            +
TUNISIA
TURKEY                                                +
URUGUAY                                                              +           +
VENEZUELA                                                            +     +     +




                                            65
                  Any Price        Extensive       Process          Product         Statutory
                  Control          Control         Patents          Patents         Term
                  Early Late       Early Late      Early Late       Early Late      Early Late
AUSTRALIA                                                                                       +
AUSTRIA                                                               +
BELGIUM
CANADA               +                                                                 +
DENMARK              +              +, 0                              +
FINLAND                                        +                              +
FRANCE
GERMANY              +        0
GREECE
HONG KONG
IRELAND                                                                                +
ISRAEL
ITALY                                          0
JAPAN                                                                                           +
KUWAIT               +               +
LUXEMBOURG
NETHERLANDS                   +
NEW ZEALAND          +                                                                          +
NORWAY                                         +                      +
PORTUGAL             +                                                        +                 +
SINGAPORE
SLOVENIA             0        +      0         +
SPAIN                                                                 +
SWEDEN                                         0
SWITZERLAND
UK
UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES
USA                                                                                             +

Note: Changes are only indicated for a country during periods for which launch information is also
available. + indicates and increase and 0 a decrease in the variable.




                                                   66
                            Table A5: First-stage Regression Estimations
                             The Probability of Extensive Price Control

                       Low- and Middle-income Countries                 High-income Countries
     Variables           Coefficient     Estimated S.E.              Coefficient    Estimated S.E.
LnPopulation               -0.008             0.023                    -0.059           0.021
LnGDPcapita                 0.024             0.158                    -3.908           0.563
Gini Coefficient          -0.051*            0.031*                    -1.178           0.177
Gini*LnGDPcapita            0.004             0.004                     0.115           0.017
Pct 65 yrs +               -4.789             1.124                     1.805           1.160
Pct 15-64 yrs              -3.549             0.888                    -5.574           1.291
Instruments
Executive_right              0.447                 0.063                0.181*               0.105*
Executive_left               0.376                 0.064                 0.369                0.105
Executive_center             0.391                 0.086                 0.359                0.135
Executive_natl              -0.412                 0.071
Tenure                       0.007                 0.003                 0.008                0.007
Military                     0.201                 0.050
Budget Balance              -0.033                 0.006                 0.009                0.006
    Adjusted R2                         0.324                                      0.292
     No. Obs.                            435                                        385

Notes: The first three instruments are dummies for the economic orientation of the party of the chief
executive. The fourth indicates if it is a nationalist party. Tenure is the number of years that the chief
executive has been in office. Military indicates if he is a military officer. Budget balance is overall,
including grants, as a percent of GDP. All instruments save tenure are lagged two years (as preferred
by data). Bold typeface and * indicate coefficients significant at α = 0.05 and 0.10, respectively.
Sources: Political variables, the World Bank Database of Political Institutions, downloaded from
http://www.worldbank.org/research/bios/pkeefer.htm; Budget, World Development Indicators Online,
2004 (both accessed April 5, 2004).




                                                     67
                                    General References

Bloom, Nicholas and John van Reenen (1998) “Regulating Drug Prices: Where Do We Go from
Here?” Fiscal Studies, Vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 321-42.

Carpenter, Daniel, Brian Feinstein, Colin Moore, Marc Turenne, Ian Yohai and Evan James
Zucker (2004) “Why do Bigger Firms Receive Faster Drug Approvals?” Mimeo. Department of
Government, Havard University.

CDRI (1996). “Patents: Indian,” Drugs and Pharmaceuticals: Industry Highlights. NISSAT. 19 (3
and 6), 35-39 and 43-48.

Chaudhuri, Shubham, Penelopi Goldberg and Panle Jai (2004) “Estimating the Effects of Global
Patent Protection in Pharmaceuticals: A Case Study of Quinolones in India.” Mimeo. Yale
University.

Danzon, Patricia, Wang, Y. Richard and Liang Wang (2005) “The Impact of Price Regulation on
the Launch Delay of New Drugs,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 269-92.

Dranove, David and David Meltzer (1994) “Do important drugs reach the market sooner,” RAND
Journal of Economics, Vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 402-23.

Ellison, Sara Fisher and Catherine Wolfram (2004) “Coordinating on Lower Prices:
Pharmaceutical Pricing under Political Pressure.” Mimeo. Haas School of Business, U.C.
Berkeley.

Erfle, Stephen and Henry McMillan (1990) “Media, Political Pressure, and the Firm: The Case
of Petroleum Pricing in the Late 1970s,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 115-34.

Gabrowski, Henry G. and John Vernon (2000) “Effective Patent Life in Pharmaceuticals,”
International Journal of Technology Management. Vol. 19, nos. ½, pp. 98-120.

Ganslandt, Matthias and Keith E. Maskus (2004) “The Price Impact of Parallel Imports in
Pharmaceuticals: Evidence from the European Union,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 23,
no. 5, pp. 1035-57.

Glazer, Amihai and Henry McMillan (1992) “Pricing by the Firm Under Regulatory Threat,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, no. 3, pp. 1089-99.

Jack, William and Jean O. Lanjouw (2005) “Financing Pharmaceutical Innovation: How Much
Should Poor Countries Contribute?” World Bank Economic Review, forthcoming.

Kanavos, Panos, Joan Costa-i-Font, Sherry Merkur, Marin Gemmill (2004) “The Economic
Impact of Pharmaceutical Parallel Trade in European Member States: A Stakeholder Analysis,”
Special Research Paper, LSE Health and Social Care, the London School of Economics and
Political Science.



                                             68
King, John L. (2003) “Patent Examination Procedures and Patent Quality,” in Wesley M. Cohen
and Steven A. Merrill (eds.) Patents in the Knowledge-based Economy. (Washington D.C.: The
National Academies Press).

Kyle, Margaret (2004a) “Pharmaceutical Price Controls and Entry Strategies,” Mimeo. Fuqua
School of Business, Duke University.

Kyle, Margaret (2004b) “The Role of Firm Characteristics in Pharmaceutical Product Launches,”
Mimeo. Fuqua School of Business, Duke University.

Lanjouw, J. O. (1998) “The Introduction of Product Patents in India: “‘Heartless Exploitation of
the Poor and Suffering’?” NBER Working Paper no. 6366.

Malueg, David and Marius Schwartz (1994) “Parallel imports, demand dispersion, and
international price discrimination,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 37, pp. 167-95.

McCalman, Philip (2004) “International Diffusion and Intellectual Property Rights: An
Empirical Analysis,” Journal of International Economics. (forthcoming). Department of
Economics, U.C. Santa Cruz.

Rivers, Douglas and Quang H. Vuong (1988) “Limited Information Estimators and Exogeneity
Tests for Simultaneous Probit Models,” Journal of Econometrics. Vol. 39, pp. 347-66.

Sell, Susan (2003) Private Power, Public Law: the Globalization of Intellectual Property.
Cambridge Studies in International Relations.

Scherer, F.M. and Jayashree Watal (2002) Post-TRIPS Options for Access to Patented Medicines
in Developing Nations,” Journal of International Economic Law, Vol. 5, pp. 913-939.


                                        Policy References
Patent Law

Patents Throughout the World. Subscription updated looseleaf publication (New York: West
Group).

World Patent Law and Practice: Patent Statutes, Regulations, and Treaties. John P. Sinnott and
William Joseph Cotreau, eds. (New York: Matthew Bender & Co., Inc. 1-800-833-9844.)

Tariffs
European Union (2003) “Working Document on Developing Countries’ Duties and Taxes on
Essential Medicines used in the Treatment of Infectious Diseases,” DG Trade, EU. Ref. 135/03.
Available at: http://europa.eu.int/comm/trade/issues/global/medicine/docs/wtosub_100303.pdf.




                                              69
Pharmaceutical Regulation
Ballance, R., J. Pogany, and H. Forstner. 1992. The World' s Pharmaceutical Industries. An
International Perspective on Innovation, Competition and Policy. United Kingdom: Edward
Elgar Jacobzone.

Brudon, P. and C. Pénicaud. 1996. Le secteur pharmaceutique dans les pays de la zone CFA.
WHO/DAP/95.8. Genèvre: Organisation mondiale de la Santé.

Chalmers, A., ed. 2002. International pharmaceutical registration. Denver, Colo.: Interpharm
Press.

Cohen, J. C. 2000. Public Policies in the Pharmaceutical Sector: A Case Study of Brazil. World
Bank LCSHD Paper Series No. 54. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Dag Hammarskjold Foundation. 1995. Making National Drug Policies a Development Priority:
A Strategy Paper and Six Country Studies (Norway, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Australia, India,
Mexico). Development Dialogue 1: 1-240.

Govindaraj, R. and G. Chellaraj. 2002. The Indian Pharmaceutical Sector: Issues and Options for
Health Sector Reform. World Bank Discussion Paper no. 437. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hill, Suzanne and Kent Johnson (2004) “Emerging Challenges and Opportunities in Drug
Registration and Regulation in Developing Countries,” Issues Paper – Access to Medicines.
DIFD Health Systems Resource Centre.

Hogerzeil, H., et al. 1993. Field Tests for Rational Drug Use in Twelve Developing Countries.
The Lancet 4 (December 1993): 1408-1410.

Huttin, C. 1999. Drug Price Divergence in Europe: Regulatory Aspects. Health Affairs 18
(May/June 1999): 245-9.

Jacobzone, S. 2000. Pharmaceutical Policies in OECD Countries: Reconciling Social and
Industrial Goals. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Labor
market and Social Policy, Occasional Papers No. 40.

Maksimova, L. 2001. Pharmaceutical Market in Russia. Industry Sector Analysis Series, U.S.
Department of State.

Nambu, T., R. Rapp and R. Rozek. 1998. Regulatory Influences on the Decision to Introduce
Pharmaceutical Products in Japan. The Journal of World Intellectual Property 1 September 1998.

Spivey, R., A. I. Wertheimer and T. D. Rucker, eds. 1992. International pharmaceutical services:
the drug industry and pharmacy practice in twenty-three major countries of the world. New
York: Pharmaceutical Products Press.




                                              70
World Health Organization (WHO). 2000. Policies on Pricing and Reimbursement of Medicines
in Europe. Networking for Information Exchange among Policy-makers, WHO Regional Office
for Europe.

________. 1999. Troisième Rencontre des Ministres de la Santé des Pays africains de la zone
franc et des pays associés sur la politique du medicament. WHO/EDM/DAP/99. Genèvre:
Organisation mondiale de la Santé.

________. 1997. Comparative analysis of national drug policies in 12 countries.
WHO/DAP/97.6. Geneva: World Health Organization.

________. 1998. Financing Drugs in South-East Asia. . Health Economics and Drugs DAP
Series No. 8. Report of the second meeting of the WHO/SEARO Working Group on Drug
Financing. Geneva: World Health Organization.

________. 1994. Drug Pricing Systems in Europe, An Overview. WHO/EURO. Geneva: World
Health Organization.

________. 1992. Latin American Conference on Economic and Financial Aspects of Essential
Drugs. Caracas, March 1992. WHO/DAP/92.8. Geneva: World Health Organization.

________. 1990. Guiding Principles for Small National Drug Regulatory Authorities. WHO
Expert Committee on Specifications for Pharmaceutical Products, Technical Report Series, no.
790. Geneva: World Health Organization.

World Bank. 2003. Turkey: Reforming the Health Sector for Improved Access and Efficiency.
Sector Report, vol. 1 & 2.

_________. 1997. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan Health Sector Study. World Bank Country
Study. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Sarmiento, A. Z. 1995. Alternative Drug Pricing Policies in the Americas. WHO/DAP/95.6.
Geneva: World Health Organization.

Madrid, I. 1998. Pharmaceuticals and health sector reform in the Americas: an economic
perspective. Washington, D.C. : Action Programme on Essential Drugs, World Health
Organization.

Fefer, E. 1996. Drug regulation in Latin America. Drug Policy Issues 20 March 1996. Boston,
MA: Boston University.

_______, I. Madrid, and G. Velázquez. 1998. Pharmaceuticals and Health Sector Reform in the
Americas: An Economic Perspective. Washington, D.C.: Pan American Health Organization and
World Health Organization.




                                            71
_______ and G. Velasquez, eds. 1991. Pharmaceutical in the Americas. WHO/HTP/EDM 99.1.
Geneva: World Health Organization.

Whitaker, D. et al. 2002. Taiwan Pharmaceutical Price Gap: A Report for the PhRMA. National
Economic Research Associates. London.

Petrova, G. 2002. Reform in the pharmaceutical sector in Balkan countries: critical moments.
Faculty of Pharmacy, MU-Sofia.

Felker, G., et al. 1997. The Pharmaceutical Industry in India and Hungary. World Bank
Technical Paper. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Kanji, N., et al. 1992. Drugs Policy in Developing Countries. London: Zed Books.

Lu, Z. J., et al. 1998. Strategic Pricing of New Pharmaceuticals. Review of Economics and
Statistics n1 (February 1998): 108-18.

Frank, R. G., et al. 1995. Generic Entry and the Pricing of Pharmaceuticals. National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper: 5306.

Litvack, J. I., D. S. Shepard, and J. D. Quick. 1989. Setting the Price of Essential Drugs:
Necessity and Affordability. The Lancet 8659: 376-79

Redwood, H. 1993. Price Regulation and Pharmaceutical Research: The Limits of Co-Existence.
Felixstow, Suffolk, UK: Oldwicks Press Limited.

Mossialos, E., C. Ranos, and B. Abel-Smith, eds. 1994. Cost Containment, Pricing and
Pharmaceuticals in the European Community: The Policy-Makers'View. Athens: LSE Health
and Pharmetrica SA.

Jommi, C. 2001. Pharmaceutical policy and organisation of the regulatory authorities in the main
EU countries. Milano, EGEA.

Raymond, M. and S. Ueber. 1978. Health and policymaking in the Arab Middle East. Center for
Contemporary Arab Studies. Washington, DC: Georgetown University.

United Nations (UN). 1976. Pharmaceuticals in Africa. United Nations Economic and Social
Council, Economic Commission for Africa.

Gray, A., et al. 2002. Policy Change in a Context of Transition: Drug Policy in South Africa
1989-1999. Center for Health Policy, School of Public Health, University of Witwatersrand.

Department of Health. 1996. National Drug Policy for South Africa. Pretoria, South Africa.

Islam, N. 1989. Bangladesh National Drug Policy: An Assessment. Trop Doctor 19:18-20.




                                              72
Gallagher, E. N. 1990. Egypt's other wars: epidemics and the politics of public health. Syracuse,
N.Y.: Syracuse University Press.

Chowdhury, Z. 1995. The politics of essential drugs: the makings of a successful health strategy:
lessons from Bangladesh. N.J.: Zed Books.

Basant, R. 2001. Pharmaceutical Industry in Pakistan. Indian Institute of Management,
Ahmedabad and the World Bank, Washington, DC.

Lee, M.B. 1994. The politics of pharmaceutical reform: the case of the Philippine National Drug
Policy. International Journal of Health Services 1994; 24(3): 477-494.

Bulgakov, D. 2000. Pharmaceutical price limits set. The Russia Business Journal, 2 Sept 2000.

Schoonveld, E. 2002. Market Segmentation and International Price Referencing. Cambridge
Pharma Consulting.

Dukes, G. and D. Broun. 1994. Pharmaceutical Policies: Rationale and Design. Human
Resources Development and Operations Policy. HRO Working Papers No. 35. World Bank.

Danzon, P. M. 1997. Pharmaceutical price regulation: national policies versus global interests.
Washington, D.C.: AEI Press.

_________ and A. Towse. 2003. Differential pricing for pharmaceuticals: reconciling access, R
& D and patents. Washington, D.C.: AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies.

_________ and L. W. Chao. 2000. Cross-national price differences for pharmaceuticals: how
large, and why? Journal of Health Economics 19 2000 159–195.

Jayasuriya, D.C. 1985. Regulation of pharmaceuticals in developing countries: legal issues and
approaches. Geneva: Albany, NY : World Health Organization.

Wertheimer, A.I., and S. K. Grumer. 1992. Overview of International Pharmacy Pricing.
PharmacoEconomics December 2(6): 449-55.

Burstall , M L. 1998. Pricing and Reimbursement in Western Europe 1998; A Concise Guide. A
Pharma Pricing Review Report.

Rosian I., C.Habl and S. Vogler. 1998. Pharmaceuticals: Market control in nine European
countries. Austrian Health Institute, Vienna.

Bala, K. and K. Sagoo. 2000. Patents and Prices. Health Action International. HAInews No 112
April/May 2000.

Gross, A. 1999. New Regulatory Trends in Thailand’s Pharmaceutical Market. Report Date:
March 1999. Pacific Bridge, Inc.



                                               73
PriceWaterhouseCoopers. 2002. Moscow Government Introduces New Pricing Regulations On
Medicines. Tax Flash Report. Special Pharmaceuticals Issue No. 5, 4 June 2002

Ratanawijitrasin, S. and E. Wondemagegnehu. 2002. “Effective drug regulation: A multi-country
study.” Geneva: World Health Organization.

Health Care Systems in Transition: (various countries and years). European Observatory on
Health Care Systems.

Kanavos, P. 2002. Financing Pharmaceuticals in Transition Economies. Department of Social
Policy and LSE Health, London School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK.

________. 2002. Pharmaceutical Pricing and Reimbursement in Europe. London, UK: PJB
Publications.

_________. 2000. The Single Market for Pharmaceuticals in the European Union in Light of
European Court of Justice Rulings. PharmacoEconomics, Vol. 18, No. 6, pp. 523-532, December
2000.

________, E. Mossialos, and M. Mrazek. 2000. Pharmaceuticals: A Global Industry with Local
Interests. In Parsons, L. and G. Lister (eds.) Global Health: A local issue. The Nuffield Trust.

London School of Economic Study on Healthcare in Individual Countries: Worldwide Survey on
Pharmaceutical Pricing and Reimbursement Structures. Commissioned by Enterprise
Directorate-General of the European Commission.

Additional information was obtained from the health ministry websites of individual countries.




                                               74
