                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    EARLY TEEN MARRIAGE AND FUTURE POVERTY

                                         Gordon B. Dahl

                                       Working Paper 11328
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w11328


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2005




This revised version appears under a new title. The old title was "Myopic Matrimony and Dropout
Decisions: Evidence Using State Laws for Marriage, Schooling, and Work." I thank Mark Bils, David
Card, David Lee, Lance Lochner, Uta Schoenberg and seminar participants at several universities
for valuable comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by Gordon B. Dahl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Early Teen Marriage and Future Poverty
Gordon B. Dahl
NBER Working Paper No. 11328
May 2005, Revised March 2009
JEL No. J2

                                              ABSTRACT

Both early teen marriage and dropping out of high school have historically been associated with a
variety of negative outcomes, including higher poverty rates throughout life. Are these negative outcomes
due to pre-existing differences or do they represent the causal effect of marriage and schooling choices?
 To better understand the true personal and societal consequences, this paper uses an instrumental
variables approach which takes advantage of variation in state laws regulating the age at which individuals
are allowed to marry, drop out of school, and begin work. The baseline IV estimate indicates that
a woman who marries young is 31 percentage points more likely to live in poverty when she is older.
 Similarly, a woman who drops out of school is 11 percentage points more likely to be poor. The results
are robust to a variety of alternative specifications and estimation methods, including LIML estimation
and a control function approach. While grouped OLS estimates for the early teen marriage variable
are also large, OLS estimates based on individual-level data are small, consistent with a large amount
of measurement error.


Gordon B. Dahl
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
gdahl@ucsd.edu
1 Introduction
        Historically, individuals were allowed to enter into a marriage contract at a very young

age. In Ancient Rome, the appropriate minimum age was regarded as 14 for males and 12 for

females. When Rome became Christianized, these age minimums were adopted into the

ecclesiastical law of the Catholic Church. This canon law governed most marriages in Western

Europe until the Reformation. When England broke away from the Catholic Church, the

Anglican Church carried with it the same minimum age requirements for the prospective bride

and groom. The minimum age requirements of 12 and 14 were eventually written into English

civil law. By default, these provisions became the minimum marriage ages in colonial America.

These common laws inherited from the British remained in force in America unless a specific

state law was enacted to replace them. 1

        While Roman, Catholic, English, and early American law may have allowed marriage at

12 for girls and 14 for boys, many questioned the advisability of such an early union.

Researchers and policymakers around the turn of the 20th century recognized that teens may be

especially ill-prepared to assume the familial responsibilities and financial pressures associated

with marriage. 2 As a result of the changing economic and social landscape of the U.S., in the

latter part of the 19th century and throughout the 20th century, individual states began to slowly

raise the minimum legal age at which individuals were allowed to marry. In the U.S., as in most

developed countries, age restrictions have been revised upwards so that they are now between 15

and 21 years of age.

        During this same time period, dramatic changes were also occurring in the educational

system of the United States (see Goldin, 1998, 1999; Goldin and Katz, 1997, 2003; Lleras-


1
  See "Marriage Law," Encyclopædia Britannica, 2005.
2
  The Russell Sage Foundation commissioned an early study to raise awareness about “child” marriages
and document state-specific minimum age laws (May, 1929). Concurrently, Richmond and Hall (1929)
harshly criticized early teen marriage as a result of their investigation of 240 women who married before
the age of 16. They concluded “the effects of child marriage do not cease with childhood. Both physically
and socially the marriage relation can be permanently influenced by immature mating” (p. 124).


                                                    1
Muney, 2002). Free public schooling at the elementary level spread across the U.S. in the middle

of the nineteenth century and free secondary schooling proliferated in the early part of the

twentieth century. As secondary schooling became more commonplace, states began to pass

compulsory schooling laws. States often also passed child labor laws which stipulated minimum

age or schooling requirements before a work permit would be granted. These state-specific

compulsory schooling and child labor laws are correlated with the legal restrictions on marriage

age, indicating that it might be important to consider the impact of all the laws simultaneously.

        There are at least two rationales often given for the use of state laws as policy instruments

to limit teenagers’ choices. The first argument is that teens do not accurately compare short-run

benefits versus long-run costs. If teens are making myopic decisions, restrictive state laws could

prevent decisions they will later regret. It is also argued that the adverse effects associated with

teenagers’ choices impose external costs on the rest of society. If these effects can be prevented,

external costs (such as higher welfare expenditures) would also argue for restrictive state laws.

Both teenage marriage and dropping out of high school are closely associated with a variety of

negative outcomes, including poverty later in life. To assess the relevance of either argument,

however, it is important to know whether the observed effects are causal.

        Any observed negative effects may be due to pre-existing differences, rather than a causal

relationship between teen marriage (or schooling choices) and adverse adult outcomes. Women

who marry as teens or drop out of school may come from more disadvantaged backgrounds or

possess other unobserved characteristics that would naturally lead to worse outcomes. For

example, teens choosing to marry young might have lower unobserved earnings ability, making it

hard to draw conclusions about the causal relationship between teenage marriage and poverty.

        To identify the effect of a teenager’s marriage and schooling choices on future poverty,

this paper uses state-specific marriage, schooling, and child labor laws as instruments. Variation

across states and over time in these laws can be used to identify the causal impact teen marriage

and high school completion have on future economic well-being. While compulsory schooling


                                                  2
laws have previously been used as instruments in a variety of settings (e.g., Acemoglu and

Angrist, 2000; Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2004; Leon, 2004; Lleras-Muney, 2005; Lochner

and Moretti, 2004; Oreopoulus, 2005; Oreopoulus, Page, and Stevens, 2003), this appears to be

the first time marriage laws have been used as instruments. The idea of the marriage law

instrument is that states with restrictive marriage laws will prevent some teenagers from marrying

who would have married young had they lived in a state with more permissive laws.

        Using the marriage, schooling, and labor laws affecting teens as instruments for early

marriage and high school completion, I find strong negative effects for both variables on future

poverty status. The baseline IV estimates imply that a woman who marries young is 31

percentage points more likely to live in poverty when she is older. Similarly, a woman who drops

out of school is 11 percentage points more likely to be living in a family whose income is below

the poverty line. The IV results are robust to a variety of alternative specifications and estimation

methods, including LIML estimation and a control function approach. In comparison, the OLS

estimates are very sensitive to how the data is aggregated, particularly for the early marriage

variable. OLS estimation on individual-level data indicates a small effect for early teen marriage,

while OLS estimates using grouped data are also large.

        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, I first briefly review the

negative outcomes associated with teenage marriage and dropping out of school and discuss

alternative perspectives for why teens might make these decisions. Section 3 describes the data

and presents OLS estimates. I then discuss the early marriage, compulsory schooling, and child

labor laws which will be used as instruments in Section 4. Section 5 presents the instrumental

variable estimates and conducts several specification and robustness checks. It also provides a

discussion of measurement error issues and a reconciliation with the teenage childbearing

literature. Section 6 concludes.




                                                  3
2 Early Marriage and Dropout Decisions

         Previous research points to a variety of social, family, health, and financial outcomes

which are strongly correlated with early teen marriage and low education. Women who marry

while in their teens are two-thirds more likely to divorce within 15 years of their wedding

compared to women who postpone marriage. In addition, women who marry in their teens tend

to have more children and to have those children earlier. 3 Teenage marriage is also associated

with much lower education levels; women who marry before the age of 19 are fifty percent more

likely to drop out of high school and four times less likely to graduate from college (U.S. Census

data tabulations; Klepinger, Lundberg, and Plotnick, 1995; Ribar, 1994). There is an even larger

literature documenting the negative outcomes associated with low education, including lower

wages and higher unemployment rates (Katz and Autor, 1999), worse health (Berger and Leigh,

1989; Lleras-Muney, 2005), and higher crime rates (Lochner and Moretti, 2004).

         The negative outcomes associated with early marriage and dropping out of high school

have the potential to affect not only the individual making the decision, but also her children and

the rest of society. For example, a high divorce rate combined with low wages and a larger

family size increases the number of children living in poverty and receiving state assistance

(Bane, 1986; Moffit, 1992). Children of teenage mothers also have lower birth weights, have a

higher rate of infant homicide, are often the victims of child abuse and neglect, have academic

and behavioral problems in school, and are more likely to engage in crime (Goerge and Lee,

1997; Heinz et al, 1998; Hotz, McElroy, and Sanders, 1997; Hunt, 2003).

         Given these negative outcomes, why would an individual choose to marry young or drop

out of high school? Traditional economic analysis focuses on rational and forward-looking

individuals (Becker, 1974; Becker, Landes, and Michael, 1977). A woman chooses whether to


3
  Married teen mothers are 40 percent more likely to have a second birth within 24 months of their first
birth compared to unmarried teen mothers (Kalmuss and Namerow, 1994). For the sample period used in
this paper, twenty-three percent of women who married in their teens gave birth to five or more children,
versus eight percent for those who married later in life (U.S. Census tabulations). See also Kiernan (1986).


                                                     4
accept a teen marriage offer (or drop out of school) based on the relative attractiveness of her

alternatives. In this paradigm, a young woman fully anticipates the future consequences of her

decisions, subject to some uncertainty about how things will actually turn out. Women who

marry early can have a high likelihood of ending up poor later in life, yet still be optimizing.

However, even if the individual is optimizing, society might still be concerned about the effects

of poverty on her children and the costs associated with transfer programs.

        An alternative perspective for why teens marry young is based on psychological and

behavioral economic models. In a discussion of risky behavior among youth, O’Donoghue and

Rabin (2001) explore extensions to the traditional approach which can help in modeling the

decisions of adolescents. They argue that teens may not accurately compare short-run benefits

versus long-run costs because teens discount the future too heavily. Two closely related

explanations are that teens have time-inconsistent preferences or projection bias. These models

provide an explanation for why teenagers engage in risky teenage behavior such as drinking,

smoking, drug use, unprotected sex, and criminal activity, even though these behaviors can have

substantial negative consequences in the long run (Gruber, 2001). Looking at schooling

decisions, Oreopoulos (2007) argues that myopia helps explain why some teens drop out of

school early. The various psychological explanations for poor decision-making by youth

generally share the feature that teens make choices they will later regret.

        Although teen marriage and low education are associated with a variety of below-average

outcomes, it is not necessarily true that these choices caused the bad outcomes. For example,

differences may be due to pre-existing characteristics of women who marry young versus later,

rather than any causal relationship between teen marriage and negative adult outcomes. To my

knowledge, no previous research has studied the causal effect of early marriage. Yet

understanding the causal effect of teens’ choices is key for understanding whether they are

making choices they will later regret or which impose costs on their children and society. If

teenage marriage and dropping out of high school are largely driven by unobserved personal


                                                  5
characteristics which are the primary cause of negative outcomes, legal interventions to prevent

these choices may make little difference. However, if strong causal effects exist, then state laws

restricting teenagers’ choices have the potential to greatly lessen the chances of future poverty.

        While issues of causality have received little attention in the context of teenage marriage,

a related line of research attempts to disentangle the effects of teenage childbearing on education

and wages from pre-existing differences between those who parent early and those who delay

childbearing. Early research using OLS reveals large and significant consequences associated

with teenage childbearing (Moore and Waite, 1997). Subsequent approaches which attempt to

deal with selection bias reach disparate conclusions. For example, studies using a variety of

instrumental variables by Angrist and Evans (1996), Grogger and Bronars (1993) and Klepinger,

Lundberg, and Plotnick (1999) conclude that teenage childbearing has negative consequences.

However, Geronimus and Korenman’s (1992) paper using sister fixed effects and the research by

Hotz, McElroy, and Sanders (1997, 2005) and Hotz, Mullin, and Sanders (1997) using random

miscarriages as an instrument find little evidence of a negative effect. The debate is ongoing,

with recent work by Ashcroft and Lang (2007) and Fletcher and Wolfe (2008) using variations on

the miscarriage instrument and finding negative effects.


3 Data and OLS Estimates

3.1 Data

        The data for this paper combines information on state-specific marriage, schooling, and

labor laws with data from the 1960, 1970, and 1980 U.S. Decennial Censuses. 4 Supplementary

data is obtained from Vital Statistics marriage certificate data and the National Fertility Surveys.

The U.S. Census data are ideal for obtaining precise information about teenage marriage at the


4
 Data are taken from the U.S. Census 1960 general sample; the 1970 Form 1 State, Neighborhood, and
Metro samples; and the 1980 State, Metro, and Urban/Rural samples (see Ruggles, et al, 2004; and
http://www.ipums.org). Information on age at first marriage is not collected in the 1990 or 2000 Censuses.



                                                    6
state level due to the large number of individuals in the survey. For 7% of the entire U.S.

population in 1980, 3% in 1970, and 1% in 1960, the Census has information regarding age at

first marriage, along with limited demographic, educational attainment, and economic variables.

        Even though the Census datasets are cross-sectional surveys conducted every ten years,

they contain information about women from a variety of cohorts. Since the surveys ask

retrospective questions about age at first marriage and women are different ages when the survey

is administered, a large dataset with time varying information can be created from the cross-

sections. All three census years are combined together to create a dataset for women born

between 1920 and 1954. These women were 15-year-old teenagers from 1935 to 1969, which

corresponds to the approximate age they were at risk for becoming early teen brides. The sample

is further restricted to women who were between the ages of 20 and 60 when the Census was

taken and who were born in the U.S. 5 Data is also restricted to the 41 states with available data

on marriage laws, compulsory schooling laws, and child labor laws (these laws will be discussed

in Section 4.1).

        The Census data reveal that early teen marriage, which I define as marrying before the

age of 16, has historically accounted for a nontrivial fraction of all marriages in the United States.

In the sample used in this paper, 3.5% of women report first marrying under the age of 16. 6 This

compares to 11.9% of women first marrying at ages 16 or 17 (4.5% at age 16 and 7.4% at age

17). The top two series in Figure 1a graph the fraction of women marrying at these ages over

time. The fraction of early teen marriages starts out at 3.8% for the 1935 cohort, reaches a peak

of 4.9% in the early fifties, and then declines to 1.6% by the end of the sample. This pattern is

mirrored for the fraction of women marrying at age 16 or 17.

        To put these patterns into perspective, the bottom series in Figure 1a graphs the median


5
  This age restriction implies the 1970 sample contains women born between 1920 and 1950 and the 1960
sample contains women born between 1920 and 1940.
6
  Age at first marriage is calculated from each woman’s date of first marriage and date of birth. In 1980
valid responses included ages as low as 12; in 1960 and 1970, the lowest valid response was age 14.


                                                    7
age at first marriage for a long time horizon. The plot reveals that the time period of interest in

this paper (1935 to 1969) corresponds to a period in history when marriage ages were remarkably

low by historical standards. The median age at marriage for women fell almost two years from

the start of the century to reach a low of 20.1 in 1956. Since the 1970s, the median age has risen

dramatically, so that by the end of the nineties, the median age was 25.

        Figure 1b plots other well-known secular trends which were also occurring in the middle

of the 1900s. There was a sharp decline in overall fertility during WWII, followed by a dramatic

increase in the post-war period. Fertility starts to decline by the end of the fifties, reaching a low

in the late seventies where the rate is half that of the peak. The trends in the top half of Figure 1b

– couples starting their marriages and childbearing sooner in the post-war period – are recognized

as being largely responsible for the baby boom between 1946 and 1964. Similarly, the baby bust

resulted from delayed marriage and fertility. The same fertility pattern holds for teenage

childbearing as well. At the peak in 1957, there were 96 births per 1000 15-19 year old women in

the U.S. 7 Comparing Figures 1a and 1b, it is apparent that the trends in early teen marriage

coincide with those for teen childbearing.

        To add further perspective, the bottom half of Figure 1b plots marriage and divorce rates

over time. Marriage and divorce rates fell during the Great Depression and spiked following

WWII. Divorce rates also rose sharply starting in the late 1960s before reaching a plateau in the

1980s. Further insights into the changes in and possible causes of these dramatic shifts in

marriage and divorce can be found in Stevenson and Wolfers (2007).

        These secular trends have several implications for the current study. First, it will be

important to allow for different effects by time period. In the regression analyses which follow,

separate dummies will be included for year of birth, current age (in year intervals), and census


7
 The fertility rate for 15 to 17 year old women is available starting in 1960. From 1960 to 1998, the 15-17
year old rate is 59% of the 15-19 year old rate on average, and the two series roughly have the same time
pattern.



                                                     8
year. Second, the findings should be interpreted in the appropriate historical context, as the

cultural, legal, and economic environment is very different today.

        In addition to early marriage, another key variable for the analysis is the high school

dropout rate. Carter et al. (2006) document that dropout rates have fallen over time. At age 19,

52.3% of women born between 1921 and 1930 have not finished high school. This percentage

falls monotonically over time, so that for women born between 1971 and 1980, only 15.1% of 19

year old women have not finished high school. 8 Completion rates rise as women age and have

the opportunity to go back to school; for example, women in their thirties who were born between

1921 and 1930 have a dropout rate of 42.9%.

        As a summary measure of well-being, I use a variable which indicates whether the

woman lives in a poor family according to the government definition of poverty. Whether a

woman lives in poverty depends on family income, family size (including the number of children

in the family), and whether the householder is over age 65. Approximately 10% of all

observations in my sample are classified as poor, with this rate more than doubling for those who

marry before the age of 16.

        This poverty variable captures the cumulative impact of a variety of past decisions by a

woman. As such, it is a useful summary measure of the consequences of early marriage and

dropping out of high school. For example, a woman who marries young may have additional

children, gain less work experience, and divorce sooner, all of which likely increase the chances

of future poverty. While individuals can enter and exit poverty throughout the lifecycle, Bane

and Ellwood (1986) find that “the majority of poor persons at any time are in the midst of a rather

long spell of poverty.” In addition, Rank and Hirschi (2001) find that once poverty occurs it is

likely to occur again.

        The large fraction of early teen marriages for the women in our sample is ideal for the


8
 The dropout rate at age 19 for women is 52.3% for the 1921-30 birth cohort, 43.1% for 1931-40, 36.7%
for 1941-50, 25.9% for 1951-60, 20.7% for 1961-70, and 15.1% for 1971-80 (Carter et al., 2006).


                                                   9
current paper. There are over 140,000 of these early teen marriages in our combined census

sample. The large number of high school dropouts, and the dramatic decrease over time which

does not parallel the pattern in early marriage rates, makes the data well-suited to separate out the

two effects. Perhaps the biggest advantage of the data, however, is that this era of high teen

marriage rates and declining dropout rates coincides with a time period when many states were

revising their early marriage, compulsory schooling, and child labor laws. These laws are

discussed in the next section, after the OLS estimates are presented.

3.2 OLS Estimates

        How are poverty, early teen marriage, and dropping out of high school related? I begin

by presenting OLS estimates of the effect of early teen marriage and dropout status on poverty.

The top panel of Table 1 displays results for individual-level data, which includes more than 3

million observations. The estimates in column 1 do not include any controls, and indicate that

early marriage and dropping out of high school increase the chance of poverty by around 4% and

13%, respectively. Including additional control variables in columns 2-4 decreases the estimates

slightly, to around 3% and 12%, respectively. These estimates suggest that dropping out of high

school has a sizable impact on future poverty, but that teen marriage has relatively small effect.

        In contrast to the individual-level estimates, the grouped data results in the bottom panel

of Table 1 present a very different picture. In the bottom panel, the data is aggregated to state of

birth × year of birth × census year cell means. In contrast to OLS, the estimates in columns 1-4

are much larger and the inclusion of controls affects both the dropout and teenage marriage

coefficients. After including controls for (i) census year, race, and current age dummies, (ii) state

of birth and birth cohort dummies, (iii) and region of birth trends, the coefficient on early teen

marriage is 26.4 and on dropout is 12.9. These coefficients are large; they imply a 26% increase

in future poverty for early teen brides and a 13% increase for those who do not finish high school.

A key question is whether there are additional omitted variables which would drive either of these




                                                 10
coefficients closer to zero, or whether these estimates represent causal effects.

         Column 5 expands the sample to include allocated observations. The Census Bureau

allocates values for age at first marriage when data are missing or inconsistent. First, a logical

edit is performed if possible, using information from other variables and other household

members. When this isn’t possible, the Census uses a hot deck allocation method to assign a

value from an individual with similar characteristics. 9 Allocation rates are much higher for early

teen marriages compared to the rest of the sample, especially in 1980. Additionally, the hot deck

procedure used in 1980 (and to a lesser extent in 1960 and 1970) suffers from bracketing issues

for early teen marriages, with sharp spikes in marriage rates occurring for women whose current

age is a multiple of five. When these allocated marriages are included in column 5, the

coefficient on early teen marriages drops, particularly in the grouped OLS panel. As we shall see

later, these allocated marriages do not have much of an impact on the IV estimates, suggesting

that these allocated marriages are largely noise. Therefore, unless otherwise noted, all allocated

marriages are dropped from the data.

         What explains the different estimates for early teen marriage when comparing the

individual versus grouped data in Table 1? Aggregation should not affect the estimated

relationship as long as the model is correctly specified and the coefficient of interest is the same

for all individuals (Theil, 1954). When the model is not correctly specified, aggregation has the

potential to do two things: (i) minimize attenuation bias arising from noisily measured covariates,

and (ii) either minimize or exacerbate the effects of selection bias. We will explore these issues,

including the role of measurement error and heterogeneous effects, later on in the paper. If

appropriate instruments can be found, misspecification due to omitted variables or measurement


9
 For example, in the 1980 Census, entries for the age at first marriage variable “were allocated from one of
seven matrices in which reported marital history responses were stored. The matrices contained data on
various combinations of characteristics, such as age, marital status, sex, the presence or absence of a
spouse, the presence of the person’s own children in the household, and the number of times the husband or
wife had been married” (Census Bureau, 1981).



                                                    11
error can be eliminated at both the individual and aggregate level. As we shall see later, using

state marriage, compulsory schooling, and child labor laws as instruments results in remarkably

similar individual-level IV and aggregate IV estimates.


4 State Laws and Their Effect on Early Marriage and Schooling

4.1 State Marriage, Schooling, and Labor Laws

         The OLS estimates presented in the last section potentially suffer from both omitted

variable bias and measurement error. One solution to these problems is to use an instrumental

variables approach. Ideally, instruments would induce exogenous variation in early teen marriage

but be uncorrelated with unobserved characteristics which affect both poverty and the decision to

marry young. Similarly, the instruments would induce exogenous variation in high school

graduation but be orthogonal to the error term in the poverty equation. I use changes in state

marriage, schooling, and labor laws over time as instruments for early marriage and dropping out

of high school. By preventing some teens who would like to marry or drop out of high school

from doing so, these legal restrictions can help identify the causal effects on poverty free of

selection bias.

         In the U.S., wide variation has historically existed regarding the minimum age

individuals were legally allowed to marry. The laws which regulate teenage marriage have

appeared in the World Almanac and Book of Facts starting in the late 1800’s. Since 1935,

information has consistently been reported on the minimum marriage age with parental (or court)

consent, separately for males and females. I have collected this information annually for the

years 1935 to 1969, for the 41 states with reliable information on marriage laws during this time

period. 10

10
  Information was collected from each year’s World Almanac. If a state’s law was missing or changed for
one (or at most two) years and then returned to its previous value, that year’s law was replaced with the
value from the surrounding years. This procedure resulted in 12 changes out of a total of 1,435 state-year
laws. If these 12 changes are not made, the results which follow are virtually identical. Alaska and Hawaii
are excluded since compulsory schooling and child labor laws are not available. Maine, Massachusetts,


                                                    12
         There are two sets of laws specifying minimum age requirements for marriage. The first

is the minimum age with parental (or court) consent while the other is the minimum age without

parental consent. In this paper, I focus on the marriage age laws with parental consent, partly

because there is little variation over time or across states in the laws without parental consent

during the period of my data. Prior to 1971, approximately 80% of states specified an age of 18

for marriage without parental consent for women and approximately 85% specified an age of 21

for men. In 1971, men and women were granted the right to vote at age 18, which seems to have

spurred most states to change their statutes for the legal age without parental consent for both

men and women to age 18 (for a discussion of these laws, see Blank, Charles, and Sallee, 2007).

         Focusing on the laws with parental consent, it should be noted that the laws do not

eliminate all early teenage marriages. Some teens may find ways to lie about their age or may

travel to states with lower age requirements to get married. In addition, in most states, the

marriage law specifies that the courts have the right to grant exceptions to women based on

“moral” and “welfare” arguments (as explained in the footnotes to tables in the World Almanac

and Book of Facts, various years). These statutes imply that a judge could grant permission for

an early teenage marriage if the teenage woman was pregnant. How often judges actually granted

exceptions is hard to know ex post, but given the relatively low rate of illegitimate births and

abortions during much of this period, exceptions for pregnancy were probably common.

         It is important to note that the fact that restrictive laws do not prevent 100% of early

teenage marriages does not make them invalid instruments. Rather, the strength of the instrument

set is that restrictive state laws make it harder to marry young, thereby preventing some fraction

of teen marriages that otherwise would have occurred.

         I also use the compulsory schooling and labor laws originally collected by Acemoglu and



Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, North Carolina, South Carolina, and West Virginia are excluded since
the World Almanac reports unstable, noisy data on their state laws (i.e., multiple up and down changes
spanning several years in the marriage laws). If these eight states are included in the analysis, the estimates
are less precisely estimated, but the general conclusions do not change.


                                                      13
Angrist (2000), and subsequently modified by Goldin and Katz (2003). These laws typically

specify a minimum age or amount of schooling before a youth can drop out of school or obtain a

work permit. Using Goldin and Katz’s approach, compulsory school attendance is defined as the

minimum of (i) the required years of schooling before dropping out and (ii) the difference

between the minimum dropout age and the maximum enrollment age (lagged 8 years). Child

labor is defined as the maximum of (i) the required years of schooling before receiving a work

permit and (ii) the difference between the minimum work age and the maximum enrollment age

(lagged 8 years). The value of the marriage, schooling, and labor laws assigned to a woman are

based on the set of laws for her birth state which are in force when she would have been age 15. I

assess the potential bias of this assignment rule in Section 5.2.

        Table 2 summarizes the changes in these laws across five-year time periods (in the

regression analysis, year-by-year values are used). For the period 1935 to 1939, 41% of states

specified that a woman had to be 16 or older before marrying. Over time, several states raised

their age requirements, so that by 1965-1969, 70% of states required a woman to be at least 16

before marrying. Summarizing the law changes another way, the average minimum marriage age

across states was 14.6 years at the beginning of the sample period, but rose by approximately one

year to 15.7 years by the end of the sample. There have also been similar increases in the

requirements governing school attendance and child labor. In 1935-1939, 24% of states required

at least 9 years of compulsory schooling; by 1965-1969, this rose to 63% of states. Similarly, in

1935-1939, only 2% of states had a child labor requirement of 9 years or more; by 1965-1969,

38% of states had such a requirement.

        Figure 2 shows the geographical distribution of the legal minimum marriage age at the

beginning and end of the sample period. In 1935, there is a fair amount of variation in the laws,

with 25 out of 41 states specifying an age of 15 or less. While southern states generally have

lower minimums to begin with, there is a mix of age minimums in all regions of the country. By

1969, a substantial fraction of states had revised their marriage law upwards, with only 11 states


                                                  14
specifying a legal minimum of 15 years or less. The states with relatively permissive laws

regulating marriage are scattered throughout the country at the end of the sample period. In 1969,

New Hampshire had a requirement of 13; Alabama, New York, Texas, and Utah had a

requirement of 14; Idaho, Mississippi, Missouri, North Dakota, Oklahoma, and Oregon had a

requirement of 15. A more detailed listing of the early marriage laws across states can be found

in the Appendix Table.

         Previous work has documented the patterns of compulsory schooling and child labor laws

across states and over time, and hence is not repeated here (Acemoglu and Angrist, 2000; Goldin

and Katz, 2003; Lleras-Muney, 2002; Lochner and Moretti, 2004; Margo and Finegan, 1996).

What has not been documented, however, is the strong correlation between these laws and the

early marriage laws. Table 3 shows the relationship between these three sets of laws by

tabulating the relative frequencies of various combinations of laws.

         Consider the first panel, which tabulates the marriage laws versus the schooling laws.

The rows indicate compulsory attendance requirements and the columns indicate minimum

marriage age requirements. The values for these two sets of laws are clearly interrelated; the chi-

square test for the independence of the rows and the columns is strongly rejected. States with

relatively low required compulsory attendance laws are generally more likely to have a low

marriage age law, although the relationship is not always monotonic. The marriage laws are also

intertwined with the child labor laws in a state; for example, states with a child labor law of 7

years or less are considerably less likely to prohibit marriages at very early ages (before age 16)

compared to states with child labor laws of 8 or more. 11 Later on in the paper, we will also

investigate the impact of divorce and unilateral divorce laws. These laws are less tightly tied to

the marriage laws, partly because few states enacted unilateral divorce until the 1970s (only 4%

of the state-years in our sample period).


11
  The interrelated nature of the marriage and schooling/labor laws cannot be attributed solely to trends over
time. After regressing out time trends in the laws, the state laws are still highly related.


                                                     15
         Since the marriage, schooling, and labor laws affecting youth are so highly correlated, it

could be important to account for all three simultaneously when estimating instrumental variable

regression models. Past research has used the compulsory schooling and child labor laws as

instruments for education in models describing human capital externalities (Acemoglu and

Angrist, 2000), crime (Lochner and Moretti, 2004), mortality (Lleras-Muney, 2005),

intergenerational transmission of human capital (Oreopoulus, Page, and Stevens, 2003), and

fertility (Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2004; Leon, 2004). In many of these applications, there

may not be a need to instrument for early teen marriage. However, for some outcomes, part of

the observed effects might be due to changes in marriage laws (and early marriage rates) but

mistakenly attributed to changes in compulsory schooling laws (and education levels) instead. In

the IV regressions which follow in Section 5, I use all three sets of laws in poverty regressions

which instrument for early marriage and high school completion.

4.2 The Impact of State Laws on Early Teen Marriage

         How effective are state-specific marriage laws at restricting the age individuals marry?

Other work has examined the effectiveness of compulsory schooling and child labor laws on high

school graduation, and is not repeated here (See Acemoglu and Angrist, 2000; Goldin and Katz,

2003; Lleras-Muney, 2002; Lochner and Moretti, 2004; Margo and Finegan, 1996). The

combined census samples reveal that restrictive laws are associated with a smaller number of

early teen marriages (i.e., marriages occurring before age 16). In states with a legal minimum of

12-13, 14, 15, and 16+, the percent of women who are early teen brides is, respectively, 6.5%,

4.3%, 3.5%, and 2.9%. 12 Of course, these differentials could partly be due to time trends or

variation across states with differing laws. In the IV regressions appearing in the next section,

these factors will be accounted for.

         Are the laws actually reducing the number of teen marriages or would states with


12
  Although not shown, there is a persistent difference in early teen marriage rates over time. The trends
across states with restrictive or permissive laws both follow the same general pattern shown in Figure 1.


                                                     16
restrictive laws naturally have lower teen marriage rates anyway? If states laws actually prevent

early teen marriages, one would expect to see a jump in the number of marriages occurring

immediately after the specified minimum age. I use the 1968 and 1969 Vital Statistics Marriage

Detail files, which collect data from marriage certificates, to examine the timing of teen

marriages. 13 For women who married between the ages of 14 and 16 in 1968 or 1969, Figure 3

plots the fraction of women marrying at different ages (measured in two-month intervals) who are

residents of states with different legal age minima.

         Sharp increases in the fraction marrying occur where expected assuming the laws are

enforced. For example, in states where the legal minimum is 14 years, a fair number of women

actually marry at this young age. Moreover, there is not much of a jump in marriages once

women turn age 15. In contrast, in states where the legal minimum is 15 years, there a sudden

rise in the number of marriages immediately after women reach the minimum age of 15. For

another example, consider women marrying at age 16. In the third graph where the legal

minimum is 16, there is a sharp and large increase in the number of marriages occurring

immediately after women turn 16. In comparison, the rise surrounding age 16 is much less

pronounced in states with minimum ages of 14 or especially 15. 14 Most states also record the

state where the marriage takes place on the marriage certificate. A graph of the timing of

marriages by marriage state instead of residence state, although not shown, yields a similar

picture. The graphs suggest that restrictive state laws effectively delay or prevent at least some


13
   Data from 1968 and 1969 is used because earlier years are not readily available. Data is collected for the
42 registered Marriage Reporting Areas (MRAs). Marriage certificate data is not reported in 1968 and
1969 for the non-MRA states of Arizona, Arkansas, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma,
South Carolina, Texas, and Washington. In addition, 6 MRA states collect marriage age data in years, but
do not record age in months (District of Columbia, Idaho, Indiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, and Ohio)
and hence are excluded from the analysis in Figure 3. MRA states for which marriage law information is
unavailable are also excluded from Table 4.
14
   There are also noticeable rises surrounding the time a young women has a birthday regardless of the legal
restriction. For example, there are moderate jumps at age 16 even in states where the legal minimum is 14
or 15 years old. Two possible explanations are that parents or the courts may not give their consent to let
young women marry until they reach their 16th birthday or that young women themselves do not wish to
marry until they turn 16.



                                                     17
early teen marriages.

         Another way to test whether state laws impact the probability of marrying young is to see

whether teens travel to a state with a lower age requirement to get married. If so, this is an

indication that restrictive laws impose costs on those wishing to marry before the law in their

state of residence allows. Some young teens will cross state lines, while others will be deterred

by these costs. The extent to which teens cross state lines to marry in states with more permissive

laws can be examined using the residence state and marriage state information in the Vital

Statistics datasets.

         Before looking at the entire U.S., first consider the case for women residing in Tennessee.

Tennessee is a long, narrow state, with population centers scattered throughout the state.

Tennessee has an age requirement of 16 years for women to marry in 1968 and 1969, the period

for which Vital Statistics data is available. As Figure 2 shows, Tennessee is bordered by 8 states

with varying age minimum. Six of these states have valid marriage certificate and marriage law

information. 15 If the marriage age law is binding in Tennessee, we might expect those who want

to marry earlier than the law allows in Tennessee to travel to Alabama, Mississippi, or Missouri,

where the age minimum is lower. However, we should not see as many prospective teen brides

travel to Georgia, Kentucky, or Virginia, where the age requirement of 16 is the same as in

Tennessee.

         The pattern of out-of-state marriages strongly supports the idea that Tennessee teens

travel to bordering states with more permissive laws in order to marry young. Twenty-two

percent of women from Tennessee who marry before the age of 16 travel to Alabama,

Mississippi, or Missouri to marry compared to only 4% who travel to Georgia, Kentucky, or

Virginia. This is not because Alabama, Mississippi, and Missouri are more convenient or

attractive places to get married in general, however. For Tennessee brides who marry at age 16,


15
  Arkansas is not in a Marriage Reporting Area, so no marriage certificate data is available; North Carolina
does not have information available on marriage laws.


                                                    18
4% travel to Alabama, Mississippi, or Missouri; this compares to 18% who travel to Georgia,

Kentucky, or Virginia. It appears that the set of neighboring states with an age requirement

identical to Tennessee’s are the preferred marriage destinations, but that brides wishing to marry

below the age of 16 go out of their way to marry in a state with a lower age requirement. 16

        Table 4 extends the Tennessee analysis of out-of-state marriages to all of the states in the

sample. I categorize women based on the earliest age they can marry in their state of residence

with their parent’s consent. I then tabulate the percentage of women who marry (1) in their state

of residence, (2) in a state with a lower minimum age compared to their residence state, and (3) in

a state with an equal or higher minimum age compared to their residence state. For women who

married between the ages of 12 and 15, 22% of those living in states with a legal minimum of 16

years of age went to states with lower age limits to marry. In contrast, individuals living in states

with legal minima of 13, 14, or 15 years were much more likely to remain in their residence state

to marry (only 5% travel outside their residence state to marry).

        Of course, the patterns observed in the top panel of Table 4 could be the result of the

location of states with various laws or the general attractiveness of marrying in different states.

To control for this possibility, in the bottom panel of Table 4, I tabulate marriage patterns for

women who married at age 16. For these women, the marriage laws should not be binding.

Indeed, fewer of the women facing an age minimum of 16 leave their residence state to marry. In

contrast to the top panel, women in states with laws specifying a legal minimum of 16 who

choose to marry outside their state of residence are much more likely to marry in states with an

equal or higher minimum age law.

        A simple difference-in-differences estimate makes clear that women are crossing state

lines to marry young. To construct the estimate, first compare the fraction of women who marry


16
  Jerry Lee Lewis, the rock singer, and Myra Gale Brown are perhaps the most famous example of a
Tennessee couple traveling across state lines to marry. In 1957, Lewis took his 13-year-old second cousin
to Hernando, Mississippi, where they were married. At the time, the minimum marriage age was only 12 in
Mississippi, while it was 16 in Tennessee.


                                                   19
in a state with a lower minimum versus a higher minimum. Subtracting this difference for

women who marry between 12 and 15 from the difference for women who marry at age 16 yields

the estimate. For states with a marriage requirement of 13 or 14, the difference in difference is

close to 0 and not significant, as expected. For states with an age minimum of 15, the estimated

difference in difference is 4.6% and significantly different from zero. An even greater contrast

shows up for the states specifying a minimum age of 16, with a large and significant estimate of

14.0%. These results imply that restrictive marriage laws increase the costs to potential teen

brides and likely prevent some desired early teen marriages.

        As a final check on the validity of the laws as instruments, I explore the timing of law

changes. One potential concern is that states which pass more restrictive laws would have

experienced larger reductions in early teen marriage rates even in the absence of a law change.

However, if law changes are exogenous, then future values of the laws should not affect current

early marriage rates conditional on current laws. 17 To check this, I added the state laws in place

ten years in the future into a regression describing early teen marriage rates, where the regression

also includes the current set of laws (and the full set of controls appearing in the baseline IV

specification in Table 5). The results from this exercise indicate that future laws do not

significantly determine current early marriage rates, while current laws do. The F-statistic for the

effect of future laws is 0.92 (p-value=0.44), while the F-statistic for the effect of current laws is

14.6 (p-value=.01).


5 Instrumental Variable Estimates

5.1 First Stage Results

        To investigate the effects of teenage marriage and high school completion on subsequent

poverty, this paper uses state marriage, schooling, and labor laws as instrumental variables. The


17
  Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2004) and Lochner and Moretti (2004) perform similar analyses for
compulsory schooling laws and find that future laws do not affect current dropout rates in a state.


                                                  20
bottom panel in Table 5 presents the first stage estimates. Since I am instrumenting for both early

marriage and dropout status, there are two sets of regression estimates. Column 1 regresses a

dummy variable for early teen marriage on the set of marriage, schooling, and labor laws.

Additional controls mirror those used in column 4 of Table 1, and are described in the table.

        The marriage laws significantly reduce the number of teens who marry before the age of

16; ceteris paribus, states with a legislated minimum of 13 or less have between 0.5 to 1.1

percentage points more early marriages compared to states with more restrictive marriage laws.

In states without a legislated minimum, common law (which specifies a minimum of 12 years)

prevails; the estimated effect of a common law is similar to a legislated minimum of 13 or less.

Interestingly, the child labor laws seem to work in the opposite direction—more restrictive child

labor laws actually increase the probability of an early marriage. A woman born in a state with a

child labor law of 9 or greater has a one percentage point higher probability of marriage at an

early age. One possible explanation is that early marriage becomes more attractive to a young

woman if her other options, such as working, are more limited. The third set of laws which deal

with compulsory schooling are smaller and less significant.

        Column 2 presents the same set of coefficient estimates for the first-stage dropout

regressions. As expected, the compulsory schooling laws have a relatively large and jointly

significant effect on whether a young woman finishes high school. The marriage laws have

nontrivial coefficient estimates, but are imprecisely estimated and therefore not significant. One

reason why dropout status might project onto the marriage laws is that the marriage laws are

highly correlated with the compulsory schooling laws. The marriage laws are measured every

year but the schooling laws are only measured intermittently. 18 In the years for which schooling

laws are interpolated noisily, effects may load onto the marriage laws instead. More restrictive

child labor laws seem to discourage some women from dropping out of school, but the estimates


18
  The compulsory school and child labor laws were collected approximately every five years. I adopt the
approach of Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) and interpolate by extending older data.


                                                   21
are not statistically significant.

         For all of the estimates, F-statistics are reported for the joint significance of the

instruments. The F-statistic is 15.68 for the early teen marriage equation and 5.44 for the dropout

equation. All of the standard errors reported in Table 6 (and throughout the paper) are adjusted

for clustering by state of birth to account for arbitrary correlation over time. Bertrand, Duflo, and

Mullainathan (2004) show that failure to account for such correlation can lead to severely biased

confidence intervals for the estimated coefficients. This is particularly likely to be important in

IV analyses which use laws over time as instruments, since there is typically a long time

component and plausible serial correlation. 19

5.2 Baseline IV Results

         The top panel of Table 5 presents the baseline results for the instrumented poverty

regression. Early teen marriage and dropping out of high school both have sizable effects on the

probability a woman will end up in poverty. The estimates imply that marrying young is

associated with a 30.6 percentage point increase in the probability of living in poverty. Dropping

out of high school is associated with an 11.2 percentage point increase in poverty.

         I now present a series of alternative estimation approaches to assess the robustness of the

baseline result. Table 1 revealed that aggregation made a large difference for OLS estimates: the

individual-level results suggested a small impact of early teen marriage on poverty, while the

grouped-level OLS estimates suggested a large effect. The first column in Table 6 repeats the

baseline IV analysis, but this time with grouped data. The data is aggregated at the state of birth

× year of birth × census year level. The grouped data IV estimates are remarkably similar to the

individual-level IV estimates (0.314 versus 0.306 for early teen marriage and 0.112 versus 0.112

for dropout). The similarity of the coefficient estimates is not surprising, since the instruments


19
  Failure to adjust the standard errors in the first stage and the corresponding F-statistics makes a large
difference in the current analysis. Without clustering, the F-statistics for the dropout equation rise to 29.22
and for the marriage equation to 22.35. Clustering at the state of birth × year of birth level, the F-statistic
for the dropout equation is 12.96 for the dropout equation and 15.48 for the marriage equation.


                                                      22
are constant for all individuals in a state-cohort group, effectively aggregating both the

individual-level and group-level estimates. The standard errors also change very little when using

the grouped data, increasing by about 10% for early teen marriage and not at all for dropout.

Since the aggregated data produces very similar point estimates and slightly more conservative

standard errors, in what follows, I present results for aggregated data unless otherwise noted. 20

         As is well known, weak instruments can lead to biased IV estimates; under general

conditions and finite samples, weak instruments bias the estimates in the same direction as OLS

estimates (See Bound, Jaeger, and Baker, 1995; and Staiger and Stock, 1997). The first stage F-

statistics appearing in Table 5 are significant, but of moderate size. To help assess whether weak

instruments might be biasing the results, the first column in Table 6 reports LIML estimates for

the baseline model. The consensus in the literature is that when there are many instruments /

weak instruments, LIML tends to exhibit less bias compared to least squares IV, and LIML

confidence intervals typically also have better coverage rates (Stock, 2002). 21 The LIML results

are virtually identical to the grouped IV estimates. This suggests that weak instruments are not a

major issue for estimation.

         The next task is to assess the impact migration has on the assignment of state laws for

marriage, schooling, and work and the subsequent IV estimates. As a reminder, laws are assigned

based on a woman’s state of birth, although ideally we would like to use the state a woman lived

in at age 15. Since some women have migrated out of their birth state and into a state with a

different set of laws by age 15, the instruments are measured with error. I assess how this affects

the IV estimates in column 3 of Table 6.


20
   Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004) show that clustering does not always do a good job correcting
the standard errors if the within-group sample is large. Aggregating the data should produce more
conservative standard errors in such situations.
21
   Of course if the instruments are weak enough, both the least squares IV and the LIML confidence
intervals can have the wrong coverage rates. With a single endogenous variable, solutions include
inverting the Anderson-Rubin test statistic or implementing the conditional likelihood ratio test of Moreira
(2003). These approaches do not readily extend to the case where there are two or more endogenous
variables, which is the situation in the current paper.



                                                     23
        To see how I examine the issue, notice the expected value of the ideal (but unobserved)

                                                                         *
state laws can be calculated if migration probabilities are known. Let z ij be a dummy variable

indicating the state law woman i faces at age 15, given she was born in state j. The asterisk

indicates this variable is not observed, since she may have moved from her birth state by age 15.

However, if migration probabilities are known, we can calculate the expected value of this

variable as

         E[ z ij* ] = ∑ p jk wk
                    k


where p jk represents the probability that a woman will live in state k at age 15 given she was

born in state j and wk is the law in force in state k for the relevant year. The same logic applies

when there are several variables for state laws, such as the instruments used in Table 5.

                                                                *          *
        It is straightforward to show that substituting in E[ z ij ] for z ij yields consistent estimates

in an IV framework. The remaining issue is how to consistently estimate the conditional

migration probabilities, p jk . While this information is not available for all women, we can

estimate the migration patterns for women who are age 15 at the time of the census enumeration.

This is because the Census records both state of birth and state of current residence. I use 15-year

old women in the 1960 Census to estimate these migration probabilities. I then calculate the

expected value of the laws based on the state a women lived in at age 15 as outlined above, and

use these expected laws as instruments. 22 The migration adjusted estimates in column 3 of Table

6 are very similar to the baseline estimates, indicating the assignment of state marriage laws

based on state of birth is a reasonable approach.

        If there is heterogeneity an individual’s “returns” to marrying young or dropping out of


22
   This implicitly assumes that migration patterns have not changed over time. As a check on this
assumption, I alternatively used 15 year olds from the 1970 Census, and the IV estimates are very similar
(.317 for early teen marriage, and .111 for dropout). Expanding the age window to 14-16 year olds also
yields similar estimates.


                                                    24
school, the assumptions needed for IV to consistently estimate an average treatment effect are

stronger (Björklund and Moffit, 1987; Card, 1999, 2001; Heckman and Vytlacil, 1998; Willis and

Rosen, 1979; Wooldridge, 1997). In the current context, a sufficient set of conditions is the

instruments are independent of (i) the individual returns to marrying young and dropping out of

high school, (ii) any individual-specific intercept term in the outcome equation, and (iii) the

reduced form residuals in the first stage early marriage and dropout equations (see Heckman and

Vytlacil, 1998).

        To assess the impact of heterogeneous returns, I pursue a control function approach

similar to the one proposed by Garen (1984) and discussed by Card (2001). The basic idea of a

control function approach is to make some assumptions about the relationship between the

observed variables (controls and instruments) and the individual-specific returns and individual-

specific intercept term. One then includes additional terms in the outcome regression to control

for these relationships. The Appendix details the assumptions and estimating equation. The

resulting control function estimates appear in column 4 of Table 6. Compared to the baseline IV

estimates, the early marriage estimate is approximately 10% smaller and the dropout estimate is

approximately 10% larger. These results suggest that heterogeneity across individuals plays a

minor role in estimation of the average treatment effect.

5.3 Additional Estimates

        To further investigate heterogeneity in the returns to marrying young and dropping out of

school, Table 7 presents additional OLS estimates. Panel (A) estimates the poverty equation

separately for blacks and whites. The OLS estimates suggest that dropping out of school is

associated with a much larger penalty for blacks compared to whites, while the early marriage

coefficient is similar for both races. The estimates by region of country in Panel (B) suggest

somewhat larger coefficients for both early marriage and dropping out, although the estimates are

imprecise.

        Panel (C) shows how the estimates differ based on year of birth and age cohorts. The


                                                 25
first column interacts the early teen marriage and dropout variables with three age cohorts. The

coefficient for early teen marriage is much larger for the earliest birth cohort (born between 1920

and 1930). In contrast, the dropout coefficient is smallest for the earliest birth cohort. Column 2

performs the same exercise, but with current age cohort interactions instead. Both early marriage

and dropping out of school have the largest effect for women in their twenties. Column 3

includes both sets of interactions at the same time. The same general patterns hold in this

regression as well.

         The first two panels in Table 8 present additional IV estimates by race and region of

country. The IV estimate of the early teen marriage effect for the black sample is 0.46, which is

much larger than the baseline estimate or the estimate for the white sample (although the estimate

for whites is imprecisely estimated and not significant). The marriage instruments also have

more power for the black sample than the white sample. The dropout coefficients are similar for

whites and blacks, but statistically insignificant for blacks. When looking at estimates by region

of the country, it becomes clear that most of the identification is coming from Southern states,

which is not surprising given that much of the variation in laws occurs in this region of the

country. Interestingly, the dropout coefficients fall for both the black and white samples. Taken

together, these OLS and IV estimates suggest heterogeneous returns to marrying young and

dropping out of school, although the estimates are sometimes imprecise. 23

         The last three panels in Table 8 present additional robustness checks for the IV estimates.

This paper has focused on the laws governing marriage with parental consent for women. There

are also laws specifying the minimum marriage age without parental consent for women and laws

for men. As discussed earlier, there is little variation in the laws without consent for either

women or men before 1970, so we cannot effectively use these to instrument for marriages at

later ages. The laws for men with parental consent are highly correlated with the laws for women


23
  While it would be interesting to also have IV estimates by birth and age cohorts as in Table 7, this is not
feasible in practice as there is not sufficient variation in the instrument set.


                                                      26
with parental consent, and are usually two years higher. In Panel (C) we use all of the marriage

laws, for men and women, with and without consent, as instruments. These additional

instruments result in modest increases in the IV estimates for both the early marriage and dropout

variables.

        In the results presented so far, the dependent variable has been poverty, a binary

outcome. I now explore the effect of early marriage and dropping out of high school on family

income, a continuous outcome. While this variable arguably does not capture a family’s financial

well-being as accurately (since it does not account for family size or the number of children), it

provides a useful robustness check. The effects of early marriage and dropout status on family

income are large, presenting a similar picture to the poverty regressions. An additional

robustness exercise includes observations where the age at first marriage variable was allocated

by the Census Bureau. Including these observations had a large impact on the OLS estimates

appearing in the bottom panel of Table 1. In contrast, the IV estimates are robust to the inclusion

or exclusion of these allocated observations.

        As a final exercise, in Table 9 I investigate the effect of divorce on poverty. I begin by

presenting estimates similar to those in column 4 of Table 1, but with an additional variable for

whether a woman is currently divorced. The estimated effect is substantial. Current divorce is

associated with a 21.5% increase in the probability of poverty, an effect similar in magnitude to

the estimated effect of an early teen marriage. In this regression, the early teen marriage

coefficient falls slightly compared to Table 1, from 26.4% to 23.5%. The IV estimate in column

2 instruments for early teen marriage and dropout status using the same specification as column 1

of Table 6, but also adds in the currently divorced variable as an additional control. The IV

estimate for early teen marriage falls to 26.4% (compared to 31.4% in Table 6), suggesting that at

least part of the penalty for an early teen marriage arises through a divorce channel. The divorce

coefficient also falls in this specification compared to Table 1, but remains large.

        Since divorce might not be exogenous, it would be useful to instrument for this variable


                                                 27
as well. Previous research has analyzed the effect of changes in divorce laws on divorce rates and

stocks (Friedberg, 1998; Parkman, 1992; Peters, 1986; Wolfers, 2006). Research in this area has

looked at the impact of divorce laws on outcomes such as labor supply, suicide, investment in

marriage specific capital, children’s well-being, and family distress (Gray, 1998; Gruber, 2004;

Stevenson, 2007; Stevenson and Wolfers, 2006). One possibility for the current paper is to use

these divorce laws as instruments.

        I follow the approach taken by Wolfers (2006) and Gruber (2004) and use unilateral

divorce laws as an instrument for the stock of divorces. I assign divorce laws based on current

state of residence (using Gruber’s coding), which necessitates the use of individual-level data.

The divorce coefficient appearing in column 3 of Table 9 is negative, but not statistically

significant. The early marriage coefficient rises to 38%, while the dropout coefficient does not

change much compared to the baseline estimate. While the results of this exercise are interesting,

they should be interpreted with caution, as most of the changes in divorce laws, as well as most of

the rise in divorce rates, occurs after my sample period (see Figure 1).

5.4 Discussion

        The IV estimates indicate the causal effects of early teen marriage and dropout status on

future poverty are substantial. The baseline estimates imply that marrying young increases the

chances a young bride will end up in poverty later in life by around 31 percentage points.

Dropping out of high school has a somewhat smaller, but still substantial, 11 percentage point

effect on future poverty. These results are robust to the level of aggregation, LIML estimation,

corrections for migration, and a control function approach. The individual-level OLS estimates

for early teen marriage are small, while aggregated OLS estimates yield an estimate which is of

the same magnitude as the IV estimates.

        To better understand why the IV and aggregated OLS estimates differ so much from the

individual level OLS estimates, I now explore the role of measurement error. In Census data, age

at first marriage is calculated from the reported date of first marriage and date of birth (month and


                                                 28
year). Note that usually only one person fills in the Census form for the entire household. This is

likely to exacerbate measurement error, as the person completing the census may not have

accurate information about other household members’ dates of birth and first marriage. In 1970

and 1980, the Census form instructs individuals to “give your best estimate” when either of these

dates is “not known.” 24

        Since the fraction of early teen marriages is so small, any mismeasurement of date of

birth or date of marriage – the two variables used to construct age at first marriage – is likely to

lead to a very large downward bias in the OLS estimate of the early teen marriage coefficient.

With just a small amount of measurement error, the incorrectly classified teen brides can

outnumber the true teen brides, resulting in substantial attenuation bias.

        To better understand the prevalence of measurement error in reported dates, consider the

1975 National Fertility Survey (NFS). This was the fifth in a series of surveys conducted every

five year examining marital fertility and family planning. The interesting feature of the survey in

1975 is that the researchers chose to re-interview a selected sample of women from the 1970

survey. The re-interview sample includes 2,355 white women in their first marriages who were

continuously married, whose age at marriage was less than 25 years, and whose husbands had

also been married only once. Both the 1975 and 1970 surveys ask date of birth and date of first

marriage, with both sets of answers being recorded in the 1975 sample. So for this subset of

women, I can calculate a lower bound on misreports by comparing the same woman’s answers

over a 5 year time horizon.

        Table 10 tabulates how often the responses from the 1975 survey do not match with the

responses from the 1970 survey. For the entire sample, dates of birth do not concur 4% of the

time and dates of marriage do not concur 12% of the time. The result is that a woman’s age at


24
  Research finds several sources for misreporting of date of birth, including ignorance, miscommunication,
distortion to meet preconceived social norms, and errors in processing (Mason and Cope, 1987). These
same measurement error issues are likely compounded for reports of date of first marriage.



                                                   29
marriage measured in years will not line up for 11% of the observations in the sample. Mismatch

rates are also reported in Table 10 for groupings based on a woman’s reported marriage age in the

1970 survey. For those marrying at or below the age of 15 in the 1970 survey, 8% of birth dates

and 35% of marriage dates do not align across survey years. For this group, 39% of the implied

marriage ages differ across the surveys. While misreporting generally declines as a woman’s

reported marriage age rises, the amount of error in these other groups is modest in comparison.

The amount of measurement error in the Census is likely to be even larger, since the 1975 NFS

only samples women who have never divorced and has women answer questions about

themselves.

        Measurement error can plausibly explain the difference between the individual OLS

estimates and the grouped OLS or IV estimates. One remaining question is why the grouped

OLS and IV estimates are so large. The results in Table 9 put some perspective on the size of the

effect: early teen marriage results in an increase in poverty which is on par with the effect of

divorce (when treated exogenously) or almost three times the effect of dropping out of school.

These effects are larger than those found in much of the literature for teenage childbearing

discussed earlier. How can the current results be reconciled with that literature?

        There are at least two reasons why the estimated effect of early teenage marriage might

not be comparable to the effects estimated in for teenage childbearing in the literature. First, the

sample periods differ greatly. Most of the research on teenage childbearing is for births occurring

in the 1970s or later, since these studies often use NLSY or PSID data. In contrast, the current

paper focuses on women who were age 15 between 1935 and 1969. Comparing the two time

periods, there are large differences in access to birth control and abortion, social norms, and labor

market opportunities for married women and women with children. Birth control began to be

widely available to young, single women starting in the late 1960s and had large effects on

women’s career and marriage decisions (Goldin and Katz, 2002). Abortion also became legalized

in the early 1970s, first in select states, and then nationwide with Roe v. Wade in 1973. To


                                                 30
highlight one change in what was socially acceptable over time, consider illegitimacy rates,

which rose from 3.9% in 1950, to 10.7% in 1970, to 28.0% in 1990 (National Vital Statistics

Reports, 2002). Female labor force participation rates for married women also increased

dramatically over this time period, steadily increasing from 15% in 1940 to over 50% by 1980

and almost 75% by 1990 (Goldin, 2006). In sum, there were many changes starting in the 1970s

which could make teenage motherhood after that period not comparable to my sample of early

teen brides earlier in the century.

        The second reason for why the estimated effect of early teen marriage is so large

compared to the estimates for teen childbearing is that this paper looks at a sample of particularly

young teenagers – those marrying at or before the age of 15 – while the teen childbearing

literature typically examines the effect of births to teenagers less than or equal to age 19. There

may be a large difference between marrying (or having a child) at or before the age of 15 versus

between the ages of 16 and 19.

        Some of these differences can be highlighted using the 1965 and 1970 National Fertility

Surveys. 25 Women who marry at age 15 or younger divorce within five years of marriage 18% of

the time, compared to 12% for women who marry at age 16 or 17 and 7% for women who marry

at age 18 or 19. Eighty-seven percent of early teen brides have not finished high school,

compared to 66% and 29% of brides who marry at age 16-17 and 18-19, respectively. 26 These

early teen brides have children early, with 63% having one child by the age of 16 and 25% having

two children by the age of 18. This compares to rates of 10% and 8% for those marrying between

16-17, and 1% and 0.5% for those marrying between 18-19.

        Moreover, early teen brides marry men who are also relatively young and less educated.


25
   In the combined 1965 and 1970 NFS sample, there are 654 marriages before age 16, 2,080 marriages at
age 16-17, and 3,458 at age 18-19.
26
   For tabulations of dropout status, I only include women (or men, when considering husband’s education)
currently over the age of 25 so as to focus on individuals who are more likely to have completed their
education.



                                                   31
Twenty percent of women marrying at age 15 or younger marry a man who is 17 or younger. In

contrast, only 10% of women marrying between 16-17 and 3% of women marrying between

18-19 do so. The dropout rates of early teen brides’ husbands is 65%, compared to 53% for

women marrying between 16-17 and 36% marrying between 18-19. These tabulations from the

NFS show that those who marry very young have substantially different divorce, fertility,

schooling, and husbands, even in comparison to women who marry just a few years later.

        One other interesting comparison can be drawn from the NFS data. In 1965, the survey

asked respondents if they would encourage a daughter to marry at a younger age, the same age, or

an older age as they did. Ninety-one percent of early teen brides answered “older”, compared to

48% for the rest of the sample. This provides some indication that early teen brides would not

necessarily make the same decision to marry so young if they had it to do over again.


6 Conclusion

        Do the negative effects associated with early teen marriage and dropping out of school

reflect unmeasured characteristics or the true consequences of a teen’s choices? To better

understand the effect of women’s early decisions on future life outcomes, this paper uses

variation over time and across states in the laws which regulate early marriage, school attendance,

and child labor. Using these laws as instruments for early marriage and high school completion,

the results indicate strong negative effects on poverty status which are not due to self selection.

The baseline IV estimates imply that women who marry young are 31 percentage points more

likely to live in poverty when they are older. Similarly, women who drop out of school are 11

percentage points more likely to be in families below the poverty line. The IV results are robust

to a variety of alternative specifications and estimation methods, including LIML estimation and

a control function approach. In comparison, OLS estimates are sensitive to how the data is

aggregated; regressions on individual level data estimate small effects for early teen marriage,

while aggregated data estimate large effects. I argue the difference is due to a large amount of



                                                 32
measurement error in the early marriage variable, resulting in substantial attenuation bias in the

individual-level OLS regressions, but not the aggregated OLS or IV regressions.

        The results suggest that the decisions women make early in life can have long-lasting

consequences. The IV estimates suggest that legal restrictions which prevent early marriage and

mandate high school completion have the potential to greatly reduce the chances of future poverty

for a woman and her family. The implication is that legal restrictions on teenager’s choices can

reduce external costs imposed on society, and it is possible that they also prevent some teens from

making decisions they will later regret.




                                                 33
Appendix

        This appendix describes the control function approach taken for the estimate appearing in

Table 6. Consider the following outcome equation, which allows for individual-specific

coefficients and an individual-specific intercept term:

(1)      y i = α + γ mi + δ d i + (α i − α ) + (γ i − γ ) mi + (δ i − δ )d i + ei

where yi is a dummy for poverty, mi is early teen marriage, and d i is divorce. For ease of

exposition, other control variables are excluded and coefficients have been written as deviations

from their averages.

        The equations for early teen marriage and divorce are

(2)      mi = ϕ z i + u i

(3)      d i = ρ z i + vi

where z i is the vector of marriage, schooling, and work laws for individual i’s state.

        Begin by assuming that E (ei | mi , d i , z i ) = 0 , E (u i | z i ) = 0 , and E (vi | z i ) = 0 and

that the three individual-specific terms α i , γ i , and δ i are mean independent of z i . Following

Garen (1984) and Card (2001), further assume that

         E (α i − α | mi , d i , z i ) = π m mi + π d d i + π z z i

         E (γ i − γ | mi , d i , z i ) = λ m mi + λ d d i + λ z z i

         E (δ i − δ | mi , d i , z i ) = τ m mi + τ d d i + τ z z i .

Under these linearity assumptions, it follows that

         E ( y i | mi , d i , z i ) = α + γ m i + δ d i + π m u i + π d v i + λ m m i u i + λ d d i v i + τ m m i u i + τ d d i v i .

This equation can be consistently estimated using the estimated residuals û i and v̂i from

equations (2) and (3) in place of u i and vi .




                                                              34
References

Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist, 2000. “How Large are the Social Returns to Education?
        Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws,” NBER Macro Annual, No. 15, pp. 9-59.
Angrist, Joshua and Guido Imbens, 1991. “Sources of Identifying Information in Evaluation
        Models.”
Angrist, Joshua and William Evans, 1996. “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of the
        1970 State Abortion Reforms,” NBER Working Paper 5406.
Ashcraft, Adam and Kevin Lang, 2006. "The Consequences of Teenage Childbearing," NBER
        Working Paper 12485.
Bane, Mary Jo, 1986. “Household Composition and Poverty” in Sheldon Danziger and Daniel
        Weinberg, eds., Fighting Poverty: What Works and What Doesn't, Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.
Blank, Rebecca, Kerwin Charles, and James Sallee, 2007. “Do State Laws Affect the Age at
        Marriage? A Cautionary Tale About Avoidance Behavior?” working paper.
Becker, Gary S., 1974. “A Theory of Marriage,” in Economics of the Family, Schultz, ed.,
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974.
Becker, Gary S., Elisabeth M. Landes, and Robert T. Michael, 1977. “An Economic Analysis of
        Marital Instability,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, No. 6, pp. 1141-1188.
Berger, Mark and J. Paul Leigh, 1989. “Schooling, Self-Selection, and Health,” Journal of
        Human Resources, Vol. 24, No. 3, pp. 433-455.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004. “How Much Should We
        Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119,
        No. 1, pp. 249-75.
Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux, and Kjell Salvanes, 2004. “Fast Times at Ridgemont High? The
        Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on Teenage Births,” NBER Working Paper 10911.
Bound, John, David Jaeger, and Regina Baker, 1995. “Problems with Instrumental Variables
        Estimation When the Correlation between the Instruments and the Endogenous
        Explanatory Variables is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol.
        90, pp. 443-450.
Björklund, Anders and Robert Moffit, 1987. “The Estimation of Wage Gains and Welfare Gains
        in Self-Selection,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 69(1), pp. 42-29.
Card, David, 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor
        Economics, Volume 3A, ed. by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam and New
        York: North Holland.
Card, David, 2001. “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent
        Econometric Problems,” Econometrica, Vol. 64, No. 5, pp. 1127-1160.
Carter, Susan et al., 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States, Millennial Edition,
        Cambridge University Press.
Census Bureau, 1981. Enumeration Procedures for the 1980 Population and Housing Census,
        available from http://www.ipums.org, Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center.
Fletcher, Jason and Barbara Wolfe, 2008. "Education and Labor Market Consequences of
        Teenage Childbearing: Evidence Using the Timing of Pregnancy Outcomes and
        Community Fixed Effects," NBER Working Papers 13847.
Friedberg, Leora, 1998. “Did Unilateral Divorce Raise Divorce Rates? Evidence from Panel
        Data,” American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 3, pp. 608-627.
Garen, John, 1984. “The Returns to Schooling: A Selectivity Bias Approach with a Continuous
        Choice Variable,” Econometrica, 52, 1199-1218.
Geronimus, Arline and Sanders Korenman, 1992. “The Socioeconomic Consequences of Teen
        Childbearing Reconsidered,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, pp. 1187-1214.



                                             35
Goerge, Robert and Bong Joo Lee, 1997. "Abuse and Neglect of the Children," in Rebecca
        Maynard, ed., Kids Having Kids, Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.
Goldin, Claudia, 1998. “America’s Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread of
        Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Economic History, Vol. 58,
        pp. 345-374.
Goldin, Claudia, 1999. “A Brief History of Education in the United States,” NBER Historical
        Working Paper 119.
Goldin, Claudia, 2006. “The Quiet Revolution That Transformed Women's Employment,
        Education, and Family,” 2006 Ely Lecture, American Economic Association Meetings,
        Boston MA.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence Katz, 1997. “Why the United States Led in Education: Lessons
        from Secondary School Expansion, 1910 to 1940,” NBER Working Paper 6144.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz, 2002. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and
        Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(5); 730-
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz, 2003. “Mass Secondary Schooling and the State: The Role
        of State Compulsion in the High School Movement,” NBER Working Paper 10075.
Gray, Jeffrey, 1998. “Divorce Law Changes, Household Bargaining, and Married Women’s
        Labor Supply,” American Economic Review, 88(3): 628-42.
Greer, Florencia and Jodie Levin-Epstein, 1998. “One Out of Every Five: Teen Mothers and
        Subsequent Childbearing,” Center for Law and Social Policy.
Grogger, Jeff and Stephen Bronars, 1993. “The Socioeconomic Consequences of Teenage
        Childbearing: Findings from a Natural Experiment,” Family Planning Perspectives, Vol.
        25, pp. 156-161.
Gruber, Jonathan, 2001. “Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, Introduction,”
        in Jonathan Gruber, ed., Risky Behavior Among Youth: An Economic Analysis. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press, pp. 1-28.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2004. “Is Making Divorce Easier Bad for Children? The Long-Run
        Implications of Unilateral Divorce.” Journal of Labor Economics, 22(4): 799–833.
Hanushek, Eric, Steven Rivkin, and Lori Taylor, 1996. “Aggregation and the Estimated Effects
        of School Resources,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 78, No. 4, pp. 611-627.
Hausman, J., 1978. “Specification Tests in Econometrics,” Econometrica, Vol. 46, No. 6, pp.
        1251-1271.
Heckman, James, and Edward Vytlacil, 1998. “Instrumental Variables Methods for the
        Correlated Random Coefficient Model: Estimating the Rate of Return to Schooling when
        the Return is Correlated with Schooling,” Journal of Human Resources, 23, 974-987.
Heinz, W. Berendes, et al, 1998. “Risk Factors for Infant Homicide in the United States,” New
        England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 339, No. 17.
Hoffman, Saul B, 1998. “Teen Childbearing Isn’t So Bad After All...Or Is It?—A Review of the
        New Literature,” Family Planning Perspectives, Vol. 30, No.5.
Hotz, V. Joseph, McElroy, and Seth G. Sanders, 1997. “Impacts on Mothers and Consequences
        for Government,” in Rebecca Maynard, ed., Kids Having Kids, Washington, D.C.: The
        Urban Institute Press.
Hotz, V. Joseph, McElroy, and Seth G. Sanders, 2005. “Teenage Childbearing and Its Life Cycle
        Consequences: Exploiting a Very Natural Experiment,” Journal of Human Resources,
        40(3), Summer 2005, 683-715.
Hotz, V. Joseph, Charles H. Mullin, and Seth G. Sanders, 1997. “Bounding Causal Effects Using
        Data from a Contaminated Natural Experiment: Analyzing the Effects of Teenage
        Childbearing,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 64, pp. 575-603.
Hunt, Jennifer, 2003. “Teen Births Keep American Crime High,” NBER Working Paper 9632.
Kalmuss, Debra and Pearila Namerow, 1994. “Subsequent Childbearing Among Teenage
        Mothers: The Determinants of a Closely Spaced Second Birth,” Family Planning


                                              36
        Perspectives, Vol. 26, No. 4, pp. 149-153.
Katz, Lawrence and David Autor, 1999. “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
        Inequality,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics
        Volume 3, Amsterdam, Netherlands: North-Holland.
Kiernan, Kathleen, 1986. “Teenage Marriage and Marital Breakdown: A Longitudinal Study,”
        Population Studies, Vol. 40, No. 1, pp. 35-54.
Klepinger, Daniel, Shelly Lundberg, and Robert Plotnick, 1999. “How Does Adolescent Fertility
        Affect the Human Capital and Wages of Young Women?,” Journal of Human Resources,
        pp. 421-448.
Leon, Alexis, 2004. “The Effect of Education on Fertility: Evidence from Compulsory Schooling
        Laws,” Working Paper, University of Pittsburgh.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana, 2002. “Were Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws Effective:
        An Analysis from 1915 to 1939,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. XLV, No. 2,
        2002.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana, 2005. “The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the
        U.S.,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol.72, No. 1.
Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti, 2004. “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from
        Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports,” American Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 1,
        pp. 155-189.
Margo, Robert and T. Aldrich Finegan, 1996, “Compulsory Schooling Legislation and School
        Attendance in Turn-of-the-Century America: A ‘Natural Experiment’ Approach,”
        Economics Letters, Vol. 53, pp. 103-110.
Mason, Karen and Lisa Cope, 1987. “Sources of Age and Date-of-Birth Misreporting in the 1900
        U.S. Census,” Demography, Vol. 24, No. 4, pp. 563-573.
May, Geoffrey, 1929. Marriage Laws and Decisions in the United States, New York: Russell
        Sage Foundation.
Moffit, Robert, 1992. “Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review,” Journal of
        Economic Literature, Vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 1-61.
Moore, K. and L. Waite, 1977. “Early Childbearing and Educational Attainment,” Family
        Planning Perspectives, Vol. 9, pp. 220-225.
Moreira, Marcelo, 2003. “A Conditional Likelihood Ratio Test for Structural Models,”
        Econometrica, Vol. 71, No. 4, pp. 1027-1048.
National Center for Health Statistics, 1997. “Report of Final Natality Statistics, 1997,” Vol. 47,
        No. 12, Washington, D.C.: U.S Government Printing Office.
O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin, 2001. “Risky Behavior among Youths: Some Issues from
        Behavioral Economics,” in Jonathan Gruber, ed., Risky Behavior Among Youth: An
        Economic Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Oreopoulos, Philip, 2007. “Do Dropouts Drop Out Too Soon? Wealth, Health, and Happiness
        from Compulsory Schooling,” Journal of Public Economics (forthcoming).
Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page, and Ann Stevens, 2006. “The Intergenerational Effects of
        Compulsory Schooling,” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 24, No. 4, pp. 729-760.
Parkman, Allen, 1992. “Unilateral Divorce and the Labor Force Participation Rate of Married
        Women, Revisited,” American Economic Review, 82(3): 671-78.
Peters, H. Elizabeth. 1986. “Marriage and Divorce: Informational Constraints and Private
        Contracting.” American Economic Review, 76(3): 437–54.
Richmond, Mary and Joseph Hall, 1929. Marriage and the State, New York: Russell Sage
        Foundation.
Ribar, David, 1994. “Teenage Fertility and High School Completion,” Review of Economics and
        Statistics, Vol. 76, No. 3, pp. 413-24.
Ruggles, Steven et al., 2008. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 4.0,
        http://www.ipums.org, Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center.


                                               37
Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock, 1997. “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
         Instruments,” Econometrica, Vol 65, No. 3, pp. 557-86.
Stevenson, Betsey, 2007. “The Impact of Divorce Laws on Investment in Marriage Specific
         Capital,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25(1): 75-94.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers, 2006. “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce
         Laws and Family Distress.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(1): 267-88.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers, 2007. “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their Driving
         Forces,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21, No. 2, pp 27-52.
Stock, James, 2002. “Instrumental Variables in Economics and Statistics,” in International
         Encyclopedia for the Social and Behavioral Sciences, Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 15721-
         15724.
The World Almanac and Book of Facts, various years (1935-1969). New York: Press Publication
         Company.
Theil, Henri, 1954. Linear Aggregation of Economic Relations, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey, 1997. “On Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of the Average Treatment
         Effect in a Random Coefficient Model,” Economics Letters, 56, 129-133.
Willis, Robert, and Sherwin Rosen, 1979. “Education and Self-Selection,” Journal of Political
         Economy, 87, S7-S36.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey, 1997. “On Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of the Average Treatment
         Effect in a Random Coefficient Model,” Economics Letters, 56, 129-133.
Wolfers, Justin, 2006. “Did Unilateral Divorce Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconciliation and New
         Results,” American Economic Review, 96(5): 1802-1820.




                                             38
Table 1. OLS Estimates of the Effect of Early Teen Marriage and Dropping Out of High School on
Poverty Using Individual and Grouped Data.

                                                                     Dependent Variable = Poor
                                                                      (1 = poor, 0 = not poor)
                                                    (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)
                                                                              OLS Estimates
                                                          **             **
 Early teen marriage                              0.043          0.037           0.033**       0.032**       0.029**
                                                  (0.005)        (0.003)         (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 High school dropout                              0.134**        0.125**         0.122**       0.121**       0.123**
                                                  (0.010)        (0.007)         (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)
 Control variables:
  Census year, race, and age dummies                                X              X             X              X
  State of birth and birth cohort dummies                                          X             X              X
  Region of birth trends                                                                         X              X
 Allocated observations included                                                                                X
 Observations                                   3,256,434      3,256,434        3,256,434     3,256,434     3,489,385
 R-squared                                        0.041          0.079            0.082         0.082         0.084

                                                                        Grouped OLS Estimates
 Early teen marriage                              1.065**        0.453**         0.329**       0.264**        0.071*
                                                   (.135)        (0.090)         (0.063)       (0.054)       (0.041)
 High school dropout                               0.026         0.119**         0.166**       0.129**       0.136**
                                                  (0.022)        (0.029)         (0.024)       (0.035)       (0.033)
 Control variables:
  Census year, race, and age dummies                                X              X             X              X
  State of birth and birth cohort dummies                                          X             X              X
  Region of birth trends                                                                         X              X
 Allocated observations included                                                                                X
 R-squared                                         0.421          0.815           0.871        0.874          0.884
 Observations (number of cells)                    3,567          3,567           3,567        3,567          3,567
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering by state of birth to account for arbitrary autocorrelation
over time. Data are from the 1960, 1970, and 1980 U.S. Censuses. The sample is restricted to women between the
ages of 20 and 60 who were born in one of the 41 states with valid marriage, compulsory schooling, and child labor
laws (see Appendix Table). The dependent variable, poor, is a dummy equal to one if the woman currently lives in a
family which is at or below the poverty line. Early teen marriage is defined as marrying between the age of 12 and
15 (14 or 15 in the 1970 and 1980 Censuses) and high school dropout is defined as fewer than 12 years of completed
schooling. Year dummies are indicators for each of the three census years, race is a dummy for whether the
respondent is white, and current age dummies are single year indicators for a woman’s current age. State of birth
dummies are indicators for each of the 41 states, and cohort of birth dummies are single year indicators for each
birth cohort. Region of birth trends are separate linear cohort year trends for each of the four birth regions. In the
second panel, the data is aggregated to state of birth × year of birth × census year cell means. Allocated
observations refer to observations whose value for the variable age at first marriage has been logically edited or hot
decked by the Census Bureau.
**
   Significant at the 5% level, *Significant at the 10% level
Table 2. Summary of State Laws by Time Period.

                                                                      Time Period
                                      All      1935-      1940-      1945-     1950-      1955-      1960-     1965-
                                     years     1939       1944       1949      1954       1959       1964      1969
                                      (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
 Marriage Laws (%)
   common law                         4.3       14.1        8.8       5.8       1.5         0         0          0
   minimum marriage age ≤ 13          3.2       3.9         3.4      2.4        3.4        4.4       2.4        2.4
   minimum marriage age = 14         16.7       21.5       18.1      17.1       17.1       17.1      14.2       11.7
   minimum marriage age = 15         18.6       19.5       18.5      18.1       19.5       20.0      19.0       15.6
   minimum marriage age ≥ 16         57.2       41.0       51.2      56.6       58.5       58.5      64.4       70.2

 Compulsory Schooling Laws (%)
   compulsory attendance = 7         10.0       17.6       18.5       9.3        6.8        5.4       7.3        4.9
   compulsory attendance = 8         47.3       58.0       57.1      57.6       47.8       42.4      36.6       31.7
   compulsory attendance = 9         30.1       12.7       14.6      23.4       34.1       35.6      41.5       48.8
   compulsory attendance ≥ 10        12.6       11.7       9.8       9.8        11.2       16.6      14.6       14.6

 Child Labor Laws (%)
   child labor = 6                   13.5       19.5       19.5      17.6       16.1       11.2       6.8       3.9
   child labor = 7                   21.5       22.0       22.0      22.4       21.0       25.9      19.5       18.0
   child labor = 8                   44.7       56.1       56.1      48.8       38.0       34.6      39.5       40.0
   child labor ≥ 9                   20.2        2.4       2.4       11.2       25.9       28.3      34.1       38.0

 Sample size                         1,435      205        205        205       205        205        205       205
Notes: Entries are the fraction of states with a specified law averaged over the five-year time interval. Sample size
is the number of state-years; there are 41 states with laws available and 35 years, for a total of 1,435 observations.
Table 3. Relationship between Early Marriage and Compulsory Schooling, Child Labor, and Divorce
Laws across States.

                                                                         Marriage Laws
                                                                     (minimum marriage age)
                                         common law        ≤ 13          14         15              ≥ 16      Row total
 Compulsory Schooling Laws
   compulsory attendance ≤ 7 (24.5%)          6.3           8.2           6.5         16.2          62.8        100%
   compulsory attendance = 8 (46.1%)          6.2           2.4           9.1         22.7          59.7        100%
   compulsory attendance = 9 (18.1%)          0.0           0.0          49.8          7.7          42.5        100%
   compulsory attendance ≥ 10 (11.3%)         0.0           0.0          16.7         24.7          58.6        100%
 Column average                               4.3           3.2          16.7         18.6          57.2        100%
  2
 χ test of independence                      324.3
  [p-value]                                 [0.0001]

                                                                         Marriage Laws
                                                                     (minimum marriage age)
                                         common law        ≤ 13          14         15              ≥ 16      Row total
 Child Labor Laws
   child labor ≤ 6 (11.4%)                    11.6         11.0           9.2         14.6          53.7        100%
   child labor = 7 (22.8%)                    11.9          3.4          16.8         35.2          32.7        100%
   child labor = 8 (44.0%)                     0.6         2.5           15.5         16.0          65.3        100%
   child labor ≥ 9 (21.8%)                     0.3         0.0           22.7          8.6          68.4        100%
 Column average                               4.3           3.2          16.7         18.6          57.2        100%
 χ2 test of independence                     266.6
   [p-value]                                [0.0001]

                                                                         Marriage Laws
                                                                     (minimum marriage age)
                                         common law        ≤ 13          14         15              ≥ 16      Row total
 Divorce Laws
   no unilateral divorce (96.0%)              4.6           3.3          17.4         18.2          56.6        100%
   unilateral divorce (4.0%)                  0.0           0.0          0.0          29.3          70.7        100%
 Column average                               4.3           3.2          16.7         18.6          57.2        100%
  2
 χ test of independence                       20.3
  [p-value]                                 [0.0001]


Notes: Entries are the fraction of states with a specified combination of laws over all years. Sample size is the
number of state-years; there are 41 states with laws available and 35 years, for a total of 1,435 observations. χ2 test
of independence is a test for the independence of the rows and the columns. Percentages in parentheses represent
marginal percentages averaged over the marriage laws.
Table 4. Pattern of Out-of-State Marriages by Restrictiveness of State Laws, 1968 and 1969 Vital
Statistics Marriage Certificate Data.

                                        Married Outside State of Residence (%)

Earliest Age a Woman                                   State with Equal
Can Marry in         Married in State State with Lower    or Higher
Residence State with  of Residence     Minimum Age Minimum Age            Difference      Observations
Parental Consent           (1)               (2)              (3)       Column (2) – (3) [Weighted Obs.]
                                                          12 ≤ Age at 1st Marriage ≤15
 13 or 14 years                94.6                 0                 5.4                -5.4              482
                               (1.2)                                 (1.2)               (1.2)           [3,889]
 15 years                      94.7                3.9                1.4                 2.5              581
                               (1.0)              (0.9)              (0.5)               (1.0)           [3,842]
 16 years                      77.8               15.3                6.9                 8.4             1,919
                               (1.0)              (0.9)              (0.7)               (1.0)          [16,654]

                                                            Age at 1st Marriage = 16
 13 or 14 years                94.1                 0                 5.9                -5.9             1,160
                               (0.9)                                 (0.9)               (0.9)           [9,935]
 15 years                      93.7                2.1                4.2                -2.1             1,133
                               (1.0)              (0.5)              (0.9)               (1.0)           [7,701]
 16 years                      88.0                3.2                8.8                -5.6             7,128
                               (0.4)              (0.2)              (0.4)               (0.5)          [69,042]

                                                            Difference in Difference
 13 or 14 years                                                                           0.5
                                                                                         (1.5)
 15 years                                                                                 4.6
                                                                                         (1.4)
 16 years                                                                                14.0
                                                                                         (1.2)
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Data collected from marriage certificates by the National Center for Health
Statistics. The sample is restricted to first marriages of women who are residents of and get married in one of the 32
states which are in a Marriage-Reporting Area (MRA) and have information on marriage laws. See footnote 13 in
the text for a list of available MRA states. The marriage certificate data includes all records for small states and a
random sample for larger states; the probabilities above are weighted (unweighted probabilities are very similar).
Table 5. Baseline Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of Early Teen Marriage and Dropping
Out of High School on Poverty.

                                                    Second Stage
                                                                          Dependent Variable = Poor
                                                                           (1 = poor, 0 = not poor)
 Early teen marriage                                                                 0.306**
                                                                                     (0.096)
 Dropout                                                                             0.112**
                                                                                     (0.035)

 Observations                                                                      3,256,434
                                                      First Stage
                                                                            Dependent Variable
                                                              Early Teen Marriage              Dropout
 Marriage Laws (≤13 excluded)
 common law                                                           0.001                          0.010
                                                                     (0.003)                        (0.011)
 minimum marriage age = 14                                            -0.08*                        -0.004
                                                                     (0.004)                        (0.018)
 minimum marriage age = 15                                           -0.011**                       -0.014
                                                                     (0.003)                        (0.015)
 minimum marriage age ≥ 16                                            -0.005                        -0.007
                                                                     (0.004)                        (0.017)
 Compulsory Attendance Laws (7 excluded)
   compulsory attendance = 8                                          0.000                          -0.008
                                                                     (0.001)                        (0.006)
   compulsory attendance = 9                                         -0.005**                       -0.028**
                                                                     (0.003)                        (0.006)
   compulsory attendance ≥ 10                                         0.003                          -0.012
                                                                     (0.002)                        (0.009)
 Child Labor Laws (6 excluded)
   child labor = 7                                                   0.005**                        -0.002
                                                                     (0.002)                        (0.008)
   child labor = 8                                                   0.007**                        -0.005
                                                                     (0.002)                        (0.006)
   child labor ≥ 9                                                   0.010**                        -0.014
                                                                     (0.003)                        (0.009)
 F-statistic (state of birth clustering)                              15.68                           5.44
   [p-value]                                                         [.0001]                        [.0001]

 R-squared                                                            0.019                          0.102
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering by state of birth. All regressions include census year,
race, age, state of birth, and cohort of birth dummies, and region of birth trends. See notes to Table 1.
**
   Significant at the 5% level, *Significant at the 10% level
Table 6. Alternative Estimators for the Baseline Model.

                                                                    Dependent Variable = Poor
                                                                     (1 = poor, 0 = not poor)

                                               Grouped             Grouped             Migration            Control
                                                 IV                 LIML               Adjusted             Function
 Early teen marriage                            0.314**             0.315**              0.318**             0.281**
                                                (0.107)             (0.109)              (0.111)             (0.108)
 Dropout                                        0.112**             0.112**              0.112**             0.123**
                                                (0.034)             (0.035)              (0.033)             (0.036)
 û                                                                                                           -.0152
                                                                                                             (0.165)
 û × early teen marriage                                                                                     3.648*
                                                                                                             (2.045)
 û × dropout                                                                                                 -0.375
                                                                                                             (0.527)
 v̂                                                                                                           0.015
                                                                                                             (0.106)
 v̂ × early teen marriage                                                                                    3.405**
                                                                                                             (1.510)
 v̂ × dropout                                                                                                -0.440*
                                                                                                             (0.267)
 F-statistic for control function                                                                              3.58
   [p-value]                                                                                                 [0.0062]
 F-statistic for early marriage 1st stage       14.52                14.52               13.09
   [p-value]                                   [0.0001]             [0.0001]            [0.0001]
 F-statistic for dropout 1st stage               5.15                 5.15                5.81
   [p-value]                                   [0.0001]             [0.0001]            [0.0001]

 Observations                                    3,567               3,567                3,567               3,567
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering by state of birth. All regressions include census year,
race, age, state of birth, and cohort of birth dummies, and region of birth trends. Data is aggregated to state of birth
× year of birth × census year cell means. See notes to Table 1. The migration adjusted approach is described in the
text and the control function approach is described in the text and Appendix.
**
   Significant at the 5% level, *Significant at the 10% level
Table 7. Heterogeneity in the Return to Marrying Young and Dropping Out of School, OLS Estimates.

                                                                            Dependent Variable = Poor
                                                                             (1 = poor, 0 = not poor)

 (A) By race                                                       Black                             White
                                                                       **
  Early teen marriage                                            0.100                               0.093**
                                                                 (0.033)                             (0.047)
  Dropout                                                        0.242**                             0.097**
                                                                 (0.034)                             (0.024)
  R-squared                                                        0.737                                0.780
  Observations                                                     3,304                                3,567

 (B) By region of country                                          South                           Non-South
                                                                       **
  Early teen marriage                                            0.194                                0.15*
                                                                 (0.078)                             (0.082)
  Dropout                                                        0.110**                             0.095**
                                                                 (0.034)                             (0.029)
  R-squared                                                        0.901                                0.749
  Observations                                                     1,218                                2,349

 (C) By birth year and age cohort
  Early teen marriage × birth cohort 1920-1930            0.391**                                           0.425**
                                                          (0.082)                                           (0.179)
  Early teen marriage × birth cohort 1921-1941            0.151**                                            0.123
                                                          (0.053)                                           (0.125)
  Early teen marriage × birth cohort 1942-1954            0.168**                                             ---
                                                          (0.109)
  Dropout × birth cohort 1920-1930                        0.109**                                           0.314**
                                                          (0.034)                                           (0.119)
  Dropout × birth cohort 1921-1941                        0.165**                                            -0.108
                                                          (0.040)                                           (0.123)
  Dropout × birth cohort 1942-1954                        0.134**                                           -0.396**
                                                          (0.043)                                           (0.162)
  Early marriage * age cohort 20-29                                                 0.370**                   0.066
                                                                                    (0.109)                 (0.045)
  Early marriage * age cohort 30-44                                                  0.120*                  0.075**
                                                                                    (0.067)                 (0.032)
  Early marriage * age cohort 45-60                                                  -0.112                     ---
                                                                                    (0.099)
  Dropout * age cohort 20-29                                                        0.258**                 0.156**
                                                                                    (0.042)                 (0.039)
  Dropout * age cohort 30-44                                                        0.156**                 0.078**
                                                                                    (0.037)                 (0.036)
  Dropout * age cohort 45-60                                                        0.089**                  0.004
                                                                                    (0.034)                 (0.042)
  R-squared                                                0.875                    0.897                       0.902
  Observations                                             3,567                    3,567                       3,567
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering by state of birth. All regressions include census year,
race, age, state of birth, and cohort of birth dummies, and region of birth trends. Data is aggregated to state of birth
× year of birth × census year cell means. See notes to Table 1. There are no observations in the 20-30 year age
cohort who are also in the 1920-30 birth year cohort and there are no observations in the 45-60 age cohort who are
also in the 1942-1954 birth year cohort. This explains the omitted interaction terms in column 3 of Panel (C).
**
   Significant at the 5% level, *Significant at the 10% level
Table 8. Additional IV Estimates.

                                                                     Dependent Variable = Poor
                                                                      (1 = poor, 0 = not poor)

 (A) By race                                              Black                                     White
                                                                **
  Early teen marriage                                     0.464                                      0.227
                                                          (0.205)                                   (0.332)
  Dropout                                                  0.085                                    0.109**
                                                          (0.114)                                   (0.057)
  F-statistic for early marriage eqn.                      52.54                                     5.92
  F-statistic for dropout equation                         5.53                                      4.84
  Observations                                             3,304                                     3,567

 (B) By region of country                                 South                                    Non-South
  Early teen marriage                                     0.384**                                    0.377
                                                          (0.112)                                   (0.440)
  Dropout                                                  0.061*                                    0.063
                                                          (0.032)                                   (0.060)
  F-statistic for early marriage eqn.                     178.44                                     2.40
  F-statistic for dropout equation                         27.45                                     39.19
  Observations                                            1,218                                      2,349

 (C) Adding marriage laws for women without consent and for men with and without consent as instruments
  Early teen marriage                                                                    0.368**
                                                                                         (0.113)
  Dropout                                                                                0.157**
                                                                                         (0.022)
  F-statistic for early marriage equation                                                 47.98
  F-statistic for dropout equation                                                        35.34
  Observations                                                                            3,567

 (D) Using total family income as the dependent variable
  Early teen marriage                                                                   -25.596**
                                                                                        (10.380)
  Dropout                                                                                 -5.470
                                                                                         (4.495)
  F-statistic for early marriage equation                                                 14.52
  F-statistic for dropout equation                                                         5.15
  Observations                                                                            3,567

 (E) Including allocated observations
  Early teen marriage                                                                    0.334**
                                                                                         (0.103)
  Dropout                                                                                0.110**
                                                                                         (0.042)
  F-statistic for early marriage equation                                                 15.96
  F-statistic for dropout equation                                                         5.27
  Observations                                                                            3,567
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering by state of birth. All regressions include census year,
race, age, state of birth, and cohort of birth dummies, and region of birth trends. Data is aggregated to state of birth
× year of birth × census year cell means. Family income measured in thousands of dollars. See notes to Table 1.
**
   Significant at the 5% level, *Significant at the 10% level
Table 9. OLS and IV Estimates of the Effect of Divorce on Poverty.

                                                                          Dependent Variable = Poor
                                                                           (1 = poor, 0 = not poor)

                                                         Grouped OLS                   IV                     IV
                                                                   **                       **
 Early teen marriage                                         0.235                   0.264                  0.380**
                                                             (0.059)                 (0.133)                (0.129)
 Dropout                                                     0.128**                 0.112**                0.125**
                                                             (0.035)                 (0.033)                (0.043)
 Currently divorced                                          0.215**                 0.159**                -0.114
                                                             (0.037)                 (0.003)                (0.117)
 Instrumenting for early marriage and dropout?                                         X                       X
 Instrumenting for divorce?                                                                                    X
 F-statistic for early marriage 1st stage                                            13.67                   14.83
   [p-value]                                                                        [0.0001]               [0.0001]
 F-statistic for dropout 1st stage                                                    5.32                   6.61
   [p-value]                                                                        [0.0001]               [0.0001]
 F-statistic for divorce 1st stage                                                                           14.68
   [p-value]                                                                                               [0.0001]
 R-squared                                                    0.877
 Observations                                                 3,567                2,870,390               2,870,390
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering by state of birth. All regressions include census year,
race, age, state of birth, and cohort of birth dummies, and region of birth trends. Data is aggregated to state of birth
× year of birth × census year cell means. See notes to Table 1.
**
   Significant at the 5% level, *Significant at the 10% level
Table 10. Marriage Age Misreports in the 1975 and 1970 National Fertility Surveys.

                                                          Percent of 1975 Responses
                                                      Not Matching with 1970 Responses

                                                    Date           Date of       Marriage Age
                                                                                                        Obs.
                                                  of Birth        Marriage        (in Years)
 Reported Age of Marriage in 1970 Survey
 ≤ 15                                               7.7†            34.6††            38.5††             52
 16                                                  3.5            15.9†              12.4             113
 17                                                 5.7††           16.1††            17.1††            211
 18                                                  3.5            14.0††             11.5             400
 19-24                                               3.0             10.2               9.1            1,579
 Any age                                             3.5             12.2              11.0            2,355
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Data come from the subsample of women the 1970 National Fertility Survey
who were re-interviewed in the 1975 National Fertility Survey. Marriage age is calculated from date of marriage
and date of birth.
††
   Significantly different from the 19-24 coefficient at the 5% level, †Significantly different at the 10% level
Appendix Table. Legal Minimum Marriage Age by State and Year.

                                                                   Year
State                    1935       1940        1945        1950          1955     1960       1965        1969
Alabama                   14          14         14          14            14       14         14          14
Arizona                   16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Arkansas                  14          14         16          16            16       16         16          16
California                16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Colorado                  12          12         12          16            16       16         16          16
Connecticut               16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Delaware                  16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
D.C.                      14          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Florida                   12          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Georgia                   14          14         14          14            14       14         14          16
Idaho                     12          12         12          15            15       15         15          15
Illinois                  16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Indiana                   16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Iowa                      14          14         14          14            14       14         16          16
Kansas                    16          16         16          16            16       16         16          18
Kentucky                  14          14         14          14            14       14         16          16
Louisiana                 12          12         12          16            16       16         16          16
Maryland                  12          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Mississippi               12          12         12          12            12       15         15          15
Missouri                  15          15         15          15            15       15         15          15
Montana                   16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Nebraska                  16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Nevada                    16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
New Hampshire             13          13         13          13            13       13         13          13
New Mexico                16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
New York                  14          14         14          14            14       14         14          14
North Dakota              15          15         15          15            15       15         15          15
Ohio                      16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Oklahoma                  15          15         15          15            15       15         15          15
Oregon                    15          15         15          15            15       15         15          15
Pennsylvania              16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Rhode Island              12          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
South Dakota              15          15         15          15            15       15         16          16
Tennessee                 16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Texas                     14          14         14          14            14       14         14          14
Utah                      14          14         14          14            14       14         14          14
Vermont                   16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16
Virginia                  15          15         16          16            16       16         16          16
Washington                15          15         15          15            15       15         15          17
Wisconsin                 15          15         15          15            15       15         16          16
Wyoming                   16          16         16          16            16       16         16          16

Average                  14.61      14.95       15.02      15.29          15.29   15.37       15.51       15.66
Note: Entries indicate the minimum marriage age for women with parental (or court) consent in the specified year.
States which revised their minimum marriage age law are underlined. The following ten states do not appear in the
table since they do not have available or consistent information on marriage laws: Alaska, Hawaii, Maine,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, North Carolina, South Carolina, and West Virginia.
Figure 1a. Fraction of Women Marrying Young and Women’s Median Age at First Marriage
over Time.




                                                                                                                                .15      .1
                                                                                                                                  Fraction
                                                                                                                                .05
                                                                                                                                0
         20 21 22 23 24 25
 Years




                             1900      1920                  1940              1960             1980                     2000
                                                                        Year
                                         Median age at first marriage                  Fraction marrying before age 16

                                         Fraction marrying at age 16 or 17




Figure 1b. Marriage, Divorce, and Fertility Rates over Time.




                                                                                                                                40 60 80 100 120
                                                                                                                                  Annual Rates
      25
10 15 20
Annual Rates
      5




                    1920                   1940                         1960               1980                          2000
                                                                        Year
                                    Divorces per thousand married women               New Marriages per thousand women

                                    Births per thousand women age 15−19               Births per thousand women age 20−44




Notes: Data on fraction of teenage marriages from author’s tabulations of U.S. Census data. All other data
series from various tables in Carter et al. (2006). Vertical lines denote the time period being analyzed in
this paper (1935-1969).
Figure 2. Minimum Legal Marriage Age by State for Women with Parental Consent, 1935 and 1969.


                                     1935




                                                                      Minimum Marriage Age
                                                                           16             (1 6)
                                                                           15              (8 )
                                                                           14              (9 )
                                                                           1 2 or 13 *     (8 )
                                                                           No t available (1 0)

                                                                       *NH is 13




                                     1969




                                                                      Minimum Marriage Age
                                                                           16 or greater* (30)
                                                                           15              (6)
                                                                           14              (4)
                                                                           13              (1)
                                                                           Not available (10)

                                                                       *WA is 17, KS is 18
Figure 3. The Timing of Marriages for Women by Type of State Marriage Law, 1968 and 1969
Vital Statistics Marriage Certificate Data.

           .15




            .1
Fraction




           .05




            0

                 14               15                        16                       17
                                           M arriage Age
                      Legal Minimum Age of 14 (with Parental Consent)

           .15




            .1
Fraction




           .05




            0

                 14               15                        16                       17
                                           M arriage Age
                      Legal Minimum Age of 15 (with Parental Consent)
Figure 3 (continued). The Timing of Marriages for Women by Type of State Marriage Law, 1968
and 1969 Vital Statistics Marriage Certificate Data.


            .15




             .1
 Fraction




            .05




             0

                  14                    15                             16                             17
                                                   M arriage Age
                           Legal Minimum Age of 16 (with Parental Consent)
Notes: Data collected from marriage certificates by the National Center for Health Statistics. Marriage
rates are grouped in two month intervals. The sample is restricted to women who are marrying for the first
time, who marry between the ages of 14 and 16, and who are residents of and get married in one of the 32
states which are in a Marriage-Reporting Area (MRA) and have information on marriage laws. The
marriage certificate data includes all records for small states and a random sample for larger states; the
probabilities above are weighted (unweighted probabilites are very similar). The 32 states included in this
figure have the following minimum marriage age with parental consent in 1968 and 1969 for women: 13
years: New Hampshire (included with the 14-year age minimum states in the first graph); 14 years:
Alabama, New York, Utah; 15 years: Idaho, Mississippi, Missouri, Oregon; 16 years: California,
Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maryland, Montana, Nebraska, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee,
Vermont, Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming.
