NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SEASONAL ADJUSTMENT WITH MEASUREMENT ERROR PRESENT

Jerry A. Hausinan
Mark Watson

Working Paper No. 1133

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

May 1983

Both

authors thank the NSF for research support. Hausman has
received support from the NBER. This per was written while he
was on leave at Harvard, 1982—1983. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1133
May 1983

SEASONAL ADJUSTMENT WITH MEASUREMENT ERROR PRESENT

Abstract

Seasonal adjustment procedures attempt to estimate the sample realizations

of

an unobservable economic time series in the presence of both seasonal factors

and irregular factors. In this paper we consider a factor which has not been
considered explicitly in previous treatments of seasonal adjustment: measurement
error. Because of the sample design used in the CPS, measurement error will not
be a white noise process, but instead it will be characterized by serial

correlation of a known form. We first consider what effect the serially
correlated measurement error has on estimation of the non—seasonal component in

seasonal adjustment models. We also consider the effect of measurement error on
the widely used seasonal adjustment process Xli. Xii which is the seasonal
adjust procedure used by the BLS will implicitly reduce the effect of measurement

error because of the averaging process used. However, this treatment will not be
optimal in general. We therefore specify a seasonal adjustment model which takes
explicit account of the measurement error. For examples on the unemployment
rate, we find that Xii does almost as well as the optimal filter on some series

but its efficiency is less than iO for the teenage unemployment series. We also
find that optimal treatment of the measurement error which accounts for the
serial correlation can reduce the overall mean square error of the seasonally
adjusted series below the variance of the measurement error which is often used
as the benchmark for the sampling procedure.
Jerry A. Hausman
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Economics - E52—27iA
Cambridge, MA 02139
617—253—3644

Mark Watson
Harvard University
(617) 495—5148

SEASONAL ADJUSTI'!ENT WITH NEASUREMENT ERROR PRESENT

Jerry

Hausman - MIT and NBER

Mark Watson - Harvard

Seasonal adjustment procedures attempt to estimate the sample realizations
of an unobservable economic time series in the presence of both seasonal factors

and irregular factors. Only the sum, or the product, of the three components is

observed. Within an additive framework the procedures may be represented as
=

(1)

where

+

St + et

is the non—seasonal component, 5t is the seasonal component, and et is a

stochastic disturbance. Seasonal adjustment procedures differ in their treatment
of each of the components in equation (1). Many procedures treat
deterministic up to some unknown

parameters of
=

x.,

—

s•

parameters

as

and set et to zero. The unknown

are estimated and the n series is then determined by
Other seasonal adjustment procedures treat

after estimation by

signal

as stochastic and

extraction methods, again determine

by subtraction.

In either case, little attention is given to the properties of the stochastic

disturbance, et. Now, et can arise from two sources as in most econometric

models. The first source of et can be model specification error which we will
test for subsequently. The other source of e1 can be measurement error. The
concept of measurement error is somewhat non-standard here since we do not have a

2

'real' series which we are attempting to measure. That is,

does not exist

apart from the model specification of the components of equation (i). But it

still makes sense to consider an underlying series, say x, where we can only
observe Xt which contains measurement error. In this reformulated model we would

have x. x + et so that

and

determine x. In the presence of measurement

error and thus estimation will need to account for the properties of e.
The usual model of measurement error in statistics and econometrics is one

of white noise. However, because of government data collection procedures which
use overlapping sample designs, the measurement error can be serially correlated.
For instance, the sample design used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) to

measure unemployment consists of 8 sub—samples, seven of which have been included

in previous samples. This sample design is chosen presumably to induce positive
correlation across months which leads to a reduction of measurement error in

estimated changes in the unemployment rates. So far as we know, no seasonal
adjustment procedure takes explicit account of this measurement error which
becomes confounded with the seasonal component St because of the 50% overlap from
year to year induced by the BLS sample design.
The natural question is what effect this serially correlated measurement
error has on estimation of the non-seasonal component nt from equation (1). This
question cannot be answered apart from an examination of the goals of seasonal

adjustment in the specification of the components of equation (i) since the true
is not observable and

does not exist apart from a specific model formulation.

Nerlove et al. (1979) and Pierce (1976) discuss the question of the goal of
seasonal adjustment, with Pierce setting forth a set of assumptions to guide his

procedure. We choose the minimum mean square error estimator of nt given

3
hypothesized ARI1A models for both

and St. Thus we allow for both

deterministic and stochastic components in the model for both components. When
measurement error is ignored the estimates of both

and s. will be determined

by the similarity of their spectra and that of the measurement error. Our
empirical examples demonstrate that the increase in mean square error can be
substantial in some cases while in other cases the increase can be quite small.
Besides comparing optimal seasonal adjustment procedures which ignore
measurement error to an optimal procedure which takes account of measurement
error, we also consider the effect of measurement error on Xli .

Xli

is the

seasonal adjustment procedure used by the BLS and many other government agencies.
Since the Xli procedure uses a moving average of measured unemployment it will
implicitly reduce the effect of measurement error because of the averaging

procedure used. However, this treatment will not be optimal because the explicit
form of the measurement error has not been incorporated. Our empirical examples
demonstrate again that the effect of measurement error on the efficiency of the

Xli procedure can vary widely across series. The efficiency of Xli with respect
to the optimal filter which takes account of measurement error is found to be as
low as .09 in our examples so that consideration of measurement error is an

important topic. Also, of interest is that we calculate the root mean square
error of Xli so that one can assign confidence intervals to estimated levels or
changes of the official unemployment rate.

The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we consider the signal
extraction problem for

when

and et have been assigned ARXA

specifications. We derive expressions for the effect of omission of general

4

measurement error on otherwise optimal filters. In Section 3 we discuss the
sampling procedure used by the BLS and derive the specification of measurement

error for this particular sample design. We then estimate the unknown parameters
of the model by maximum likelihood estimation via the Kalman filter. We estimate
models for both the overall unemployment rate as well as the teenage unemployment

rate. Since the latter series has considerably more variance, it offers a good

comparison to the overall series. We test for the specification of our model
both by using diagnostic statistics and by seeing how well it can predict the

estimates from a model which ignores measurement error. Then in Section 4 we
compare the optimal procedure with Xli and with an optimal filter which ignores

measurement error. For the overall unemployment rate the three procedures given
quite similar results with the efficiencies varying from .71 to .98. For teenage

unemployment the three procedure give very dissimilar results with the efficiency
of the optimal filter which ignores measurement error as low as .2 and Xli as low

as .09. In the conclusion we discuss other potential applications of the model
as well as implications for sample design.

5

Section 2

In

the last section we defined seasonal adjustment, in the context of an

additive components model, as a procedure for estimating the unobserved non-

seasonal component using data on the observed composite series. Measurement
error simply adds another component to the model. The observed series is now
"contaminated" not only with seasonality but with measurement error as well. The
presence of this extra component reduces the precision with which the non-

seasonal component can be estimated. If part of the non-seasonal component is
deterministic, but a function of unknown parameters (e.g., a time trend),

measurement error will decrease the precision of the estimated parameters. In
general, estimates of these parameters will remain consistent so that this

problem diminishes as the sample size grows. On the other hand, measurement
error will have an effect on the estimate of the stochastic part of the non-

seasonal which no amount of data can eliminate. This fact is easily
demonstrated.

We will ignore any deterministic components and

assume that the non—seasonal

and the seasonal component, s are generated by independent

component,

stationary and invertible moving average processes of the form
(2)

where

and

=

e(B)ct

=

e(B)
are white noise and e(B) and 85(B) are polynomials in the

6

backshift operator B. (The stationarity assumption is not crucial for what

follows. An investment in additional notation would allow us to assume that

(B)nt and 5(B)st were stationary, where A(B) and (B) are differencing
operators with no common factors. This generalization is discussed in Cleveland
and Tiao (1976) and Pierce (1979).) We will assume that the measurement error,
et, is generated independently of nt and

by another stationary and invertible

moving average process

e

(4)

is white noise. This allows et to be serially correlated, a

where

characteristic of the measurement error processes for the two series discussed in

the next section. Finally, let x. be the series composed of only

and

let x be composed of

()

x=

(6)

x =

et.

5

n+

+ et.

The problem of estimating

given x or x (i.e., seasonally adjusting x

or x) can be solved using well known
cases
is

and 5' and

signal

extraction techniques. In both

is estimated from "noisy" measurements. When x is observed the noise
when x is observed the noise is the sum

of

and e.

In general, the signal extraction procedure for n. depends on the time

subscript t. When t is not near the beginning or the end of the sample the
procedure for forming the minimum linear mean square estimates of

and

are

very similar. Indeed, they can be made arbitrarily close by extendiri the sample

7

at both ends. To avoid the

notational burden of extra time

assume that a complete realization of

subscripts i'ie will

the observed series is available. If the

observed series is uncontaminated with measurement

error the linear minimum mean

square estimate of n. is given by
=

V(B)xt

where

v(B) =

(8)

1=0

v(B' +

B')

and the coefficients V. can be formed from
1

()

v(z)=

2e
Cfl (z)e (z—' )
2e
en (z)e n(z—' )

+

2o

(z)e S(z—' )

(See whittle [1963] or Grether and
Nerlove [1970] for the derivation of the
filter V(B).) The seasonal

adjustment error associated with

the filter V(B) is

given by
(10)

-

at =

and the variance of
i
=

(ii)

where f(w),

= (i

-

V(B))nt

V(B)st,

at of this seasonal adjustment error is

f

(w)f (w)

(wY

dw

and f(w) are the spectra of

When the observed series is
seasonal noise the optimal

n, ,

and

x respectively.

Contaminated by measurement error as well as

seasonal adjustment filter changes.

In this case the

8

(12)

is given by

estimate of

linear minimum mean square

cnn.

n =

where

2e (z)e (z—1)
(13)

v*(z) =

2e(z)e(Z1) + ee5(Z)85(Z1)

The seasonal adjustment error
(14)

+

in this case is

ant_fl

and
it

(15)

f(w)(f(W)+f(w))

dw

2a* = 5

and f(w) are the spectra of e and x. The increase

where

adjustment caused by the

variance of the seasonal

in the

measurement error is easily

shown to be

f(w)

it

(16)

-

C—çy-)

J

f(w)

dw.

Since
(17)

f(w) =

+

f(w)

and
(18)

f(w) f(w) + f(w)

the terms in parenthesis

+

fe(W)

in mean
are both less than one so that the increase

9
square error is less than the variance of e.

In the discussion of optimal seasonal adjustment procedures found in the

literature measurement error is usually (always) ignored. The literature has
focused on the construction and evaluation of seasonal filters when the models
for

and s are known (e.g., Grether and Nerlove [1970], Cleveland Tiao [1976])

or the estimation of models for n and

using the composite series (e.g.,

Pierce [1976], Engle [1976], Burinan [1980], Hilimer and Tiao [1982].) When
measurement error is ignored seasonal adjustment filters formed using the actual
or estimated models for nt and
optimal filter V(B),

for

will

be sub—optimal. In the first case the

seasonal adjustment of x. is used to seasonally adjust

x. This produces a seasonally adjusted series

(19)

V(B)x

with seasonal adjustment error

(20)

=

—

The increase in mean square error which arises from the use of this sub-optimal
filter is given by

f(w)

it

(21)

-

= 5 fe(W)

(

f(w)
)

(

f:(w)

)2 dw.

When the processes generating the measurement error and n. are very dissimilar,
so that

is large when f(w) is small and visa—versa, the increase in mean

square error will be small. This is unlikely to be true for most series where we
would expect both nt and et to be positively serially correlated. In this case

10

the spectra of the two series have a similar shape, and the increase in mean
square error can be as large as

2e

fl)_l•

+

2

c3

e

When measurement error is ignored and the contaminated data, x,

estimate models for n and

are

used to

the comparison of filters is less straightforward.

The comparison depends in an obvious way on whether the measurement error is

attributed to the seasonal or to the non—seasonal component. At one extreme the
measurement error is purely seasonal and is totally attributed to the seasonal

component. The seasonal adjustment filter in this case will filter the

"seasonal" series s +

et

This is precisely

from x leaving an estimate of

what the optimal filter does. At the other extreme the measurement error is not
seasonal (i.e., its spectrum has no peaks near the seasonal frequencies) and is

incorrectly attributed to the non—seasonal component. The seasonal adjustment
will now be an estimate of the filter which extracts (nt +

et)

from x which

yields a seasonally adjusted series

(22)

=

V(B)

=

—

x

with error
(23)

the model
The increase in mean square error caused by the misspecification of
(i.e., ignoring et) is

11

11

=5

—

(24)

a

a*

1t

f(w)

x

(w)

)

dw.

Again the exact magnitude of this increase depends on the processes generating

n'

and

et.

In the next section we estimate models for two economic time series which

are measured with error. We estimate models incorporating and ignoring the
measurement error. These models are used to construct seasonally adjusted
series. The mean square error of these series are then calculated and compared.

12

Sectioxi 3

One of the most closely watched indicators of macroeconomic performance is

the civilian unemployment rate. Each month this rate is estimated by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics using a rotating sample composed of approximately 56,000

households. The data exhibit clear seasonal behavior. The unadjusted rate in
January and June of each year is roughly one percentage point higher than the

rate in May. This empirical regularity suggests the presence of a seasonal
component. Since the data published by the BLS are estimates constructed from a
sample, they also contain a sampling error or measurement error component.
In this section we present a model which decomposes the series into three
components -. a non—seasonal component, a seasonal component, and a measurement

error component. Using the observed data we estimate the parameters of the

model. The estimated model is then used to construct the optimal seasonal
adjustment filter. We compare this filter to one which we estimate ignoring the

measurement error. The exercise is repeated for another series, the teenage
unemployment rate. This series exhibits more dramatic seasonal behavior, and is
subject to more severe measurement error.

We begin by describing the sample design used by the BLS. Each month the
BLS surveys eight sub—samples, each composed of approximately 7,000 households.
Seven of these sub-samples have been included in some past survey and one sub-

sample is new. The new sub-sample is included in the survey for four months,
left out of the survey for the next eight months, and then included for four

final months. This rotation procedure produces a 75 overlap in the sample from
month to month and a 50% overlap from year to year.

13

This sample design produces measurement error which may be serially

correlated. The degree of serial correlation will depend on the "memory" in the
measurement error for any sub-sample. Given random sampling we can assume that
errors across sub-samples are uncorrelated, but we want to allow some fraction of

the error in any sub-sample to persist from period to period. To capture this
persistance we assume that the error for the i'th sub—sample at time t is

et =

(25)

+ wt

is a time invariant random effect with mean zero and variance cr2, and

where

If we
w. is a white noise error, uncorrelated with 'y. , and has variance cr2.
w
1
it
choose our indices so that sub—sample "i" is surveyed for the first time at time
t =

i,

then the total measurement error at time t is given by

e= (i +B'2)(1

(26)

+B+

is the sum of the eight white noise terms, e1.

where

This model produces a very parsimonious representation of the process

generating the measurement error. The rotation incorporated in the sample design
implies that error follows an MA (15) process. The size of the sample determines
the standard deviation of the sampling error. (It is approximately .12% for the

civilian unemployment rate and .60% for the teenage unemployment rate.) Our
model represents this MA(15) process with known variance in terms of only one
unknown parameter, cT /a1.

While much is known about the process generating the measurement error from
the sample design we have little a priori knowledge concerning the processes

generating the non-seasonal and seasonal components. There are some "common

14

sense" constraints that seem reasonable to impose on these processes. First, the
deterministic component of the seasonal should sum to zero over any twelve month

period. Second, the stochastic component of the seasonal should have non—zero
autocorrelations only at the seasonal lags, so that it represents seasonal noise.
Third, the deterministic component of the non—seasonal should not be seasonally

periodic. Analogously, its stochastic component should not have a spectrum with
extra power at the seasonal frequencies.
Unfortunately these four constraints are not sufficient to identify the
seasonal and non—seasonal processes, even if the process generating their sum is

known. There is little problem in identifying deterministic components and the
autoregressive portion of the stochastic processes. The problem arises in the
identification of the moving average portions of the model. This lack of
identification has led to various normalizations and canonical forms (e.g., see

Pierce [1976], Burman [1980], Hilimer and Tiao [1982].) In this application we
found that low order autoregressive models adequately described the data, so that

identification was not a problem. In other applications this may not be the case
so that a "minimal extraction principle", as in Pierce [1976], or some other
normalization would have to be employed.

Our model for the deterministic part of the seasonal was very simple. We
chose a flexible form consisting of twelve monthly constants which summed to

zero. We did not include a non—seasonal deterministic component; rather we
assumed the non-seasonal to be generated by an integrated autoregressive
process :1

1More elaborate models are certainly possible. Within our framework we can allow
any of the components to depend on observed variables. The non—seasonal
component, for example, could be related to changes in GNP or an index of real
wages as well as to its own lagged values. We have chosen to use a univariate
model for n÷ so that our results are directly comparable with other widely used
"auto-adjus6ent" procedures.

15

B)(l — B)nt

(27)

=

Ct

where the roots of (z) are outside the unit circle. We also allowed the
stochastic seasonal component to be generated by an autoregressive process

(Bl2)s =

(28)

In

all models that are presented below we found

(29)

(B) =

(i

B12)

=

-

and

(30)

(1 —(jB12)

adequately described the data. Combining the non—seasonal, seasonal, and the
measurement error we have a model for the observed unemployment rate
(31)

where dt is (12 x 1) vector of monthly dummy variables and p

of unknown
estimated

constants

are ,

which sum
d1,

to

zero. The unknown

is

parameters

a (12 x i) vector

which must be

2, 2, cy/cY2, and the initial value for non= seasonal

component

no.
To estimate the unknown parameters

of the model we assumed that the

disturbances were normally distributed and calculated maximum likelihood

estimates. A very useful computational device for forming the likelihood
function and for carrying out seasonal adjustment is the Kalman filter.1

1Engle [1976] uses the Kalman filter in a similar application. See also Pagan
[1975] and Harvey [1981].

16

The Kalman filter recursively calculates various estimates including the current
estimates of the components as well as

= E[xIx1, X2•• .,x]

(32)

and

(33)

h =

var[xlx1,

Since the disturbances are normally distributed the innovations in x,

are independent and normally distributed with mean zero and variance

—

ht. The likelihood function can then be formed in terms of these innovations. A
discussion of techniques for maximizing this likelihood function can be found in
Watson and Engle [1983].

The parameters of the models for the civilian unemployment rate and the
teenage (age.16-19) unemployment rate were estimated using data from 67:1 to

83:1. The results are shown in Table 1 in the column labeled Model 1.
TABLE 1

Civilian
Unemployment

Model 1

4

Rate
Model 2

.264 (.158)
.366 (.117)

.239
.317

.028

.036
.566
.008

(.009)
.525 (.383)
.004 (.005)

Teenage

Unemployment Rate
Model 1

.278 (1.302)
.408 (1.038)
.057 ( .1032)
.758 ( .114)
.106 ( .060)

.0021(.005)

.190 (

.061)

.0016(.004)

.021 (

.007)

Q(d.s.) 25.6(18)

22.7(20)

26.5(18)

Model 2
—.153

.108
.411
.678
.167

27.2(20)

Note: Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients on
twelve seasonally dummy variables were also estimated.

17

The last entry in this column is the Box—Pierce Q—statistic followed by the

degrees of freedom.1 The Q—statistics suggest that we have committed no grievous

dynamic misspecification; neither statistic is significant at the 5% level. The
point estimates for the parameters of the non—seasonal processes are similar for

both series. They are much more precisely estimated for the civilian
unemployment rate. This series is subject to a much smaller seasonal effect (the

variance of s is .005 for the civilian unemployment rate and .250 for the
teenage unemployment rate) and much less measurement error. The persistence of
the sampling error is also much different across the two series. The persistent
random effect, y, accounts for 85% of the variance in the civilian unemployment
rate measurement error but only 47% of the measurement error for the teenage
unemployment rate.

Charts 1 and 2 show the estimated decomposition of the observed series.
These estimates were formed using the optimal signal extraction filter

constructed from the parameter values in Table 1. The seasonal and measurement
error variation is much more dramatic for the teenage unemployment rate. The
estimated seasonal factor for the teenage unemployment rate varies from 4.8% to —
2.7% and from .75% to .59% for the civilian unemployment rate. Teenage
unemployment rate sampling error varies from .95% to -.96%, and civilian
unemployment rate sampling error varies from .10% to -.11%.

1 Our component models implies an ARIMA model for the observed series. The
parameters of the ARIMA model are functions of (4'j '2' ' a2, a, and
a2
1•1

18

As a first step in constructing seasonal adjustment filters which ignore
measurement error we re-estimated the models leaving out the sampling error

component. The results are presented in Table 1 in the columns labeled Model 2.
The measurement error in the civilian unemployment rate is small and neglecting

it has only a small effect on the model. The estimated seasonal process is
essentially unchanged, and the non-seasonal process has changed slightly to

capture the measurement error dynamics. The estimated process for the seasonal

component of the teenage unemployment rate is slightly changed. The variance of
the seasonal component has increased to capture some of the effect of the

measurement error. The process for the non-seasonal component has changed

markedly. The variance of its driving noise, Ct, is over seven times larger than

in Model 1, and the point estimates of 1 and 2 are different.
While Model 1 and Model 2 may be quite different in one sense they should be

very similar in another sense. Both models are descriptions of the same observed
series, so that they should imply the same aggregate dynamic model. Comparing
the implied aggregate model from both models can therefore serve as a check on

our specification. The stochastic portion of Model 1 is Ut =

t

let us write the stochastic portion of Model 2 as Ut= n + s.
Since (1 —
(34)

B)ut

(1 - B)ut

=

is stationary it has a Wold representation

+

+ e, and

19

where at is white noise with unit variance so that
(35)

(1 —

B)(nt

+ et)

+

=

(1 —

B)(n

+

s)

=

X(B)at.

Using the estimated parameters of Model 1 and Model 2 we have calculated the

implied moving average parameters XD

These are plotted in Chart 3 for

the civilian unemployment rate and in Chart 4 for the teenage unemployment rate.

The implied models are very similar. That is, when we 'predict' the parameters
of Model 2, which ignores measurement error, in terms of the parameters of Model

1 the results are quite close. This finding should increase the confidence
placed in Model 1 since we are able to predict well the properties of the
'misspecified model', Model 2, as a function of the estimated parameters of Model
1 which is hypothesized to be correct.

A different "optimal" seasonal adjustment is associated with both Model 1

and Model 2. The Model 1 filter constructs an optimal estimate of the true nonseasonal component, nt, while Model 2 filter constructs an optimal estimate of

the misspecified non—seasonal component, .

Given a complete realization of the

observed series both of these filters will be of the form

(36)

(B) =

+ B').

+
i=1

In Chart 5 we plot the filter weights implied by Model 1 and Model 2 for the

civilian unemployment rate. The seasonal adjustment filters are quite similar so
that the filters will produce similar seasonally adjusted values for the civilian

rate. Indeed in the next section we show that Model 2 filter produces an

20
estimate of

which is only slightly less precise than the Model 1 filter. In

Chart 6 we compare the filter for the teenage unemployment rate. The filters are
quite different for this series. The misspecified filter puts far too much
weight on the current observation, and in part compensates for this by a large
negative weight at the twelfth lead-lag.

We can analyze other seasonal adjustment in a similar manner. The most
widely used seasonal adjustment procedure is produced by the Census X-11 program.
While the filter constructed by this program. contains non-linearities (e.g.,

adjustments for outliers) it can be well approximated for many series by the
symirietric 84 term linear filter which is given in Wallis [1974]. Charts 7 and 8

compare this filter with the Model 1 filter for our series. For both series X—11
puts too much weight on the first observation and compensates for this with large

negative weight at the seasonal lead—lags. This characteristic is much more
dramatic for the teenage unemployment rate. A mere glance at these charts
suggests that the increase in precision of the optimal filter from the X—1 1

filter will not be too large for the civilian unemployment rate, but may be quite

large for the teenage rate. In the next section we calculate the mean square
error associated with the X—11 procedure and find this to be the case.

21

Section 4

The unobserved components model of seasonality allows us to view a seasonal
adjustment procedure as an estimation method, and a seasonally adjusted series as

a sequence of estimates of the underlying non—seasonal component. Alternative
seasonal adjustment procedures can be evaluated on the basis of how precisely

they estimate the non—seasonal component. In this section we compare various
seasonal adjustment procedures for the two series analyzed in the previous

section using mean squre error as the measure of precision. In particular, we
calculate the m.s.e. of the estimates calculated by Census X—11 program. This
comparison allows us to discuss the accuracy of the official seasonally adjusted
series and the increase in accuracy that could be achieved using an optimal

filter. We also calculate the increase in m.s.e. that arises from the
measurement error component, both when it is ignored and when it is accounted for
in an optimal manner.

It is useful to identify five different sources of seasonal adjustment

uncertainty. First, there is a certain irreducible signal extraction
uncertainty, that arises when both n. and s. are stochastic. This uncertainty
makes it impossible to deduce the value of either when only their sum is

observed. Next, there is additional uncertainty which arises from measurement

error. Its presence increases the "noise" in the observed series. A further
increase in uncertainty may arise from the use of a suboptimal seasonal

adjustment procedure. There are also two sources of uncertainty which arise from
the quantity of data available. Since the components are serially correlated,
future values of the observed series will contain information on the value of

22

today's non—seasonal component. Data at time t+1 ,

etc.

can therefore be used to

the uncertainty surrounding nt. Finally, since the parameters used in
constructing seasonal adjustment filters may be unknown, there is uncertainty
reduce

that

arises from the use of estimated parameters.

In usual calculations of mean square error it is possible at some point in

time to observe the realization of the variable being estimated. In calculating
one-step-ahead forecast mean square error, for example, the variable being fore-

cast is observed with a period lag. This set—up makes it possible to calculate a
sample mean square error which incorporates all sources of error. In seasonal
adjustment the case is somewhat different. The variable being estimated is never

observed. Sample mean square error cannot be calculated. Mean square error can
only be calculated or estimated if the processes generating the components are

or

known

are estimated. It makes little sense to discuss the precision of an

estimate of something that is n t observed nor defined apart from a particular
model specification1 .

Our estimates of mean square error will be based on the

models that we presented in the last section. We will assume that the
specification used in Model 1 is correct.

If we assume that the data were generated by Model 1 with parameter values
shown in Table 1 then the root mean square error of various seasonally adjusted

series are straightforward to calculate. All of the seasonal adjustment
procedures that we will consider first subtract a constant, c, from the observed
series. The result is then passed through a linear filter, i(B), to produce
seasonally adjusted value. Consider for example a crude form of seasonal
adjustment in which only the deterministic seasonality is removed. In this case

Ct represents the deterministic seasonality which we denoted d in the last

Summers [1981] attempts such a discussion.

23

section

and

it(B)

=

1.

This procedure produces a seasonal adjustment error

- ,t(B)(x

=

-

c) = -

if the observed series is not measured with error and
— et
b n it(B)(x ct) =
=

(38)

—

—

—

if the observed series is measured with error. An aribtary c and it(B) will
yield seasonal adjustment errors

bt

(39)

=

(1

—

(B))nt — t(B)st — it(B)(d

=

bt

-

lt(B)et.

—

ct).

and
(40)

Recall that nt followed an integrated process so that a necessary condition for

the m.s.e. of

to be finite is that (

equivalently that ,t(i) = 1.

1

—

,(B))

contain the factor (1 — B) or

All seasonal adjustment filters that we consider

will have this property. Given these expressions for bt and b their m.s.e. can

be easily calculated from the constants (d —
(i -

B)nt

ct)

and autocovariances of

and St.

The first row of Table 2 shows the root mean square error (r.m.s.e.)
associated with the optimal filter applied to a complete realization of the

series without measurement error. This model corresponds to the series n and
error at given in Section 2. Notice that the irreducible r.m.s.e. is much
larger for the teenage unemployment rate. The larger r.m.s.e. is caused by the
large variance of the stochastic seasonal component for this series as compared

24

TkBLE 2
Seasonal Adjustment Root Mean Square error
Civilian
Unemployment Rate

Teenage
Unemployment Rate

Levels Changes

Levels Changes

1.

Ni, no measurement error

.060

.075

.222

.173

2.

Ni, with measurement error

.114

.103

.387

.202

3.

Deterministic adjustment,
no meas. error

.074

.105

.499

.706

Deterministic adjustment,
with meas. error

.141

.127

.780

.981

5.

M2, with measurement error

.124

.104

.511

.451

6.

X—11, no measurement error

.090

.091

.286

.337

7.

X—11, with measurement error

.126

.122

.552

.680

8.

Current adj. using Ni with
meas. error

.131

.104

.529

.241

Ni with parameter uncertainty* .124

.105

.391

.265

.110

.540

.270

4.

9.

10. Current adj. with parameter
uncertainty*

.139

Notes:

* Varies over the sample period
Average value is presented.

to the component for the civilian unemployment rate.
For both series notice that the r.m.s.e. is considerably smaller than the

r.m.s.e. of the measurement error component. The r.m.s.e. of the level of the
civilian rate is roughly 1/2 the size the r.in.s.e. of its measurement error, and

for the teenage rate the r.m.s.e. is only 1/3 its measurement error. This
emphasizes the point that the seasonal adjustment procedures significantly
reduces both sources of noise — seasonal and measurement error. It also

25

illustrates the point made by equations (15) and (16): while the size of the
measurement error is important, its dynamic properties and those of

and

are

equally important.

In row 2 of the table we show the r.m.s.e. associated with the optimal
filter applied to a complete realization of the series measured with error. This

model corresponds to the series n and error a given in Section 2. Again the
figures for the teenage unemployment rate are larger than those for the civilian
unemployment rate.

Comparing row 2 and row 1 of Table 2 shows the increase in r.m.s.e. due to

measurement error is larger for the teenage rates. Recall, however, that the
measurement error variance was .36 for the teenage rate as compared to .0144 for

the civilian rate. The increase in m.s.e. for the level of the teenage rate is
only 28% of its measurement error variance, while the increase in m.s.e. for the

level of the civilian rate is 65%. The reason for this differential increase is
shown in equation (16). The seasonal measurement error components are relatively
unimportant in the civilian rate so that a large fraction of the spectrum of x

and x1 is accounted for by the nt. The terms (f(w)/f(w)) and (f(w)/f(w)) in
equation (16) are, on average, larger for the civilian rate than the teenage
rate.

The next two rows of Table 2 present the r.m.s.e. of the seasonally adjusted

series when only the deterministic seasonal component is extracted. The
estimator was calculated for the series with and without measurement error.
Table 3 presents the efficiency of the optimal estimator relative to this

estimator. The relative efficiency is much smaller for the teenage rate, again
reflecting the importance of stochastic seasonality and measurement error for

this series. The next row of Table 1 presents the results using the filter

26

TABLE 3
Relative efficiency of Seasonal Adjustment Procedures

Levels Changes

Levels Changes

Deterministic adjustment,
no meas. error

.66

.51

.20

.06

Deterministic adjustment,
meas. error

.65

.66

.25

.04

M2, meas. error

.85

.98

.57

.20

X-11, no meas. error

.44

.68

.60

.26

X-11, with meas. error

.82

.71

.49

.09

constructed from the Model 2 parameter estimates and applied to a complete

realization of the series. This filter would be estimated if measurement error

were present but was ignored. For the civilian unemployment rate the variance of
the (change in the) measurement error is small relative to the variance of the
(change in the) observed series, so that the increase in m.s.e. from the Model 1

filter is not large. (See equation (24).) The relative efficiency of this
filter is quite high. In the case of teenage rate, measurement error is much
more important, and the Model 2 filter produces a much less precise estimate than

the Model 1 filter. The relative efficiency for estimating the change in

is

only .20. Our finding emphasizes the potential importance that measurment error
can have on seasonal adjustment procedures.

The plots presented at the end of the last section also suggested a more
dramatic reduction in efficiency from the use of census X—11 for the teenage

unemployment. We should point out the X—11 procedure does not subtract a
deterministic component from the row series before filtering. The seasonally

27

adjusted series will therefore contain the deterministic component it(B)d, which
is a weighted average of monthly constants. The X—11 filter is constructed so

that the weights across months are very nearly equal. Therefore, it(B)d is very
nearly the sum of the seasonal constants, which is zero. Rows 6 and 7 of Table 2
present the r.m.s.e. for the linear approximations to the X—11 filter. The
performance of the X—11 filter is close to the optimal filter for the level of
civilian unemployment rate (a relative efficiency of .82),1 but it performs very

poorly for the change in the teenage rate (a relative efficiency of .09). Indeed
for the change in the teenage rate one is better off applying the Model 1 filter
to the series measured with error then to apply the X—11 filter to the series
without measurment error.
The results thus far have assumed that a complete realization of the series

was available so that two sided filters could be applied. When adjusting current
values, or values from the recent past, symmetric two—sided filters cannot be

used. It is possible to construct optimal one—sided filters and indeed the
Kalman filter does just this. In row 8 of Table 2 we present the r.m.s.e. of
currently adjusted values using the optimal filter. Comparing these figures with
those in row 2 shows the value of future data for current seasonal adjustment.
For both series future data decreases m.s.e. for the level of the series rather

substantially (25 for the civilian rate, nearly 50% for the teenage rate), but
has a smaller effect on the m.s.e. of the change in
The filter that we have constructed from our estimated Model 1 is only an

1Our estimate of the r.m.s.e. of the X—11 process is approximately one—half of
the estimate of Summers (1981). However, he failed to take account of the time
series properties of the unemployment rate or of the X—11 filter.

28

estimate of the optimal filter. Imprecise estimates of the parameters will
produce an imprecise estimate of the filter which in turn will produce an

imprecise seasonally adjusted series. A bit more notation will make the

discussion of the effects of parameter uncertainty easier. Let
(41)

1' 2'

=

'

cy2,

/2)i

be the vector of unknown parameters used to construct the filter for extracting

the stochastic components. The other unknowns are the deterministic seasonal
and

components, 3. Let

denote the true values of the parameters, and 8 and

denote their maximum likelihood estimates. Finally we write the optimal

seasonally.adjusted series, n, as a function of (e,).

(42)

1(e)(x1

nt(8,) =

—

Expanding our estimate, n(O,p), about the true optimal estimate, n(e0,p0), and
subtracting from

(43)

nt

-

we have

n(e,)

=

+

- n(80,0)) -

ôit.(8

(8 -

es)'

°)

(x- d10)

( — )'

as our seasonal adjustment error. The first term on the left-hand side is the
error that arises from the optimal filter, the final two terms reflect parameter

estimation error. As the sample grows these last two terms converge in
probability to zero leaving only the first term. A large sample approximation to

29

'

the m.s.e. of n— nt(8,) follows from the asymptotic disturbances of I (e—e)

and /T (—).

We

-

will approximate the m.s.e. of

(e,)

using the

from the asymptotic normal distribution.

covariance matrix of 8 and

The information matrix between is easily shown to be block diagonal between

8 and

so that

m.s.e. (nt(8,))

(44)

+V
1=

-

+iwhere M99 and
from

in.s.e. (n(e0,0))

xt—i—d'
2(
t—i'o'

10 )

it.(9

ô0

'M00
'

(
'

ôit.(8
10 )

(i(e0))2d±Mdt

are estimates of the covariance matrices of 0 and

derived

the information matrix.1

In

the final two rows of Table 2 we present these estimates for both of our

series. Row 9 shows the results for the estimated two—sided filters, so that
this result corresponds to historical seasonal adjustment. The final row shows
the results using the estimated optimal one—sided filter. These results
correspond to the adjustment of current data. Comparing rows 2 and 9, and rows 8
and 10, suggests that parameter uncertainty increased m.s.e. only slightly. This
finding is true even though our point estimates of the parameters were not very
precise, as the large standard errors in Table 1 indicated.

should be indexed by T and the range of the
summations depend on sample size and

1Formally, of course, N and

t.

30

5.

Conclusions

Given our empirical findings a more full—fledged study of the effct of the

use of Xii on the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate seems called for. BLS
actually uses Xli on each of the four component series separately and then adds

to find the overall unemployment rate. Our evidence on the teenage unemployment
rate indicates that Xii could be improved on significantly by a filter that takes

account of measurement error. The further question of whether it is a good idea
to filter each of the four series by Xii separately should also be investigated.
Since the overall unemployment rate is arguably the most watched government

series, such an investigation seems worthwhile. If unemployment is not the most
watched series, then the inflation rate must be the recipient of the most

watched-over award. Our techniques seem applicable to this series also since
measurement error may be an important factor. Further investigation seems called
for.

A related question which arises is the optimal sample design of the BLS
Survey, i.e., the CPS. The National Commission on Eknployment and Unemployment
Statistics Report (1980), vol II considered the question of measurement error,

but it did not do so in the context of seasonal adjustment. If an accurate
estimate of the non-seasonal component of unemployment is an important goal for
the data collection procedure, which it almost surely is, then the sample design
could be substantially increased in efficiendy by taking account of the

simultaneous presence of both measurement error and seasonal components. Our
estimated model of Section 3 would be useful in choosing the optimal design for

31

samples used

to measure unemployment statistics.

A last potential unadjusted application arises when revisions take place
between the first announced number and the final estimate of an economic time

series, e.g., the money supply series. If the measurement error model were
applicable to these series in the sense that the measurement error is independent
of the

final number, then our procedures could be

final number given the initial estimate. It

used

seems

to predict optimally the

quite likely that the

measurement error has a seasonal component which would contaminate the estimates
of the seasonal component and non-seasonal components using current seasonal

adjustment procedures. Procedures which model the measurement error in an
explicit manner should lead to an improvement over current methods.

-I?Jifl

7g4

Percent

1o.7g

70

1

1

•1

\
"i

V.

i

Components of the Civilian Unemployment Rate

CHART

NJ

Measurement Error

Seasonal Component

Non—seasonal Component

Unadjusted Rate

-2.72

4.16

11.04

17.g2

Percent

24.80

•1

71

2

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

Components of the Teenage Unemployment Rate

CHART

79

80

81

82
I

Lmc

t-)

Measurement Error

Seasonal Component

Non—seasonal
Component

_____ Unadjusted Rate

-0.01

O.O5

111

3.23

0.00
12

3

24

36

48

60

72

84

1

Mode2

—-—Mode

Moving Average Representations of the Civilian Unemployment Rate

CHART

0e3?

-0.03

0.27

0.57

0.87

Uu0
12

36

48

60

72

96

La

______ Mode
Mode

Moving Average Representatfrns c1 the Teenage Unemployment Rate

CHART 4

2

1

U'

-0.09

.1.

00o

4i

fl • -)

fl

155

0.77

5

12

24

36

48

Optimal and Model—2 Filters for the

CHART

60

72

CivUlan Unemployment

84

La/Lag

Model—2 Filter

Optimal Filter

R;ite

C'

-0.12

ELO6

O44

O.2

0.00

-

12

6

24

36

48

60

72

84

Model—2

Optimal

Optimal and :Model—2 Filters for the Teenage Unemployment Rate

CHART

Lead / Lag

Filter
Filter

-0.18

C.07

T,?2

i.57

0.82

0.00

-

-

12

24

36

48

60

72

X—1l

84

Lead/Lag

Filter
Filter
Optimal

Optimal and X—l1 Filters for the Civilian Unemployment Rate

CHART 7

0.18

0.07

132

1.57

0.82

0.00

H

12

8

24

36

4M

60

——___________________
72

84

Lead/Lag

Filter

_____________

X-ll

Optimal Filter

Optimaland X—ll Filters for the Teenage Unemployment Rate

cHART

L)

40

REFERENCES

Burman, J. P. (1980), "Seasonal Adjustment by Signal Extraction", JRSS, Series A,
143, PP. 321-337.

Cleveland, W. P. and G. C. Tiao (1976), "Decomposition of Seasonal Time Series:
A Model for the Census X-11 Program', JASA, 71, pp. 581—587.
Engle, R. F. (1976), "Estimating Structural Models of Seasonality", in Seasonal
Analysis of Economic Time Series, edited by A. Zeliner, U.S. Dept. of
Commerce, Bureau of the Census.
Grether, D. N. and N. Nerlove (1970), "Some Properties of 'Optimal' Seasonal
Adjustment", Econometrica, 38, pp. 682—703.
Harvey, A. C. (1981), Time Series Models, Haistead Press, New York.

Hilimer, S. C. and G. C. Tiao (1982), "An ARIMA—Model-Based Approach to Seasonal
Adjustment", JASA, 77, Pp. 63-70.
Nerlove, M., D. M. Grether, and J. L. Carvaiho (1979), Analysis of Economic Time
Series, A Synthesis, Academic Press, New York.
Pagan, A. (1973), "A Note on the Extraction of Components from Time Series",
Econometrica, 43, PP. 165—168.

Pierce, D. A. (1976), "Seasonal Adjustment When Both Deterministic of Stochastic
Seasonality is Present," in Seasonal Analysis of Economic Time Series,
edited by A. Zellner, U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.
(1979), "Signal Extraction Error in Nonstationary Time Series",
Annals of Statistics, 7, PP. 1303—1326.

Summers, L. H. (1981), "Measuring Unemployment", Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, pp. 609—620.
Wallis, K. F. (1974), "Seasonal Adjustment and Relations Between Variables",
JASA, 69, Pp. 18—31.
Watson, M. W. and R. F. Engle (1983), "Alternative Algorithms for the Estimation
of Dynamic Factor, MIMIC, and Varying Coefficient Regression Models",
forthcoming Journal of Econometrics.

