             STERLING’S PAST, DOLLAR’S FUTURE:
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES ON RESERVE CURRENCY COMPETITION

                     Barry Eichengreen

                   Working Paper 11336
                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      STERLING’S PAST, DOLLAR’S FUTURE:
         HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES ON RESERVE CURRENCY COMPETITION

                                            Barry Eichengreen

                                          Working Paper 11336
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11336


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Barry Eichengreen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sterling’s Past, Dollar’s Future: Historical Perspective on Reserve Currency Competition
Barry Eichengreen
NBER Working Paper No. 11336
May 2005
JEL No. F0

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper provides an historical perspective on reserve currency competition and on the prospects

of the dollar as an international currency. It questions the conventional wisdom that competition for

reserve-currency status is a winner-take-all game, showing that several currencies have often shared

this role in the past and arguing that innovations in financial markets make it even more likely that

they will do so in the future. It suggests that the dollar and the euro are likely to share this position

for the foreseeable future. Hopes that the yuan could become a major international currency 20 or

even 40 years from now are highly premature.

Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu
                               Sterling’s Past, Dollar’s Future:
                  Historical Perspectives on Reserve Currency Competition1

                                         Barry Eichengreen
                                  University of California, Berkeley
                                              April 2005


           One can hardly pick up a financial newspaper these days without seeing a story on

the dollar’s impending loss of international preeminence. This may simply reflect the

instinctual tendency for financial journalists to find a seat on the nearest bandwagon and

ride it for all it is worth. As Mark Twain might have said, reports of the dollar’s death

have been greatly exaggerated. The dollar is still the dominant reserve currency for

central banks and governments. The share of international reserves in dollars has actually

been rising, not falling. The market in U.S. treasury securities is still the single most

liquid financial market in the world, which makes it attractive for central banks to hold

their reserves in this form. The dollar is still the dominant invoicing and vehicle currency

in international trade. Petroleum and other commodities are still invoiced in dollars.

           There are, of course, good reasons for questioning whether this will remain the

case. The dollar has fallen by 16 percent on a trade weighted basis from its peak at the

beginning of the decade. More importantly, never before have we seen the extraordinary

situation where the country issuing the leading international currency is running a current

account deficit of 6 percent of GDP. Never before have we seen the reserve currency

country in debt to the rest of the world to the extent of 25 percent of GDP. The

connections between U.S. budget deficits, themselves partly a reflection of the country’s

overseas military commitments, and the weakness of the currency suggest parallels with

the trials of the dollar in the 1960s and the tribulations of sterling after World War II. All
1
    Text of the Tawney Lecture, delivered to the Economic History Society, Leicester, 10 April 2005.


                                                      1
this is bound to raise questions in the minds of foreign holders of U.S. treasury securities

that may lead them to search for alternative forms in which to hold their claims. And for

the first time in living memory there exists another currency with a deep and liquid

market issued by an economy as large as the United States. That currency, obviously, is

the euro. Looking forward there is also the renminbi, the currency of an economy that 50

years from now may be even larger economically and trade more extensively than the

United States.

           History is widely invoked in discussions of this issue, even by currency

forecasters who are typically more comfortable with tick-by-tick data than archival

sources. Consider the following quote from Avinash Persaud of State Street Bank and

Trust. “[R]eserve currencies come and go. Over the past two and a half thousand years

there have been over a dozen reserve currencies that no longer exist. Sterling lost its

status in the first half of the 20th century, [and] the dollar will lose its status in the first

half of this century…Losing reserve currency status will lead to a series of economic and

political crises in the United States.”2

           While this passage is exceptional for its drama, it is not unusual for its history.

This is not surprising, since a change in the dominant international currency is not seen

very often. The last time such a shift occurred, from sterling to the dollar, was more than

half a century ago. Moreover, if we focus on one specific role of an international

currency, as a store of value for central banks’ and governments’ international reserves,

one can argue that this was the only such shift in recorded history.3 Other monetary units

had come in for international use before, but not as a form in which to hold liquid paper


2
    Persaud (2004), p. 1.
3
    Here,obviously, I am dissenting from one of Persaud’s assertions.


                                                       2
liabilities in connection with the operation of the international monetary system. Most

medieval and early modern examples of “international money” were simply coins that

circulated for use across national borders. In the 17th and 18th centuries when Holland was

a leading international commercial and financial power and Amsterdam was a leading

international financial center, paper claims became important but most international

operations there were in bills on foreign places, not in claims on the Dutch government

itself.4

           In the remainder of this lecture I will focus on the dollar’s role as the dominant

form of official reserves and its place in the operation of the international monetary

system. There is a sense, therefore, in which we really have only one data point, the

transition from sterling to the dollar, from which to draw inferences. Thus, we are truly in

the historian’s domain.



                                                     ****



           As I just suggested, while foreign deposits and purchases of foreign bills and

bonds are nothing new, large-scale holdings in foreign financial centers by central banks

and governments are a relatively recent development. The spread of this practice

coincided with the emergence of the international gold standard in the decades prior to

World War I. With a few important exceptions, the standard in question was a gold

bullion standard, not a gold coin standard.5 A significant share of the monetary

circulation of countries on the gold standard was not gold coin, in other words, but token

4
 See Wilson (1941) and Lindert (1969).
5
 Gold coin constituted a large share of the circulation only in England, France, Germany, the United
States, Russia after 1897, Australia, South Africa and New Zealand according to Bloomfield (1959).


                                                    3
coins and paper convertible into gold bullion under certain circumstances. The gold

bullion standard was a 19th century innovation. It presupposed a uniform currency that

was difficult to counterfeit, which became possible only when steam power came to the

mint.6 Once gold was concentrated in the vaults of central banks (or in treasuries and

other note issuing banks where there existed no central bank), there was an incentive to

substitute or at least augment it with bills and deposit claims which bore interest but were

convertible into gold. Peter Lindert’s estimates, which nearly four decades after their

appearance are still the best available, suggest that foreign exchange rose from a tenth to

a seventh of global international reserves between 1880 and 1914.7

         Why London should have been the place where many such reserves were

maintained and why sterling bills and deposits should have been their single most

important form are easy enough to understand. Britain was the world’s preeminent

trading nation, absorbing more than 30 percent of the exports of the rest of the world in

1860 and 20 percent in 1890.8 It was a leading exporter of manufactures and services and

also a voracious consumer of imported foodstuffs and raw materials. Between 1860 and

1914 probably about 60 percent of world trade was invoiced and settled in sterling.9 For

foreign suppliers seeking to sell, say, cotton, quoting prices in sterling was helpful for

breaking into the British market. The supplier would maintain a deposit account in

London where receipts could be held safely for at least short periods. With the growth of




6
  See Redish (1990) and the author’s other publications on this subject.
7
  See Lindert (1969). They then rose further, to roughly a quarter of global reserves, in the 1920s,
prompting observers to write, with something of a lag relative to reality, of the emergence of a gold-
exchange standard.
8
  According to the famous estimates of Imlah (1958).
9
  Williams (1968), p. 268.


                                                      4
imports and re-exports of these materials came the development of commodity exchanges

where both spot and forward prices were similarly quoted in sterling.10

        Britain’s position as the single most important source of long-term overseas

investment worked in the same direction. Foreign governments seeking to borrow abroad

came to London, making sterling the logical unit of account for debt securities, since then

as now there was a limited appetite for bonds denominated in their own currencies, the

markets in which were less liquid and whose value was more easily manipulated by the

issuer.11 When funds became available, it was natural to park them temporarily in deposit

accounts in London, generally in the same bank that had underwritten the loan.12 Lenders

encouraged the practice on the view that the maintenance of deposits in London was a

bonding device that might promote good behavior on the part of the borrower.13

        That Britain was an imperial power reinforced sterling’s role. From the early 18th

century a conscious effort was made to encourage the use of the pound throughout the

empire as a way of simplifying and regularizing transactions.14 British financial

institutions established branches in the colonies, and colonial banks opened offices in

London. These banks maintained assets and liabilities in London and issued bank notes

for the colonies, maintaining a fixed exchange rate between those notes and sterling.

When those exchange rates misbehaved, the British government imposed direct

regulation of local currency issues, notably featuring full external convertibility of the

local currency into sterling at a fixed rate of exchange, something that was maintained by

10
   Forward contracts in sterling traded in Liverpool from at least the 1850s.
11
   On this, see Flandreau and Sussman (2005) and Bordo, Meissner and Redish (2005). In the case of
colonial and Commonwealth borrowers, the entire question of currency denomination was moot, of course.
12
   More so to the extent that they eventually were going to be used to purchase machinery, railway rolling
stock and other products of British industry.
13
   See Balogh (1950), although it can be questioned, as Lindert does, whether it was the lender or the
borrower whose behavior was most constrained by the practice.
14
   See for example Crick (1948).


                                                    5
buying and selling sterling on demand in London. In cases like India where the British

sovereign was ultimately made legal tender, the colonial government was led to establish

a sizeable reserve in London.

         These practices further enhanced the liquidity of the London market, which was

probably the single most important fundamental making it attractive for foreign central

banks and governments to hold interest-bearing assets there in the first place. Because the

market was deep and liquid, official foreign holders of sterling could augment and

deplete their positions without disturbing prices or revealing facts about their balance

sheets. They could use sterling to intervene in the foreign exchange market to prevent

their exchange rates from straying beyond the gold import and export points. Although

problems in the London market did arise periodically, these never jeopardized the

convertibility of sterling. And while the Bank of England occasionally resorted to the

gold devices, modifying the effective price of gold, it never seriously interfered with the

freedom of nonresidents to export gold. Few if any other financial centers could claim all

these attributes.15

         Sterling’s preeminence prior to 1914 is frequently invoked as evidence that there

can be only one international currency at any point in time. Then it was the pound, now it

is the dollar, and in the future it will be something else. To again quote Persaud, “at any

one point in time, there tends to be a single dominant currency in the financial world, not

two or more, just one. Some people believe that the euro may not topple the dollar, [but




15
  Bloomfield (1959) notes that both the Bank of France and German Reichsbank, which oversaw the
operation the main competing reserve centers, took various steps in the period to make it difficult for
market participants to export gold.


                                                      6
that] it will at least share some of the spoils of financial hegemony. History suggests not.

In the currency markets the spoils go to the victor, alone; they are not shared.”16

         The notion that there is room in the market for only one reserve currency is based

on the concept of network externalities and on the singular dominance of the dollar in the

final quarter of the 20th century.17 The network-externalities story is that, as with

computer operating systems, there are strong incentives to conform to the choice that

dominates the marketplace.18 But while this argument carries some weight in the choice

of currency for invoicing trade or denominating foreign debt securities, it is less

obviously valid for the currency of denomination of reserves.19 It may pay to hold

reserves in the most liquid market, which tends to be the market in which everyone else

holds reserves, but market liquidity is not all that matters. It may be worth tolerating a bit

less market liquidity in return for the benefits of greater diversification or as an

expression of good faith to the investment bank that one seeks to have underwrite one’s

loans. And if there is no strong network externality encouraging one to hold reserves in

the same currency as other central banks, then there is no lock-in to prevent central banks

from altering the currency composition of their reserve portfolios in response to new

information about expected capital gains and losses.

         In fact, the historical evidence is not obviously consistent with the notion that the

spoils in currency markets go to the victor alone. At the end of 1913, sterling balances


16
   Persaud (2004), p. 1.
17
   To again quote Persaud (p. 2), “Reserve currencies have the attributes of a natural monopoly or in more
modern parlance, a network. If it costs extra to trade with some one who uses a different currency than you,
it makes sense for you to use the currency that most other people use, this makes that currency yet bigger
and cheaper to use. There is a good analogy with computers. ‘Windows’ is the dollar of operating systems.”
18
   This is the analytical basis for formal models of international currency status. See for example
Matsuyama, Kiyotaki and Matsui (1993).
19
   Readers familiar with my own previous work on this subject (Eichengreen 1998) will notice that my
views on this particular issued have evolved, as views will sometimes do.


                                                     7
accounted for less than half of the total official foreign exchange holdings whose

currency of denomination is known, while French francs accounted for perhaps a third

and German marks a sixth.20 (See Table 1.) Over the preceding quarter century, sterling’s

share had in fact been falling, not rising, mainly in consequence of the growing share of

the French franc. In Europe itself, sterling was a distant third as a form in which to hold

official reserves behind both the franc and the mark.

         Nor is interwar experience obviously consistent with the notion that one currency

dominates international usage. In the 1920s and 1930s three currencies again shared this

role, although now the dollar supplanted the German mark. The establishment of the

Federal Reserve System in 1914 had enhanced the liquidity of the New York market and

heightened its attractions as an international financial center. Indeed, elevating its status

in this way was one of the motivations for founding the Fed in the interpretation of

Lawrence Broz.21 Before World War I the dollar was scarcely used in international

transactions.22 There existed no central bank to rediscount those acceptances, purchase

bills on the open market, and otherwise ensure the liquidity of the market. This changed

of course with the founding of the Fed.

         World War I had a reinforcing effect. Germany suspended convertibility in the

opening week of the war. The Bank of France, which had never been legally obliged to

convert notes into gold, did so only under exceptional circumstances before an official

gold embargo was imposed in 1915. Britain restricted the export and melting of gold in



20
   Lindert (1969), Table 3. Note the qualification in the text: these calculations exclude from consideration
the $232 million whose currency of denomination is not known.
21
   See Broz (1997).
22
   This reflected the absence of a deep and liquid market in bankers acceptances, which was itself a
reflection of the fact that national banks were prohibited from accepting bills of exchange arising out of
international trade.


                                                      8
1917. The United States, in contrast, preserved gold convertibility even after it entered

World War I, in 1917.23 Its shares of global trade and foreign lending were then markedly

higher in the 1920s than they had been before World War I, leading to a considerable

expansion in the dollar’s role as a unit of account and means of payment for international

transactions between private parties. Germany and France suffered financial turmoil in

the first half of the 1920s. In the second half of the decade the Bank of England was

continuously “under the harrow,” in Montagu Norman’s famous phrase.24

         And yet, despite all this, sterling, the dollar, and the franc shared the reserve

currency role in the 1920s and 1930s. It is striking that we still lack careful Lindert-like

estimates of the relative shares of the three currencies. But sterling was probably still

first, followed by the dollar and the franc.25

         The conventional wisdom that one currency dominates reserve holdings

worldwide thus derives mainly from the second half of the 20th century alone, when the

greenback accounted for as much as 85 percent of global foreign exchange reserves. (See

Table 2.) In part, the post-World War II dominance of the dollar reflected the exceptional

dominance by the United States of global trade and payments in a period when Europe

and Japan had not yet fully recovered from the war and modern economic growth had yet



23
   In 1914 it induced the New York banks to establish a gold pool for financing balance-of-payments
settlements, and after the country entered the war the government appealed to patriotism and erected
various modest bureaucratic obstacles to discourage private gold exports. But, fundamentally, it was the
strength of the U.S. balance of payments, given the country’s status as a leading producer of manufactured
exports and raw materials for the war effort, that allowed it to maintain convertibility in this difficult
period.
24
   Sayers (1976), p. 211.
25
   Triffin (1964) provides an estimate for 1928 of official reserves in dollars of $600 million, versus $2,560
million in other currencies. He estimates the reserves denominated in dollars then fell to $60 million at the
end of 1933, with the collapse of the gold-exchange standard, while reserves denominated in other
currencies fell to $1,055. Reserves in those other currencies may have been split 70/30 between sterling and
the French franc, with a higher fraction probably being held in francs after 1931 when the convertibility of
sterling into gold was suspended and the currency was allowed to float. See Nurkse (1944) and Bell (1956).


                                                      9
to spread to what we now refer to as emerging markets.26 In addition it reflected the fact

that the governments of other potential reserve centers actively discouraged international

use of their currencies. Germany saw the internationalization of the deutschemark as a

threat to its control of inflation. Japan saw the internationalization of its currency as

incompatible with their systems of directed credit. France had seen more than once how

allowing private foreign funds to move in also allowed them to move out if investors

concluded that the government’s macroeconomic policy aspirations were incompatible

with its putative commitment to currency stability. These and other considerations led the

countries whose currencies were potential alternatives to the dollar to maintain significant

capital controls well into the post-World War II period, in some cases until the end of the

1980s. Controls limited the liquidity of their securities markets.27 Thus, it was not simply

the unusually large size of the U.S. in the world economy or the admirable liquidity of

U.S. financial markets but the maintenance of controls by other potential reserve centers

that explains why the dollar was so dominant in reserves for so long after World War II.

While most of these controls were relaxed or removed by the 1990s, that decade was

marked by a slump in Japan and the uncertain transition to the euro, making it an

unpropitious time for radical portfolio reallocation. In addition the rapid growth of the

American economy, especially in the second half of the 1990s, meant that the dominance




26
   In fact, the raw data do not suggest that the dollar dominated the market for international reserves until
the end of the 1950s. But the earlier period was one of significant disequilibrium: it was the years of the
“dollar shortage,” and the large sterling balances held by members of the Commonwealth and Empire were
blocked (that is, not held entirely voluntarily). Indeed, more than half of global foreign exchange reserves
were held in sterling in 1949, and some 36 percent was held in this form in 1957. An indirect guide to the
share of reserves that might have been held voluntarily was the share of the sterling area in global trade,
which was about 30 percent in this period.
27
   In conjunction with the bank-based nature of their financial systems, as emphasized by Rajan and
Zingales (2003).


                                                     10
of the dollar troubled few reserve managers. The question now is whether this might

change.

         But is not the persistence of sterling’s reserve-currency role into the second half

of the 20th century, long after the United Kingdom’s international commercial and

financial preeminence passed, evidence that reserve currency status, once gained, is hard

to lose? I am not convinced. After World War II, sterling reserves were held not because

of any lingering incentives conferred by network externalities but mainly as a matter of

loyalty by members of the Commonwealth and by colonies with limited choice in the

matter.28

         Another reason, in addition to loyalty, that members of the Sterling Area were

reluctant to more quickly diversify their reserves out of sterling was that they recognized

that doing so might aggravate the problems of the British economy, on which they

depended as a market for their exports. They valued the exchange-rate and financial

stability conferred by the greater sterling area and were reluctant to precipitate its break-

up.29 This position became less tenable following the 1967 devaluation, when capital

losses were once more imposed on sterling-area countries. This led to the negotiation of

the Basle Facility of 1968 and the associated bilateral agreements in which the UK

guaranteed the value in dollars of the official sterling reserves of sterling area countries,

in return for which each partner country pledged not to reduce its official sterling

balances beyond a certain point.

         This observation has inspired confidence in some circles that foreign central

banks and governments today will similarly resist the temptation to diversify their

28
   Although, as noted by inter alia Schenk (2004), the colonies did possess a significant and growing
amount of fiscal and financial autonomy after World War II, and especially in the 1960s.
29
   For discussion of this point see Cohen (1971).


                                                    11
reserves, since they know that doing so may precipitate a sharp drop in the dollar

exchange rate and damage their prospects for export-led growth.30 This interpretation

misses the distinction between the individual interest and the collective interest.31 The

relevant historical precedent here is the Gold Pool.32 Established in 1961, the Gold Pool

was an arrangement whereby central banks sought to share the cost of maintaining the

London price of gold at $35 an ounce rather than depleting U.S. gold reserves. It

encouraged collective action by establishing an understanding of how the costs of those

operations would be divided – that is, of what share of the gold that needed to be sold in

London in order to stabilize the market price would be provided by each participating

central bank. It collapsed in 1968 after French gold purchases became known and was

followed in short-order by the collapse of the Bretton Woods System itself.

         Thus, history shows that this cartel, like most cartels, proved impossible to hold

together when the need was greatest – that is, when collective action was needed for the

maintenance of the system. The same point applies today: the countries of Asia are

similarly unlikely to be able to subordinate their individual interest to the collective

interest. It may be in their collective interest to hold dollars to keep their currencies down

and the dollar up, but it is in their individual interest to get out before the bottom falls out

of the U.S. currency. This, then, is a classic cartel problem. And there already are signs

that the cartel is fraying around the edges.33



30
   This view has been popularized by Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2003).
31
   As I have argued in Eichengreen (2004).
32
   I argue that the Gold Pool is more relevant than the bilateral agreements negotiated between the UK and
the members of the sterling area in the 1930s because the UK guaranteed the value of sterling claims in
dollars in return for promises of restrain by sterling area central banks, which greatly shaped the incentive
problem. Clearly, a value-maintenance guarantee of this sort is not something that the United States would
be prepared to extend today.
33
   For some suggestive evidence see Eichengreen (2005).


                                                     12
         What about the fact that the U.S. liquid liabilities held by foreign central banks

are large relative to the foreign liquid assets of the Fed and the U.S. government? Doesn’t

this heighten the likelihood of a shift into alternative forms of reserves? By itself, this fact

is not a threat to the reserve currency status of the dollar. In 1913, the liquid sterling

claims held by official foreign institutions were 2 ½ times the Bank of England’s gold

reserves.34 After 1959, official foreign holdings of dollars similarly exceeded the gold

reserves of the United States. In both instances there was some talk of the difficulties that

would arise if foreign creditors suddenly decided to liquidate these claims. But in neither

case did wholesale liquidation occur, and in neither case was the status of the reserve

currency seriously threatened. In each of these instances the accumulation of liquid

claims on the reserve currency country was a natural corollary of that country’s status as

a financial center and of the rising demand for reserves created by a growing world

economy.

         One hears the same argument today. It is said that the U.S. is borrowing short and

lending long because it has a more efficient financial system and because the countries on

the other side of the intermediation process have a voracious demand for liquid foreign

reserves. China buys U.S. treasury securities – liquid claims on the United States – and

the U.S. turns around and uses the proceeds to fund less liquid foreign direct investment

in China, circumventing the inefficiencies of the Chinese banking system.35 This, of

course, is simply an updating of the Despres-Kindleberger-Salant (1966) view of the U.S.

balance of payments in the 1960s. Emile Despres, Charles Kindleberger and Walter

Salant argued that focusing on balance of payments statistics that put net long-term

34
   This is distinct from the ratio of total liquid liabilities to foreigners relative to total liquid assets held
abroad, about which less is known and considerable controversy prevails. See Bloomfield (1963).
35
   As argued by Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2004).


                                                         13
foreign assets above the line but net short-term foreign assets below it is misleading when

both components are in fact parts of the same intermediation process.36 The same was of

course the case before 1914.37 Then too, Britain borrowed short and lent long, acting as

banker to the world. If there was no particular reason to worry then about the fact that

liquid claims of foreign official creditors exceeded liquid foreign assets, it is said, then

there is no reason to worry now.

         But there is a difference between these two previous episodes and today, namely

that the present situation occurs against the backdrop of large, ongoing current account

deficits for the country that is banker to the world. In principle, there is no reason why the

country with the most efficient financial system that is providing intermediation serves to

the rest of the world cannot run a balanced current account or a surplus. There is no

reason why importing short-term capital and exporting long-term capital should also

require it to run a current account deficit, as the United States is doing.38 The U.S. ran

current account surpluses following World War II, even after contemporaries stopped

referring to the dollar gap. Similarly, Britain ran persistent current account surpluses

before World War I.39


36
   Two sides of the same coin, as it were. Salant (1966) provides a statement of the view that the tendency
of the U.S. to borrow short and lend long reflected the lower costs and greater efficiency of financial
intermediation in the United States. The language there is almost identical to the rhetoric currently used to
characterize the differences between the U.S. and Chinese financial sectors today.
37
   See Feis (1930), Lindert (1969) and Fishlow (1986).
38
   Arguably, on these previous occasions the reserve currency country was a net lender both on short- and
long-term account (Bloomfield 1963). In the pre-1914 British case, for example, while the net short-term
liabilities of the government and the central bank to their official foreign counterparts were positive, the net
short-term liabilities of the country as a whole were probably negative, reflecting the large volume of
private acceptance claims on foreigners (again, see Bloomfield 1963). The same may have been true of
France and Germany, although less is known about these cases.
39
   Although prewar Britain ran a deficit on merchandise trade, net income from shipping, insurance, interest
and dividends were more than sufficient to produce a substantial current account surplus. The other side of
this coin was a substantial capital outflow: between 1900 and 1913 Britain invested some 5 percent of her
GDP abroad. The country’s net foreign assets were on the order of a quarter of GDP. France invested
perhaps 2 ½ percent of her GDP abroad each year, and her net foreign asset ratio was perhaps half of


                                                      14
         Advocates of this banker-to-the-world view argue that other countries are running

surpluses against the United States and accumulating reserves in the form of dollars

because these serve as collateral for U.S. FDI.40 U.S. corporations are willing to build

factories in China, in this view, because they know that if the Chinese authorities attempt

to expropriate them, the U.S. government will freeze China’s dollar reserves. In the 19th

century, gunboats provided this function. After World War II the U.S. nuclear umbrella

did the same. Now it is the balance of financial terror.

         I do not find this rationale for U.S. deficits very compelling. The story is China

specific, where the accumulation of reserves and chronic surpluses vis-à-vis the United

States is pan-Asian. And no one worries that Japan or South Korea will expropriate U.S.

investments. I am not aware of U.S. corporate executives who have pointed to China’s

large dollar reserves as a form of collateral in justifying their decision to invest there. Nor

am I aware of statements by Chinese officials in which they explain that they are

accumulating U.S. Treasuries as a way of posting collateral for FDI inflows. Moreover,


Britain’s. My own estimates (Eichengreen 2000b) suggest that the United States first became a net foreign
creditor as a result of World War I, although the size of the net position was small. of the U.S. foreign net
asset position circa 1950 put this at some $52 billion, or about 20 percent of GDP. This is why
contemporaries and historians were able to refer to the unparalleled pulling power of the Bank of England’s
discount rate. See for example Smit (1934). If foreigners began converting sterling reserves into gold – if
Britain’s liquid external liabilities and assets both began to fall – the country’s long-term assets were easily
liquefied. In particular, an increase in bank rate damped down, or at least delayed, long-term foreign
lending. (In addition, it encouraged overseas and foreign residents floating bonds in London to maintain a
larger share of the proceeds on deposit there, as already mentioned. Raising interest rates also raised
interest earnings since the country was a net foreign creditor; that is, residents had more interest-earning
assets abroad than foreigners maintained in Britain. And, on rare occasion, there was also the possibility of
foreign support in the event that the Bank of England’s liquid assets proved insufficient, as I have
emphasized in Eichengreen (1995). For an earlier discussion of the same point see Bloomfield (1959).) It
strengthened the balance of payments by contracting the volume of acceptances and other short-term claims
on the rest of the world. The classic statement of this view is that of the Macmillan Committee (Committee
on Finance and Industry 1931). Bloomfield (1963) provides a more agnostic approach to the question. The
U.S. position in the 1960s was more tenuous because of the reluctance of the authorities to use the interest
rate to defend the dollar owing to the potentially adverse impact of tighter money on employment and
growth, as described in Eichengreen (2000b). But the government relied instead on taxes and voluntary
restraints to discourage direct foreign investment by U.S. corporations, with much the same effect.
40
   See Dooley and Garber (2005).


                                                      15
the timing is wrong: U.S. FDI in China rises starting around 1992, where the massive

reserve accumulation comes only a decade later. Given the difficulty of identifying the

final holders of U.S. treasury securities, it is not clear that selective default of this sort is

possible. And given the fact that the U.S. accounts for only a small fraction of FDI in

China, one must assume that the United States would be willing to compromise its public

credit standing in this way on behalf not just of U.S. private foreign investors but also of

those from other countries. Historically, the way foreign investments in China have been

expropriated is through the surreptitious stripping of assets by Chinese managers and

joint-venture partners. It is hard to imagine that the U.S. government would risk

tarnishing its public credit in response to more such instances. Rather, one has to assume

a major geopolitical blow-up between the U.S. and China, a decision by Beijing to freeze

all U.S. investments there, and retaliation by the U.S. government in the form of freezing

Chinese t-bill holdings. Such events are not beyond all realm of possibility, but they do

not strike me as an obvious way of explaining the current pattern of global imbalances.

        In my view, the fact that the reserve currency country is running current account

deficits and incurring a large net foreign debt threatens to undermine its position as

banker to the world. This means that long-term foreign claims on the U.S. are as easily

liquefied as long-term U.S. claims on foreigners – even more so to the extent that long-

term U.S. foreign assets take the form of illiquid FDI and U.S. long-term foreign

liabilities take the form of treasury bonds. While there may be something to the “banker

to the world” metaphor, now – unlike Britain before 1914 and the United States before

1971 – we are talking about a bank with a negative net capital.




                                                16
         A modest net foreign debt may not be a problem, given the strength of the

American economy and its attractions for foreign investors. The United States has other

sources of strength, not merely its financial capital. But if its debt is allowed to grow

relative to GDP, sooner or later foreigners will grow reluctant to hold more of it. That

reluctance could lead to currency depreciation and inflation in the United States that

ultimately makes holding reserves in dollars less attractive.

         Michael Mussa (2004), in a recent analysis, provides a simple way of thinking

about this. Mussa shows that the ratio of net foreign liabilities to GDP, denoted n,

stabilizes when c = n ∗ g, where c is the current account deficit as a share of GDP and g is

the rate of growth of nominal income. If g is 0.05 (3 percent real growth plus two percent

inflation) and c is 0.025, then the debt ratio stabilizes at 50 percent, double the current 25

percent and perhaps the plausible upper bound on how much U.S. net debt foreigners

might be willing to hold. (This is also what Mussa assumes, subject to some caveats. It

will be useful for what follows to assume that inflation in the rest of the world also runs

at 2 percent, the upper bound of the ECB’s target range.)41

         Assume now that the United States does nothing to raise its public and household

savings rates and that the current account deficit is allowed to continue running at 5

percent of GDP. With g = 0.05 and c = 0.05, the debt ratio now stabilizes at 100

percent.42 This is a much higher ratio than ever incurred by a large country, much less by


41
   Comparable rates of inflation between these two large markets are of course consistent with the long-run
stability of exchange rates between them.
42
   Or at least it stabilizes there under favorable assumptions. Note for example that I have said nothing
about the increase in nominal interest rates that might accompany this higher inflation rate. Net interest
payments to foreigners are part of the current account, of course. If they rise with inflation, as is plausible,
then the trade balance must strengthen to keep the current account from rising above 5 percent. (And if the
term of the debt shortens in response to the acceleration of inflation, the increase in interest liabilities
becomes larger still, since the now-higher interest rate must be paid on a larger fraction of the outstanding
debt.) If the trade balance doesn’t strengthen, then the U.S. authorities have to respond with a further


                                                      17
a reserve-currency country. It implies that foreigners would have to hold a considerably

greater share of their portfolios than at present in the form of claims on the United States.

This result, in other words, is implausible. Something has to give.

         One way of squaring the circle, assuming no change in c, which is what we are

assuming for the moment, is to raise the rate of inflation from, say, 2 to 7 per cent, with

the result that the rate of nominal income growth rises 5 to 10 percent.43 With c = 0.05

and g = .10, n again stabilizes at 50 percent, which we are assuming to be the upper

bound. The most likely way in which this would come about is that foreigners would

grow unwilling to add more dollar-denominated securities to their portfolios. Keeping

the share of dollar-denominated securities in foreign portfolios constant, even while the

U.S. continues to pump additional treasury bonds into the world economy, requires the

dollar exchange rate to fall.44 And once it begins falling, there may be a “rush out of

dollars,” as investors scramble out in order to avoid ending up holding the bag (that is, to

avoid incurring large capital losses as a result of being late). And the faster the dollar

drops, the greater are imported inflation and upward pressure on U.S. inflation generally.

This is how market forces produce the acceleration in inflation that limits the U.S.

external debt/GNP ratio to levels acceptable to investors.

         Some will object at this point that the Fed would not be prepared to countenance

such an acceleration in inflation. They have in mind that it would raise interest rates

sharply in order to damp down the additional inflationary pressure. But whether this

provides a smooth way out of the dilemma at hand depends on how we think the Fed’s


surprise increase in inflation, which presumably elicits an increase in interest rates, and so forth in a vicious
spiral. Presumably this would render the dollar a still less attractive form in which to hold reserves.
43
   The assumption that real growth remains unchanged is a convenient simplification to which we may wish
to return below.
44
   This is the classic portfolio-balance model of international adjustment, as in Kouri (1976).


                                                       18
higher interest rates will affect the economy and the current account. Sharply higher

interest rates would depress both absorption and output.45 They would depress consumer

spending through their negative impact on house prices and the value of other assets and

depress investment by raising the cost of capital. They would depress the growth of

output through their negative effects on investment and aggregate demand generally. If

the main thing that falls is absorption, then the current account will narrow and portfolio

equilibrium can be restored without rapid inflation. But if the main thing that falls is

output, then the current account – the current account being the difference between

absorption and output – may show little if any improvement. Higher interest rates that

depress output may then also destabilize the financial system; after all, the combination

of higher interest rates and a collapsing exchange rate, occurring against the backdrop of

chronic fiscal and external imbalances, is the classic recipe for a financial crisis.

         None of these scenarios have happy endings for the reserve currency role of the

dollar. Assume first that the Fed does not attempt to offset the inflationary effects of the

fall of the dollar. With U.S. inflation now running at three times inflation in other

countries, using the dollar as a store of value and a vehicle and invoicing currency would

become less attractive.46 The resulting capital losses would eventually encourage foreign

central banks and governments to find a more stable repository for their reserves.47

Alternatively, assume that the Fed raises the discount rate sharply in order to prevent an

45
   Here is where the assumption flagged in the previous footnote should be relaxed.
46
   A point emphasized by Tavlas (1997). If we instead assume that n must stabilize at 40 percent of U.S.
GDP, Mussa’s more conservative estimate of the feasible, then U.S. inflation must rise to 10.5 percent,
more than five times foreign levels, which only reinforces the conclusion.
47
   A complication here is that depreciation of the dollar also has the effect of reducing the U.S. net external
debt because U.S. foreign assets are disproportionately denominated in foreign currencies (as in the case, in
some sense, of foreign direct investments) while U.S. foreign liabilities are disproportionately denominated
in dollars (as emphasized by Gourinchas and Rey 2003 and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2004). But this too is
likely to change in an environment of higher inflation and secular depreciation like that emphasized in the
text.


                                                      19
acceleration of inflation. This might only precipitate a sharp recession and financial

distress – and potentially an even sharper drop in the dollar. This would again lead

foreign central banks and other investors to shift out of dollars to avoid capital losses.48

Only if we assume that the Fed can engineer a smooth landing – that it could raise

interest rates just enough to contain inflation but without precipitating a serious recession

and thereby reduce c after all – would there be a smooth way out.



                                                       ****



         What does this imply for the reserve currency role of the dollar? It implies that

whether the dollar retains its reserve currency role depends, first and foremost, on

America’s own policies. Serious economic mismanagement would lead to the

substitution of other reserve currencies for the dollar. In this context, serious

mismanagement means policies that allow unsustainably large current account deficits to

persist, lead to the accumulation of large external debts, and result in a high rate of U.S.

inflation and dollar depreciation. Clearly, this would make holding dollar reserves

unattractive. This is a lesson of British history in the sense that an inflation rate that ran

at roughly 3 times U.S. rates over the first three quarters of the 20th century, in

conjunction with repeated devaluations against the dollar, played a major role in

sterling’s loss of reserve currency status.


48
  The possibility that sharp interest rate increases that caused recession and financial distress could weaken
the currency rather than strengthening it of course was much discussed in the aftermath of the Asian crisis.
See for example Furman and Stiglitz (1998). The careful reader will have noted that the first scenario has
both inflation and currency depreciation accelerating, while the second has currency depreciation
accelerating without a concurrent increase in inflation. The reason is that the real exchange rate has good
reason to behave differently in the two scenarios; in the second one real depreciation is required to begin
crowding in the demand for U.S. goods.


                                                     20
           Under the more optimistic scenario in which the U.S. current account deficit is

brought under control, there is no obvious reason why the dollar should lose its reserve

currency status, given the stability of U.S. policy, the vibrancy of the U.S. economy, and

the liquidity of U.S. financial markets. But this does not mean that the dollar will remain

as dominant as in the past. As financial markets in other countries gain liquidity, their

currencies become more convenient forms in which to hold reserves. For more than four

decades after World War II, as I emphasized above, other countries maintained capital

controls and tight financial regulations that limited the liquidity of their markets,

rendering their currencies less attractive as repositories for reserves and accentuating the

dominance of the dollar. Now, with financial normalization and liberalization, some

diversification out of dollars is inevitable. This does not mean that the dollar is doomed to

lose its reserve currency status. The network-externalities argument that competition for

reserve currency status is a winner-take-all game holds little water either analytically or

historically. Looking forward, financial innovation will continue to reduce the costs of

converting currencies, further reducing the incentive to hold reserves in the same form

that other countries hold reserves simply in order to minimize transactions costs. Thus,

there is no reason why, several decades from now, two or three reserve currencies cannot

share the market, not unlike the situation before 1914.49

           But which currencies? Unsurprisingly, my candidates, whether we are thinking of

2020 or 2040, are the dollar and the euro. Both Europe and the U.S. have strong

institutions, respect for property rights, and sound and sound macroeconomic policies

relative to the rest of the world. They have stable political systems. Their economies are

likely to be of roughly equal size, to engage in similar levels of external trade and
49
     Another statement of this view is Issing (2003).


                                                        21
financial transactions, and to have comparably liquid securities markets. The advent of

the euro has done much to increase the liquidity of European bond markets, which is a

critical event from the point of view of enhancing the reserve currency status of the

euro.50 The only question is whether the soundness of macroeconomic policies will be

maintained in the United States or whether dollar’s reserve currency status could be

destroyed by an extended bout of inflationary.

           The other popular candidates are not likely to be major rivals. Japan is a much

smaller country with a serious demographic problem and a resistance to immigration.

Nor has it displayed a record of policy stability in recent years. Everyone’s favorite heir

to the throne, China, will have to solve some very serious problems before its currency

begins to become attractive as a repository for other countries’ foreign exchange reserves.

Removing capital controls is the least of its problems, in my view. Its financial markets

are not very liquid or transparent; indeed, most of the institutional infrastructure needed

for Shanghai to become a true international financial center will take decades to install.

The security of property rights is uncertain, and making investors feel secure will

ultimately require a transition to democracy, the creation of credible political checks and

balances, and the development of a creditor class with political sway. While the renminbi

is everyone’s favorite candidate for the new reserve currency champion four or five

decades from now, such hopes are, in my opinion, still highly premature.

           Thus, my message, appropriate for this venue, is that history must be read

carefully. In fact, several currencies can share reserve currency status, as they not

infrequently have. Changes in financial technologies and market structures, which

weaken network effects, make it even more likely that this will be true in the future than
50
     See Pagano and von Thadden (2004).


                                               22
the past. At the same time, mistaken policies can quickly knock a currency out of

contention. Time will tell whether this fate befalls the dollar.




                                              23
                                          References

Balogh, Thomas (1950), Studies in Financial Organization, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Bell, Philip (1956), The Sterling Area in the Postwar World, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Bloomfield, Arthur I. (1959), Monetary Policy under the International Gold Standard
1880-1914, New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Bloomfield, Arthur I. (1963), “Short-Term Capital Movements under the Pre-1914 Gold
Standard,” Princeton Studies in International Finance no. 11, International Finance
Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University.

Bordo, Michael, Christopher Meissner and Angela Redish (2005), “How Original Sin
was Overcome: The Evolution of External Debt Denominated in Domestic Currencies in
the United States and the British Dominions,” in Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo
Hausmann, eds, Other People’s Money: Debt Denomination and Financial Stability in
Emerging Market Economies, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 122-153.

Broz, Lawrence (1997), The International Origins of the Federal Reserve System, Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.

Cohen, Benjamin J. (1971), The Future of Sterling as an International Currency,
London: Macmillan.

Committee on Finance and Industry [Macmillan Committee] (1931), Report, London:
HMSO.

Crick, W.F. (1948), Origins and Development of the Sterling Area, London: Institute of
Bankers.

Despres, Emile, Charles Kindleberger and Walter Salant (1966), “The Dollar and World
Liquidity: A Minority View,” The Economist 218 (5 February).

Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter Garber (2003), “An Essay on the
Revived Bretton Woods System,” NBER Working Paper no. 9971 (September).

Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter Garber (2004), “Direct Investment,
Rising Real Wages and the Absorption of Excess Labor in the Periphery,” NBER
Working Paper no. 10626 (July).

Dooley, Michael and Peter Garber (2005), “Is it 1958 or 1968? Three Notes on the
Longevity of the Revived Bretton Woods System,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity (forthcoming).




                                          24
Eichengreen, Barry (1995), “Exchange Rate Commitments and Central Bank
Cooperation: The Classical and Interwar Gold Standard Compared,” Financial History
Review 2, pp. 99-117.

Eichengreen, Barry (1998), “The Euro as a Reserve Currency,” Journal of the Japanese
and International Economies 12, pp. 483-506.

Eichengreen, Barry (2000a), “U.S. Foreign Financial Relations in the Twentieth
Century,” in Stanley Engerman and Robert Gallman eds, The Cambridge Economic
History of the United States, Volume III: The Twentieth Century, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 463-504.

Eichengreen, Barry (2000b), “From Benign Neglect to Malignant Preoccupation: U.S.
Balance of Payments Policy in the 1960s,” in George L. Perry and James Tobin eds,
Economic Events, Ideas and Policies: The 1960s and After, Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution, pp. 185-242.

Eichengreen, Barry (2004), “Global Imbalances and the Lessons of Bretton Woods,”
NBER Working Paper no. 10497 (May).

Eichengreen, Barry (2005), “The Dollar and the New Bretton Woods System,” Thornton
Lecture delivered at the Cass School of Business, City University, www.emlab.berkeley.
edu.

Feis, Herbert (1930), Europe, the World’s Banker, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Fishlow, Albert (1986), “Lessons from the Past: Capital Markets during the 19th Century
and the Interwar Period,” in Miles Kahler ed., The Politics of International Debt, Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, pp. 37-94.

Furman, Jason and Joseph Stiglitz (1998), “Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from
East Asia,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, pp.1-135.

Flandreau, Marc and Nathan Sussman (2005), “Old Sins: Exchange Clauses and
European Foreign Lending in the Nineteenth Century,” in Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo
Hausmann, eds, Other People’s Money: Debt Denomination and Financial Stability in
Emerging Market Economies, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 154-189.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Helene Rey (2003), “International Financial Adjustment,”
unpublished manuscript, University of California, Berkeley and Princeton University.

Imlah, Albert (1958), Economic Elements in the Pax Britannica, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.

Issing, Otmar (2003), “The Euro – a Stable International Currency,” speech to the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, 27 February, www.ecb.int/press.



                                            25
Kouri, Pentti (1976), “The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the Short Run
and in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78,
pp.280-304.

Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2004), “Financial Globalization and
Exchange Rate Changes,” IMF Working Paper 05/03 (January).

Lindert, Peter H. (1969), “Key Currencies and Gold 1900-1913,” Princeton Studies in
International Finance no. 24, International Finance Section, Department of Economics,
Princeton University.

Matsuyama, K., N. Kiyotaki and A. Matsui (1993), “Toward a Theory of International
Currency,” Review of Economic Studies 60, pp. 283-307.

Mussa, Michael (2004), “Exchange Rate Adjustments Needed to Reduce Global
Payments Imbalances,” in C. Fred Bergsten and John Williamson, Dollar Adjustment:
How Far? Against What? Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, eds,
pp. 113-138.

Nurkse, Ragnar (1944), International Currency Experience, Geneva: League of Nations.

Pagano, Marco and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden (2004), “The European Bond Markets
Under EMU,” CSEF Working Paper no. 126, Center for Studies in Economics and
Finance, University of Salerno.

Persaud, Avinash (2004), “When Currency Empires Fall,” www.321gold.com/ editorials
(11 October).

Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (2003), “The Great Reversals: The Politics of
Financial Development in the 20th Century,” Journal of Financial Economics 114, pp. 5-
50.

Redish, Angela (1990), “The Evolution of the Gold Standard in England,” Journal of
Economic History 50, pp. 789-805.

Salant, Walter S. (1966), “Capital Markets and the Balance of Payments of a Financial
Center,” in William Fellner, Fritz Machlup and Robert Triffin, eds, Maintaining and
Restore Balance in International Payments, Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp.
177-196.

Sayers, Richard (1976), The Bank of England, 1891-1944, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Schenk, Catherine R. (2004), “The Empire Strikes Back: Hong Kong and the Decline of
Sterling in the 1960s,” Economic History Review LVII, pp.551-580.



                                           26
Smit, Carel Jan (1934), “The Pre-War Gold Standard,” Proceedings of the American
Political Science Association 16, pp. 53-56.

Tavlas, George (1997), “The International Use of the US Dollar: An Optimum Currency
Area Perspective,” The World Economy 20, pp. 709-747.

Triffin, Robert (1964), “The Evolution of the International Monetary System: Historical
Reappraisal and Future Perspectives,” Princeton Studies in International Finance no. 12,
International Finance Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University.

Williams, David (1968), “The Evolution of the Sterling System,” in C.R. Whitlesey and
J.S.G Wilson, eds, Essays in Money and Banking, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
266-297.

Wilson, Charles H. (1941), Anglo-Dutch Commerce and Finance in the Eighteenth
Century, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.




                                           27
                                Table 1
Shares of Currencies in Known Official Foreign Exchange Assets, 1899-1913

                                 End of 1899          End of 1913
           Sterling                  64                   48
           Francs                    16                   31
           Marks                     15                   15
           Other currencies           6                    6

         Notes: Percentages may not sum to 100 due to rounding.
         Source: Calculated from Lindert (1969), Table 3.




                                    28
                                     Table 2
                Currency composition of foreign exchange reserves
                                  (in percent)
               Regime           1973         1987         1995      2002
     US dollar                    84.5         66.0        56.4     64.8
     Euro                          -            -           -       14.6
     Sterling                      5.9           2.2        3.4      4.4
     German mark                   6.7         13.4        13.7       -
     French franc                  1.2          0.8         1.8       -
     Swiss franc                   1.4          1.5          0.1     0.7
     Yen                           -            7.0          7.1     4.5
     ECU                           -            5.7          6.5      -
     Other                         -            3.4          9.7    20.6

Source: IMF.




                                         29
