                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF 'ACTING WHITE'

                                          Roland G. Fryer, Jr.
                                             Paul Torelli

                                         Working Paper 11334
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11334


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




This research uses data from Add Health, a program project designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S.
Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris, and funded by a grant P01-HD31921 from the National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 17 other agencies. Special
acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwistle for assistance in the original design.
Persons interested in obtaining data from Add Health should contact Add Health, Carolina Population
Center, 123 W. Franklin Street, Chapel Hill, NC 27516-2524 (addhealth@unc.edu). We are grateful
to George Akerlof, Pol Antras, David Card, Prudence Carter, Kenneth Chay, William Darity, Federico
Echenique, Ronald Ferguson, Edward Glaeser, Michael Greenstone, Jennifer Hochschild, Christopher
Jencks, Adrianna Lleras-Muney, Lawrence Kahn, Lisa Kahn, Lawrence Katz, Rachel Kranton, Steven
Levitt, Glenn Loury, Linda Loury, Jens Ludwig, Ted Miguel, Emily Oster, Paul Peterson, Mica Pollock,
Gavin Samms, Jesse Shapiro, and Andrei Shleifer for helpful comments and suggestions. Alexander
Kaufman and Patricia Foo provided exceptional research assistance. Direct all correspondence to Fryer
at Harvard University, 1875 Cambridge Street, Cambridge MA 02138 [e-mail: rfryer@fas.harvard.edu.]
The usual caveat applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by Roland G. Fryer, Jr. and Paul Torelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
An Empirical Analysis of 'Acting White'
Roland G. Fryer, Jr. and Paul Torelli
NBER Working Paper No. 11334
May 2005
JEL No. J0,I2

                                             ABSTRACT

There is a debate among social scientists regarding the existence of a peer externality commonly referred
to as 'acting white.' Using a newly available data set (the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent
Health), which allows one to construct an objective measure of a student's popularity, we demonstrate
that there are large racial differences in the relationship between popularity and academic achievement;
our (albeit narrow) definition of 'acting white.' The effect is intensified among high achievers and in
schools with more interracial contact, but non-existent among students in predominantly black schools
or private schools. The patterns in the data appear most consistent with a two-audience signaling model
in which investments in education are thought to be indicative of an individual's opportunity costs
of peer group loyalty. Other models we consider, such as self-sabotage among black youth or the presence
of an oppositional culture, all contradict the data in important ways.


Roland G. Fryer, Jr.
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 208
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu

Paul Torelli
Harvard University
torelli@fas.harvard.edu
“Go into any inner city neighborhood, and folks will tell you that government alone can’t
teach kids to learn. They know that parents have to parent, that children can’t achieve
unless we raise their expectations and turn off the television sets and eradicate the slander
that says a black youth with a book is acting white.”

Senator Barack Obama, 2004 Democratic National Convention Keynote Address



I. Introduction

        The racial achievement gap in education is a vexing reality. Black children enter

kindergarten lagging whites, and these differences grow throughout the school years.1 On

every subject at every grade level there are large achievement differences between Blacks

and Whites (Campbell, Hombo, and Mazzeo 2000, Neal 2004). The typical Black

seventeen year-old reads at the proficiency level of the typical White thirteen year-old

(Campbell, Hombo, and Mazzeo 2000). On the Scholastic Aptitude Test, Black students

score, on average, more than one standard deviation below white college goers (Card and

Rothstein 2004). Even in affluent neighborhoods, the racial divide is daunting (Ferguson

2001, 2002 and Ogbu and Davis 2003). Accounting for a host of background factors, the

achievement gap remains essentially unchanged (Jencks and Phillips 1998).

        Gaining a better understanding of the underlying causes of the achievement gap is

a question of great importance. Neal and Johnson (1996) and O’neill (1990) find that

most of the observed black-white differential in wages among adults disappears once pre-

market test scores are taken into account. Thus, eliminating the test score gap that exists

at labor market entry may be a critical component of reducing racial wage inequality.




1
 This fact was first established by Coleman et al. (1966). For more recent analysis, see Campbell, Hombo,
and Mazzeo (2000), Carneiro and Heckman (2002), Fryer and Levitt (2004, 2005), Neal (2004), or Phillips,
Crouse, and Ralph (1998).


                                                                                                       2
         A wide variety of possible explanations for the test score gap have been put forth.

These explanations include differences in genetics (Hernstein and Murray 1994, Jensen

1973), differences in family structure and poverty (Armor 1992, Brooks-Gunn and

Duncan 1997), differences in school quality (Cook and Evans 2000), racial bias in testing

or teachers’ perceptions (Delpit 1995, Ferguson 1998, Rodgers and Spriggs 1996), and

differences in peer culture, socialization, or behavior (Austen-Smith and Fryer 2005,

Cook and Ludwig 1997, Fordham and Ogbu 1986, Steele and Aronson 1998). The

appropriate public policy choice to address the achievement gap may depend critically on

the underlying source.

         In this paper, we focus on a highly controversial and well-publicized aspect of

Black peer culture – the existence of a peer externality commonly referred to as ‘acting

white.’2 ‘Acting White’ describes a set of social interactions in which Black adolescents

ridicule other black adolescents for investing in behaviors characteristic of whites (having

an interest in ballet, raising their hand in class, or making good grades, e.g.).3 A primary

obstacle to the study of ‘acting white’ has been the lack of quantitative measures of the

phenomenon. We focus on racial differences in the relationship between popularity and

academic achievement, our (albeit narrow) definition of ‘acting white’.

         To circumvent the problems inherent in using self-reported popularity measures,

we construct an index of social status. The index measures, for each student, the number


2
  It is imperative to note that there is nothing unique about Black culture. A version of ‘acting white’ is also
prevalent in ethnographies involving the Buraku Outcastes of Japan (DeVos and Wagatsuma 1966), Italian
immigrants in Boston's West End (Gans 1962), the Maori of New Zealand (Chapple, Jefferies, and Walker
1997), and the working class in Britain (Willis 1977), among others. In all cases high achievers receive a
derogatory label from their peer group. For example, in the peer group society documented in Gans (1962),
upward mobile youth interested in education were labeled “mobiles” and “sissies.” See Fryer (2004) for a
detailed discussion of these groups. Furthermore, we examine Hispanics in addition to blacks throughout
this paper.
3
  There are many working definitions of ‘acting white’ which we discuss in section II.


                                                                                                              3
of same-race friends within her school, weighted by the popularity of each friend. We

implement the index using detailed information on friendship networks within schools

available in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Addhealth).

Addhealth is, in many respects, the ideal data for understanding the existence of ‘acting

white.’ To our knowledge, it is the only available dataset that contains within-school

friendship networks, from which it is possible to construct objective measures of social

status, along with detailed data on parental characteristics, academic achievement, and so

forth. The survey covers a sample of more than 90,000 junior high and high school

students from 175 schools in 80 communities around the country.

       Our empirical analysis of ‘acting white’ uncovers a rich set of new facts. In

contrast to the previous literature (Cook and Ludwig 1997), Figure 1A demonstrates that

there are large racial differences in the relationship between popularity and academic

achievement. Among whites, higher grades yield higher popularity. For Blacks, higher

achievement is associated with modestly higher popularity until a grade point average of

3.5, when the slope turns negative. A black student with a 4.0 has, on average, 1.5 fewer

same-race friends than a white student with a 4.0. Among Hispanics, there is little change

in popularity from a grade point average of 1 through 2.5. After 2.5, the gradient turns

sharply negative. A Hispanic student with a 4.0 grade point average is the least popular of

all Hispanic students, and has 3 fewer friends than a typical white student with a 4.0

grade point average. Put differently, evaluated at the sample mean, a one standard

deviation increase in grades is associated with roughly a .103 standard deviation decrease

in social status for Blacks and a .171 standard deviation decrease for Hispanics. For

students with a 3.5 grade point average or better, the effect triples.




                                                                                            4
        Racial differences in the relationship between popularity and achievement are

robust across many alternative specifications, subsets of the data, and different definitions

of popularity or academic achievement. The ‘acting white’ effect differs slightly as

children age. For Black students in junior high school (grades 7-9) a one standard

deviation increase in grades is associated with a .13 standard deviation decrease in

popularity; the decrease is .07 for high school students. Accounting for the number of

students at each GPA level does little to temper the ‘acting white’ effect, suggesting that

the supply of potential friends does not explain the phenomenon. Self-selection of

students into particular activities (sports, band, debate, etc) matters little, and substitution

towards other race friendships does not fully explain the stark difference in the popularity

– achievement gradient. Using class rank (in lieu of GPA) as a measure of academic

achievement confirms our results.

        We conclude by describing a model which highlights the tradeoff between peer

group acceptance and academic achievement; a variant of Austen-Smith and Fryer

(2005). The principal idea is that individuals face a two-audience signaling quandary:

signals that beget labor market success are signals that induce peer rejection. The model’s

two distinguishing predictions – racial differences in the relationship between peer group

acceptance and academic achievement will exist and these differences will be

exacerbated in arenas that foster more interracial contact or increased mobility – are

borne out in the data. ‘Acting white’ is more salient in public schools and schools in

which the percentage of black students is less than twenty, but non-existent among blacks

in predominantly black schools or those who attend private schools. Schools with more

interracial contact have an ‘acting white’ coefficient twice as large as more segregated




                                                                                               5
schools (seven times as large for Black males). Other models we consider, such as self-

sabotage among black youth or the presence of an oppositional culture identity, all

contradict the data in important ways.

           The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II provides a brief

review of the literature on ‘acting white.’ Section III describes and summarizes the data

used in the analysis. Section IV estimates the relationship between popularity and

academic achievement among racial groups. Section V develops a two-audience

signaling model, that highlights the tradeoff between peer group acceptance and

academic achievement, which is consistent with the data. Section VI concludes. There are

two appendices: an appendix which reconciles our results with those found in previous

analysis of nationally representative data, and a data appendix which provides the details

of our sample and definitions of relevant variables.



II. Background and Previous Literature

           ‘Acting white’ is a slippery and politically loaded phrase, with little consensus on

a precise definition. Neal-Barnett (2001) assembled student focus groups in an attempt to

deduce what specific behaviors led to accusations of ‘acting white.’ The list included

being enrolled in honors or advanced placement classes, speaking standard English,

wearing clothes from the Gap or Abercrombie and Fitch (instead of Tommy Hilfiger or

FUBU), and wearing shorts in the Winter! While we are cognizant of the complications

and nuances in what is often meant by ‘acting white,’ our data are not rich enough to test

many of the plausible definitions. 4 As such, for the purposes of this paper, we say



4
    See Ferguson (1998) for a very nice discussion.


                                                                                              6
‘acting white’ exists if there are statistically significant racial differences in the

relationship between popularity and grades.

        For nearly two decades, there has been a rancorous debate among sociologists,

cultural anthropologists, newspaper journalists and policy wonks on the existence of

‘acting white’. Fordham and Ogbu (1986) set the stage with their path-breaking and

controversial analysis of “Capital High,” a predominantly black high school in a low-

income area of Washington, D.C. Fordham and Ogbu (1986) argue for the existence of an

oppositional culture among black youth that eschew behaviors traditionally seen as the

prerogative for whites.

        Following the seminal work of Fordham and Ogbu (1986), there has been a flurry

of conflicting opinions as to the nature, extent, and definition of ‘acting white’.

Ethnographic evidence is hopelessly divided, and the only two nationally representative

studies dismiss ‘acting white’ as nothing more than an urban (or more precisely,

ethnographic) legend.

        An interesting feature of the ethnographic literature is that many studies report

some negative relationship between “white behaviors” and social status among blacks.5

The key differences lie in the fact that many of the authors do not report that academic

achievement, per se, is identified as a “white behavior.” That is, the literature paints a

picture whereby Black kids do not ridicule other Black kids for making good grades –

instead, they ridicule them for the behaviors that are often associated with good grades

(answering questions in class, being in advanced classes, or proper diction e.g.). Even

when academic achievement is highly correlated with “white behaviors,” many authors


5
 See, for example, Ferguson (2001), Roderick (2003), Horvat and Lewis (2003), Bergin and Cooks (2002),
Datnow and Cooper (1996), Chin and Phillips (2004), Farkas et. al (2002), and Tyson et. al. (2004).


                                                                                                     7
seemingly prefer to make a distinction between resenting achievement and resenting

behaviors that are associated with achievement.6

        Although understanding the precise behaviors that lead to accusations of ‘acting

white’ may be useful in designing effective policies. The first-order problem is whether

racial differences in the relationship between social status and achievement exist, as such

differences feed into student’s investment decisions regarding human capital, social

affiliations, and so on.7

        There have been two previous studies on the existence of ‘acting white’ using

nationally representative data (Cook and Ludwig 1998 and Ainworth-Darnell and

Downey 1998), both based on the National Educational Longitudinal Study (NELS).

These studies provide evidence that peer group norms are not significantly different

between black and white 10th graders by examining the relationship between self-reported

measures of popularity and academic achievement. Cook and Ludwig (1998) find that

high-achievers are actually more popular than low-achievers, and that this positive

achievement-popularity relationship is not significantly different between whites and

blacks – if anything, the relation is stronger among blacks, providing evidence that

suggest the ‘acting white’ phenomenon is not empirically important.8

        One shortcoming of the previous work is that it relies on self-reported measures

of popularity. The NELS contains a question that asks if the student “thinks others see

6
  This reticence could be due, in part, to the fear that some may equate ‘acting white’ with Black cultural
dysfunctionality. Yet, economic theory informs us that ‘acting white’ is an equilibrium phenomenon; it is
the consequence of two-audience signaling (see Austen-Smith and Fryer 2005). As such, any group
presented with the same set of payoffs, strategies, and so on, would behave identically.
7
  For example, some black students may be accused of ‘acting white’ because of the way they talk or dress,
not because they get good grades. This may be because they are in high-ability classes (AP, Honors, etc)
where there are few black students, and consequently their social circle may have few blacks. See
Ferguson (2001).
8
  Their results hold even when they control for nonacademic variables that influence popularity, including
family income and participation in varsity sports or band (Cook and Ludwig 1997).


                                                                                                          8
him/her as popular.” The answer choices are: not at all; somewhat; or very.

Unfortunately, it is doubtful that individuals truthfully report potentially self-damaging

information.9 The result is a classic measurement error problem which may lead to

misleading inferences (beyond greater standard errors) if the error in the self-reported

variable is related to race or achievement levels.10



III. The Data

        The Addhealth database is a nationally representative sample of 90,118 students

entering grades 7 through 12 in the 1994-1995 school year. A stratified random sample of

20,745 students was given an additional (and remarkably comprehensive) in-home

interview; 17,700 parents of these children were also interviewed. Thus far, information

has been collected on these students at 3 separate points in time: 1995, 1996, and 2002.

There are 175 schools in 80 communities included in the sample, with an average of more

than 490 students per school, allowing within school analysis. Students who are missing

data on race, grade level, or attend schools that do not assign grades are dropped from the

sample.

        A wide range of data are gathered on the students, as described in detail on the

Addhealth website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth). For our purposes, the

key feature of the Addhealth data is the detailed information regarding friendship

associations in schools. All students contained in the in-school survey were asked, “List

9
  A classic example of this is that roughly 25% of non-voters report having voted immediately after an
election. See Tanur (1992) for more examples of this bias. We are grateful to Jennifer Hochschild for
pointing us to this literature.
10
   Another potential weakness with the previous studies is that achievement levels are defined
dichotomously. Cook and Ludwig (1997) use two such measures: (1) whether the student earns “mostly
A’s in math”; and whether the student is in the honor society. When we investigate how popularity varies
across a continuous measure of achievement (GPA) using their data and our basic specification, we find
that ‘acting white’ exist and is robust to including a myriad controls. See Appendix A and Table 5.


                                                                                                           9
your closest male/female friends. List your best male/female friend first, then your next

best friend, and so on.” Students were allowed to list as many as 5 friends from each sex.

Each friend can be linked in the data and the full range of covariates in the in-school

survey (race, gender, grade point average, etc) can be gleaned from each friend.

        To circumvent the problems inherent in using self-reported measures of

popularity, we make use of the information on friendship networks within schools to

construct an “objective” measure of social status. Each student was asked to list 10

friends in their school. Instead of using raw counts, our measure of popularity for an

individual i depends on the number of same-race students, j, that list i as a friend,

weighted by the popularity of each j.11 The key innovation here is that we want a student

to be more popular the more popular her friends are. That is, if students A and B have the

same number of individuals who list them as a friend – student A will be more popular if

and only if her friends are more popular. We call this the Spectral Popularity Index and

provide a formal definition below.12

        Let K denote a finite set of students, let H be a finite set of race and ethnic groups,

and let a : K → H denote an assignment of students to a race. Thus, h = a (k ) implies

that (under assignment a ) student k ∈ K belongs to race h ∈ H . And, let Aah denote the

same-race friendship network of race h under assignment a.




11
   We emphasis same-race friends, because we believe it is most consistent with the sociological notion of
‘acting white.’ All our results are robust to including popularity from all racial groups.
12
   The Spectral Popularity Index is a special case of the Spectral Segregation Index developed in Echenique
and Fryer (2005).


                                                                                                        10
                                                                          (
Definition: The spectral popularity index is the index: a a P h (a ), pih (a )i∈h ,           )
where P h (a ) is the largest eigenvalue of graph Aah and pih (a ) = P h (a )xi ; xi is the

                                                    N
principal eigenvector normalized so that           ∑x
                                                   i =1
                                                          i   = 1 .13


P h (a ) measures the school level popularity of minority h under assignment a , and

 pih (a ) measures the level of popularity of individual i ∈ h under assignment a .14

           Summary statistics for the variables we use in our core specifications are

displayed by race in table 1, with White and Black referring solely to non-Hispanic

whites and Blacks, respectively.15 Hispanics include any individual who checked yes to

the question: “Are you of Hispanic or Spanish origin.” Our primary outcome variable is

the spectral popularity index. The index is normalized such that it has a mean of 0 and a

standard deviation of 1. On average, Blacks and Hispanics are less popular than whites.

Whites are .142 above the mean in popularity whereas blacks are .024 below the mean,

yielding a black-white difference in popularity of .166. Hispanics are .141 below the

mean popularity, yielding a Hispanic-white gap of .283. The table also indicates the

average number of friends students have from different racial backgrounds.16 Friendship

networks are remarkably segregated, the typical Black and White student each has

exactly one friend of a different race.




13
     The spectral popularity index is well defined. By the Perron-Frobenius Theorem (Theorem 8.4.4 in Horn
and Johnson 1985), the largest eigenvalue of   Aah is positive, and has an associated positive eigenvector.
14
   Programs to calculate the Spectral Popularity Index are available at:
http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/fryer/fryer.html
15
   A detailed description of these variables and their construction can be found in Appendix B.
16
   The rank correlation between the Spectral Popularity Index of an individual i and the number of students
who list i as a friend is .74.


                                                                                                              11
          The remainder of Table 1 presents summary statistics for the other variables used

in our analysis. The most important of these covariates is a composite measure of grade

point average (GPA) that we constructed. Each student was asked, “At the most recent

grading period, what was your grade in each of the following subjects?” The subjects

included were English/Language Arts, Mathematics, History/Social Studies, and

Science.17 Each of these grades was given on a 4.0 scale (A= 4, D or Lower =1). Relative

to whites, Blacks and Hispanics have lower grades (3.0 grade point average relative to

2.5).18

          Other variables used as controls include: parental education, parental occupation,

various school activities (varsity sports, student government, and cheerleading) and

school characteristics. There are substantial differences across races on many of these

variables. Black and Hispanic students come from lower socio-economic status families

(mother and father less likely to be college educated and work in professional jobs), are

more likely to live in urban neighborhoods and less likely to attend private schools, and

so on. While this may seem like a stylized set of covariates to use, they comprise all the

social and demographic variables available in the in-school survey of 90,118 students.19

          We strongly caution against a causal interpretation of the coefficients on the

covariates, which we view as proxies for a broad set of environmental and behavioral

factors. Even our main parameter is not void of the potential for reverse causality. We


17
   In calculating the GPA of each student, we only used courses in which valid grades were received, as
some students did not take particular subjects in every grading period. Students who did not have a grading
period that academic year were told to provide grades from the last grading period of the previous academic
year. Students in schools that do not assign grades were dropped from the sample.
18
   There is some evidence that blacks overstate their grades (Bauman 1996). Our calculations, using the
National Educational Longitudinal Study which contains transcript data and self-reported grades, suggests
that blacks exaggerate their grades by .3 grade points, on average.
19
   A much more exhaustive set of covariates is available for individuals who completed the in-home survey
(covering approximately ¼ of the sample).


                                                                                                        12
implicitly assume that high grades cause lower popularity; it is plausible that low

popularity causes high grades. Given our interest is in the racial differences in this

relationship, there is less worry.



IV. Racial Differences in the Relationship between Popularity and Achievement

         Figure 1A presents the relationship between popularity and grades among whites,

blacks, and Hispanics in the raw data. At low grade point averages, there is little

difference among racial groups in the relationship between popularity and grades; blacks

are more popular than whites. At roughly a 2.5 GPA (an even mix of B’s and C’s) racial

differences start to emerge. Hispanic students lose popularity at an alarming rate after this

cut-off – while Blacks and Whites continue to garner friends as their grades increase; the

white slope is steeper. Black popularity peaks at a grade point average of roughly 3.5 and

turns down afterward. Blacks with straight A’s are as popular as Blacks with a 2.9 GPA.

Whites continue to gain popularity as their grades increase.

         Racial differences in the popularity-grades gradient may be due to various

background factors that are positively related to popularity (having high income parents,

e.g.). Figure 1B estimates a non-parametric relationship between popularity and grades

for Blacks, Hispanics, and Whites, controlling for background factors including school

fixed effects. 20 Our core set of controls include gender, age, parental education and



   To understand the details, consider the following model: popularity = H ( grades) + Xγ + e . We cannot
20

estimate this directly because we do not know H(.).
But, E ( popularity | grades ) = H (grades ) + E ( X | grades )γ + E (e | grades ) . Taking the difference,
 popularity − E ( popularity | grades ) = [ X − E ( X | grades )]γ + [e − E (e | grades )] . Thus, to obtain
H ( grades ) , one needs to: (1) obtain estimates of E(popularity|grades) by running a non-parametric
regression of popularity on grades; (2) obtain estimates of E(X|grades) by running a non-parametric
regression of X on grades; (3) compute popularity - E(popularity|grades) and X - E(X|grades); (4) obtain


                                                                                                         13
occupation, a measure of (self-reported) effort, and various school activities such as

cheerleading, athletics, and student government. Figure 1B demonstrates that including

these controls shrinks the popularity differential among low achievers while maintaining

the shape of the popularity-grades gradient. Black and Hispanic high achievers continue

to be much less popular than similar whites.

           Figure 2 estimates a similar non-parametric relationship between popularity and

grades for Blacks, Hispanics, and Whites, by gender. The relationship is remarkably

similar between boys and girls. One caveat: black high achieving boys have fewer friends

than black high achieving girls. Students in public and private schools face a very

different tradeoff between popularity and grades, as demonstrated in Figure 3. Public

schools mirror the aggregate data presented in Figure 1B. In private schools, Whites with

higher grades are not as popular as their lower achieving peers; the most popular students

have a GPA of roughly 2.0 (C average). For blacks, the gradient is virtually flat. In levels,

Blacks are substantially less popular than whites, which is an artifact of our same-race

popularity measure.

           Table 2 presents a series of estimates designed to understand the existence of

‘acting white’ among Blacks and Hispanics; providing numbers (and standard errors) to

the figures we described. Econometrically, our analysis is of the form:


(2)        Spectral popularity i , s = β 0 + β 1 ⋅ Achievement i + β 2 ⋅ Black i + β 3 ⋅ Black i ⋅ Achievement i
                     + β 4 ⋅ Hispanic i + β 5 ⋅ Hispanic i ⋅ Achievement i + γ ⋅ X i + θ ⋅ Z s + η s + ε i , s



γˆ   by estimating the linear regression:
popularity − E ( popularity | grades) = [ X − E ( X | grades)]γ + [e − E (e | grades)] ; and (5) estimate
popularity − Xγˆ = H ( grades ) + e (non-parametric regression of popularity − Xγˆ on grades).



                                                                                                            14
where X i denotes an array of individual level variables for agent i, Z s represents school

level variables, and η s denotes an exhaustive set of school dummies. The model is

estimated on a sample of only Black, White, and Hispanic students; thus β 2 and β 3 are

interpreted as black coefficients relative to whites and β 4 and β 5 are Hispanic coefficients

relative to whites. We refer to β 3 and β 5 as the ‘acting white’ coefficients for Blacks and

Hispanics, respectively. The dependent variable is our spectral popularity index. The

independent variables are constant across columns and include: (self-reported) grades and

effort, socioeconomic background (parental occupation and education), and school

activities (cheerleading, sports, and student government). In all cases the estimation is

done using weighted least squares, with weights corresponding to sample weights

provided in the data, and includes school fixed effects. By comparing students who attend

the same school (and likely live in similar neighborhoods), one controls for different

grading standards, social norms, and mean popularity levels across schools.21

         Column 1 of Table 2 estimates our specification on the full sample of students.

These results confirm the results illustrated in Figure 1; the ‘acting white’ coefficient is

large and statistically significant for Blacks and Hispanics. To account for the non-

linearity inherent in the relationship between popularity and achievement, we group

students into four categories based solely on GPA: 1 to 2.0, 2.0 to 3.0, 3.0 to 3.5, and 3.5

and higher.22 These categories are roughly aligned with the changes in slope apparent in

Figure 1B.



21
   For instance, if high-achieving black students attend schools where grading standards are lax and
popularity levels inflated, then this specification will purge the upward bias.
22
   The results to come are similar if one includes higher order polynomials on grades as regressors, though
the interpretation of the coefficients is more convoluted.


                                                                                                         15
       The salience of ‘acting white’ increases monotonically with achievement. For low

achievers (students with less than a 2.0 GPA) there is no ‘acting white’ effect, which is

consistent with Figure 1B. For students with a 3.5 GPA or better, the ‘acting white’

coefficient is -.329, over three times the magnitude of the effect in the overall sample.

This captures the divergence in popularity among black and white high achievers

depicted in figure 1B. For Hispanics, the results are more mixed. The smallest effect

exists among low achievers, but ‘acting white’ is most salient among Hispanics with

grade point averages between 3 and 3.5.



A. Sensitivity Analysis and Extensions of the Basic Model

       In an effort to uncover other factors that are associated with ‘acting white,’ Tables

3 and 4 explore the sensitivity of our results across a wide variety of sub-samples of the

data and alternative specifications. We estimate separate regressions for each indicated

sub-sample of the data. Table 3 estimates regressions on the full sample of students; table

4 restricts the sample to students with a 3.5 GPA or better (hereafter referred to as “high

achievers”). In most cases the qualitative results are identical, though the magnitude of

the ‘acting white’ coefficient is 3 to 4 times as large among high achievers. We report

only the ‘acting white’ coefficients for Blacks and Hispanics, the coefficient on grades,

and associated standard errors. The top row of the tables present the baseline results from

columns 1 and 5 in table 2, respectively.

       As one peruses the tables, it becomes evident that the ‘acting white’ phenomenon

is robust across most subsets of the data, though there are a several notable exceptions.

‘Acting white’ is modestly more prevalent among Black males relative to Black Females,




                                                                                            16
and this is especially true among high achievers.23 Whether or not one uses the sample

weights provided in the Addhealth data matters little. ‘Acting White’ is large in public

schools and non-existent among blacks in private schools. This latter finding may

partially explain why black kids in private schools appear to do especially well (Akerlof

and Kranton 2002, Neal 1997 and Grogger and Neal 2000).24



ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF POPULARITY

         The ‘acting white’ coefficient is also robust to different measures of social

status.25 We include the following three alternative measures of popularity: (1) non-

normalized Spectral popularity; (2) same-race friends – measured as how many

individuals j put i down as a friend (not weighted by the popularity of each j); (3) all-race

popularity; and (4) other-race popularity. All these measures have been normalized such

that they have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. The sign and magnitude of

the ‘acting white’ coefficient for Blacks and Hispanics is robust across the first three

measures. The positive coefficient on other-race popularity suggests that blacks and

Hispanics substitute towards other-race friends in the presence of ‘acting white’. The

magnitude of the coefficient, however, is significantly smaller so that on net, ‘acting




23
   Plotting race-specific popularity and grades by race and gender reveals that popularity decreases for
black boys earlier (3.25 GPA relative to a 3.5 GPA) and the gradient for high achievers is steeper.
24
   We have also investigated whether ‘acting outlier’ is the underlying problem and not ‘acting white’ as
such, by estimating the relationship between popularity and grades among whites in schools with low
average test scores. Whites in these schools continue to have a positive relationship between popularity and
grades.
25
   We have also investigated alternative measures of academic achievement, such as class rank and a “nerd
index” (the number of activities an individual is involved in such as chess club, math club, etc.). In both
cases, the results are consistent with our main findings.


                                                                                                         17
white’ (race effect minus the substitution effect) still dominates.26 Blacks and Hispanics

with a GPA above 3.5 are actually losing other-race friends, exacerbating the effect of

‘acting white’ among this select group. This result is troubling, as one would hope that

high achieving minority students could find refuge among high achieving whites.27



BY GRADE LEVEL

         Theoretically, one could imagine that the prevalence of ‘acting white’ could

change as students are maturing and developing their identities (Cross and Fhagen-Smith

2001). We estimate our main fixed effects equation separately for each grade level from 7

to 12, though we only report ‘acting white’ coefficients for 7th, 9th, and 12th grades.

‘Acting White’ changes slightly as children age, and most pronounced amongst ninth-

graders. We have also pooled grades 7-9 (junior high school) and 10-12 (high school).

The ‘acting white’ coefficient is twice as large in junior high school relative to high

school, though we caution against making too much of the difference.28



ACCOUNTING FOR THE SUPPLY OF HIGH ACHIEVING BLACK STUDENTS

         One possible reason that blacks face a steeper popularity-grades gradient is a

supply shortage of high achieving black students. If students tend to associate with other

students with similar backgrounds (in terms of race, grades, neighborhood location, etc),


26
   The bulk of the substitution effect is occurring among students with a GPA between 3.0 and 3.5,
especially among blacks. Including controls for number of “potential friends” (i.e. number of same-race
students in GPA category by school) does little to change this.
27
   We are by no means implying that high achieving whites are in any way refusing to befriend minorities;
only reporting a correlation in the data.
28
   There are many reasons ‘acting white’ could be more salient in junior high school relative to high school
including identity development, selection of low-achieving students out of high school, or compression of
the grade distribution in high school due to ‘acting white’ in earlier grades. We are unable to adequately
test between these competing hypotheses.


                                                                                                         18
then one might observe a steep trajectory for blacks at higher GPA levels simply due to

the fact that there are few blacks in their classes. Sociologists have argued for some time

that this is a likely reason for the alienation of black high achieving students. If so, this

potentially provides a different qualitative understanding of the ‘acting white’

phenomenon.29

        We account for the number of same-race students with similar grades in each

school, by dividing the GPA distribution into four categories: less than 2.0, 2.0 – 3.0, 3.0

– 3.5, and greater than 3.5. Within each grade category, we count the number of students

by race separately for each school, and we include this variable as an independent

regressor in our basic model, linearly.30 Accounting for the supply of black high

achievers has a modest effect on the ‘acting white’ coefficient, reducing it from -.103 to -

.081, and virtually no effect on other covariates.31



STUDENT ACTIVITIES

        There are many opportunities in schools for students to self-select into particular

activities, ensuring that most of their peer interactions are with other students with similar

interests. This includes organized sports and cheerleading, various clubs (languages, math

or science, drama, or debate), band and music, or the national honor society. These

activities likely differ in their affirmation of high achievement; the honor society likely

29
   The supply of students with particular grades is itself an endogenous outcome of ‘acting white,’ thus
these results should be interpreted with some care.
30
   Thus for each school, there are 12 categories of students (three race categories times four GPA
categories) and we count how many students there are in each category.
31
   We have repeated this specification among students from junior high schools and high schools,
respectively. In both instances, accounting for the supply of black high achievers modestly reduces the
racial difference in the popularity-grades gradient. The magnitude of the effect remains higher among
junior high school students. We have also partitioned the number of potential friends into 20 equally sized
bins and included them as dummy variables. Using this non-linear approach modestly decreases the ‘acting
white’ effect.


                                                                                                        19
affirms achievement in a way that organized sports does not. Yet, across this diverse set

of potential student activities, only one eliminates the racial difference in the relationship

between social status and achievement: the national honor society. In all other activities,

there remains a substantial gap, suggesting that self-selection into extra-curricular

activities does not eliminate the effects of high grades among blacks and Hispanics. Thus,

the hypothesis by some that high-achieving blacks take up extracurricular activities to

deflect hostility (e.g. Farkas et al 2002) is not borne out in the data.



INTERRACIAL CONTACT

         The most striking aspect of tables 3 and 4 is how the coefficient on ‘acting white’

varies in arenas with more or less interracial contact. Remarkably, schools that are less

than 20 percent black have the largest ‘acting white’ effect for Blacks and Hispanics.32

Schools in which blacks comprise greater than 80% of the student body there is no

‘acting white’ effect. Indeed, in all black schools, the coefficient on black*grades is

positive.33

         Results in tables 3 and 4 are also contrasted between high and low segregated

schools. The amount of segregation in any school A is measured as:

                             Expected(CrossRace Friends) − Observed(Cross Race Friends)
(3)      Segregation A =                                                                ,
                                           Expected(CrossRace Friends)




32
   This is true even after controlling for the number of blacks within a school or controlling for the number
of blacks with similar grades.
33
   To test the robustness of this finding, we estimated an identical specification on NELS data – obtaining
very similar results.


                                                                                                           20
where cross race friends refers to the total number of friends from each race with students

from different races.34 The expected number of cross race friends is the sum of the

expected value for each race combination, omitting friends of the same race. The

expected number of friends between race i and race j is equal to the total number of

friends of race i multiplied by the probability that an individual of race i is friends with a

student of race j.

         The segregation index ranges from -1 (pure out race preference) to 1 (total

segregation). A value of 0 indicates that there is no group preference: friends are random

with respect to race. The measure of segregation was calculated for each school and

divided the set into high and low segregation school; cutting at the school median.

         Surprisingly, blacks in more segregated schools incur less of a tradeoff between

popularity and achievement. The coefficient on the ‘acting white’ term is twice as large

in schools that are above the median in terms of segregation (-.055 compared to -.136).35

Among high achievers, the differences are more stark (-.102 and -.485). In addition,

Figure 4 which estimates (non-parametrically) the relationship between popularity and

grades, accounting for our core set of controls, in high and low segregation schools

provides more evidence attesting to the fact that ‘acting white’ is particularly salient

among high achievers and those in schools with more interracial contact.

         Using the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) experiment, which assigned housing

vouchers via random lottery to public housing residents in five large cities, Kling and

Liebman (2004) and Kling, Ludwig, and Katz (2005) provide evidence of gender

34
   This index is a modification of Freeman (1978) and related to Echenique and Fryer (2005). For a
complete derivation, see the Addhealth’s School Network Variables Codebook available at:
http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/codebooks/wave1.
35
   This result is robust to accounting for the potential supply shortage of black students in very integrated
schools.


                                                                                                            21
differences in the effect of the treatment on a variety of outcomes for youth. Females

exhibit lower arrests rates, improvements in education and mental health, and are less

likely to engage in risky behaviors. Males, on the other hand, were more likely to engage

in risky behaviors, had no decrease in arrests rates, and experienced more physical health

problems (injuries or accidents, e.g.). These results suggest that males and females may

respond to their environments in distinct ways; ‘acting white’ may well be the underlying

cause.

         One way to test this general hypothesis with the current data is to examine

gender/race differences in the relationship between popularity and grades in schools with

more or less interracial contact. Results are presented in the bottom row of Tables 3 and

4. Consistent with the evidence from MTO, ‘acting white’ is twice as large for high

achieving males relative to high achieving females in low segregation schools. The

coefficient on black*grades for males in low segregation schools is seven times as large

as the identical coefficient estimated on the full sample.

         The fact that ‘acting white’ is more prevalent in schools with more interracial

contact is surprising, but consistent with our two-audience signaling model that we

describe in the next section and growing evidence that there can be significant pressure in

racially heterogeneous schools to toe the racial line (Tatum 1997).



V. An Economic Model of ‘Acting White’36

         A number of stylized facts emerge from the analysis of the preceding sections.

There are large racial differences in the relationship between popularity and grades.

36
  The model presented in this section is a variant of Austen-Smith and Fryer (2003) and Austen-Smith and
Fryer (2005).



                                                                                                     22
These differences are roughly three times as large for black students with a 3.5 grade

point average or higher. ‘Acting White’ is more salient in public schools and among

children from low education families. Accounting for self selection into extra-curricular

activities or the supply of black high achievers does little to undermine the effect.

Environments with more interracial contact are associated with a steeper popularity-

grades gradient among blacks; seven times as large for high achieving black males. The

results are not an artifact of our particular measure of popularity. While there is some

substitution towards other-race friends in the presence of ‘acting white,’ the magnitude is

small.

         In this section, we consider the extent to which a two-audience signaling model

can successfully account for this set of facts.

         Let there be a continuum of individuals with unit mass, a finite set of firms, and a

(suitably anthropomorphized) peer group. There are two discrete stages of an individual’s

life: “school years” and “employment years,” denoted τ ∈ {0,1}. Nature moves first and

distributes an innate ability, θ , to each student according to a smooth common knowledge

cumulative distribution function (CDF) F. Abilities, once disseminated, are fixed. An

individual is endowed with one unit of non-storable time in each period; the allocation of

which is common knowledge.

         At the start of each period, an individual’s stage τ time allocation problem is

influenced by whether or not she is an accepted member of her peer group. Peer groups

are valued because, other things equal, leisure time spent in the group is more enjoyable

than leisure time spent outside the group. If an individual is not an accepted member,

then she makes decisions without reference to the group. If she is an accepted group



                                                                                           23
member, then she may be called upon to make some observable time contribution to the

group. That is, in each stage τ , Nature chooses a required time contribution

         [ )
κ τ ∈ 0, κ , 0 < κ < 1 , from the individual to the group, according to a smooth common

knowledge CDF Gτ (κ τ ) . We assume the school year contribution is expected to be no

greater than the post-school year contribution.

            In the “school years,” individuals allocate effort between leisure, group

commitments, and a once-and-for-all investment in education; s ∈ [0,1] . The cost of

investing s for an individual with ability θ is denoted c(s, θ ) .37 The cost function is

assumed to be strictly increasing and convex in education, strictly decreasing in innate

ability and to satisfy the single-crossing property. To ensure that all ability types choose

interior education levels, we further assume that lim c s (s,⋅) = 0 and lim c s (s,⋅) = ∞ .
                                                                s →0                   s →1


            At the end of the school years, an individual’s education level is fixed and firms

choose wage offers to maximize expected profit. Because firms do not observe an

individual’s innate ability, the wage offered to any potential employee is that individual’s

expected marginal product conditional on her observed schooling. Given our empirical

bent, we are not interested in the details of the wage-offer schedule. As such, we simply

assume that individuals are paid a wage equal to their expected marginal product,

ω (s ) ≥ 0 , and (where appropriate) specify the firms’ responses to any out of equilibrium

action by an individual.




37
     This is in addition to the direct opportunity cost of effort used for education in the school years.


                                                                                                            24
          Let α τ ∈ {0,1} denote whether the individual is rejected (α τ = 0) or accepted

(α τ   = 1) by his or her peer group in τ .38 If an individual is rejected by the group during

the school years, she cannot be accepted in the post-school years; however, an individual

accepted by the group in the school years may be rejected in the post-school years.39 Let

u (lτ α τ ) be the individual’s stage τ payoff from leisure lτ ∈ [0,1] , conditional on the

group’s decision. If an individual is an accepted group member in some τ and is asked to

make a contribution κ τ , let δ τ ∈ {0,1} denote an individual’s decision on whether or not to

comply (respectively, δ τ = 1 or δ τ = 0 ). Thus, an individual’s stage 0 payoff from

choosing δ 0 , given the individual’s innate ability, school year education decision, and

required contribution κ 0 can be written as: u (1 − s − α 0 δ 0 κ 0 α 0 ) − c(s, θ ) . Assume u (l ⋅) is

twice differentiable concave, increasing in l over the range (0,1), and no leisure is

worthless irrespective of group acceptance. Further, we assume that both total and

marginal values from consuming any strictly positive amount of leisure are greater as an

accepted group member than otherwise.

          At the beginning of the employment years, the group makes another acceptance

decision, and Nature reveals an individual’s post-school year time commitment to the

group, κ 1 . Then, each individual decides whether or not to contribute to the group, and

makes work-force effort decision e ∈ [0,1] . Any student who is accepted by the group and

contributes in the post school years receives a lifetime utility benefit β .40 The


38
   We assume throughout that the peer group is nonempty and sidestep the interesting issue of endogenous
peer group formation, given the empirical focus of the current paper.
39
   This is without any loss of generality (Austen-Smith and Fryer 2003)
40
   In the infinite horizon version of the model (Austen-Smith and Fryer, 2003), the value β is explicitly
derived as an equilibrium payoff to a repeated interaction game between the individual and the group. As


                                                                                                       25
employment years payoff can be written as: u (1 − e − α 1δ 1κ 1 α 1 ) − eω (s ) + ρα 1δ 1 β , where

ρ ∈ (0,1) is a standard discount factor.

         Suppose an individual is accepted by his peers in the school years. At the

beginning of the employment years, the group decides whether to accept or reject the

individual. Then, Nature randomly chooses the group contribution, κ 1 , required of each

individual and they decide whether to make the contribution. The realization κ 1 and the

individual’s decision are observed by the group. Let α τ ψ (δ τ , κ τ ) be the stage τ payoff

to the group from action α τ , given the individual makes decision δ τ when the required

contribution is κ τ , where for all κ τ ≥ 0 , ψ (1, κ τ ) = max{ε , κ τ } > ψ (0, κ τ ) = min{0,−κ τ }.

The key feature of the group’s payoffs is that the group is strictly worse off having

accepted an individual who chooses not to make her required contribution than it would

be were such an individual rejected.

         Solving the preceding model yields three results. First, no equilibria exist in

which all types adopt distinct education choices; all equilibria must involve some

pooling. This result is illustrated in Figure 5, which depicts the net utility accruing to a

type θˆ individual. As shown in the figure, at any given educational investment level, s,

the individual’s net payoff is strictly greater being accepted than being rejected by the

group, and further, in each case the net payoff is strictly quasi-concave in educational

effort with an interior maximum.

         Second and most interesting, after application of a standard belief-based

equilibrium refinement (the D1 criterion), all equilibria involve a partition of individual


such, it depends on school-year decisions, among others. In the two-period model, it is enough for there to
be some reason for the individual to contribute in the post-school years if required to do so.


                                                                                                         26
abilities into at most three intervals, which is depicted in Figure 6. A (possibly empty) set

of the lowest ability types and the set of highest ability types reveal themselves through a

separating education strategy; ability types in the middle interval pool on a common

education level. Only types in the lower intervals are accepted by the group. It is worth

emphasizing that nothing is built into the model that requires accepted types to adopt a

common educational investment; it is an equilibrium outcome. This partition produces

novel predictions as one varies the wage structure, group size and value of membership,

and the types of social interactions involved.

        The two-audience signaling model has two clear predictions – racial differences

in the relationship between social status and academic achievement will exist and these

differences will tend to be exacerbated in environments with more interracial contact and

increased mobility – both of which are consistent with the empirical evidence presented

in section IV. In addition, Black high achievers also report more risky behaviors

(smoking, drinking, lying to their parents) and less happiness than White high achievers

which is consistent with the signaling aspects of the model.

        Next, we outline two popular alternative models typically used to explain ‘acting

white,’ and shows that they contradict the data in important ways.



Alternative Models of ‘Acting White’

A. An Oppositional Culture Identity Model

        The most prominent theory to explain the stylized facts put forth is the

oppositional culture hypothesis, developed in Fordham and Ogbu (1986).41 The


41
   Since then, efforts have been focused on refuting Fordham and Ogbu’s hypothesis, not developing
alternative theories.


                                                                                                     27
hypothesis states that the observed disparity between blacks and whites stems from the

following factors: (1) white people provide them with inferior schooling and treat them

differently in school; (2) by imposing a job ceiling, white people fail to reward them

adequately for their academic achievement in adult life; and (3) black Americans develop

coping devices which, in turn, further limit their striving for academic success. Fordham

and Ogbu (1986) suggest the problem arose partly because white Americans traditionally

refused to acknowledge that black Americans were capable of intellectual achievement,

and partly because black Americans subsequently began to doubt their own intellectual

ability, began to define academic success as white people’s prerogative, and began to

discourage their peers, perhaps unconsciously, from emulating white people in striving

for academic success.

       The Fordham and Ogbu hypothesis can be directly imputed into a simple

economic model of identity and human capital acquisition, ala Akerlof and Kranton

(2000, 2002). In their language, identities are accompanied by certain “prescriptions” that

define appropriate behaviors for a person of that type. When an individual makes

decisions in line with these prescriptions, there is a utility benefit. In standard models, a

student invests in human capital until the marginal cost of investment equals the marginal

benefit of that investment. Fordham and Ogbu (1986) argue that institutional

discrimination lowers the marginal benefit of investment for certain minority groups. As

a rational response, these minorities began to equate educational achievement with

whiteness, thereby altering the prescriptions (e.g. what it means to “be black”).

       The predictions of the oppositional culture identity model face mixed success in

terms of the patterns observed in the data. Consistent with the theory, there are no racial




                                                                                            28
differences in the relationship between popularity and achievement among blacks in

private schools and from high socioeconomic status families, as these environments

likely change identity prescriptions. It is unclear what the oppositional identity model

predicts about the salience of ‘acting white’ as a function of the percentage of black

students in a school.42

         The theory, however, does quite poorly in explaining why ‘acting white’ does not

exists in predominantly black schools. Indeed, Fordham and Ogbu (1986) base the

oppositional culture hypothesis on observations in an all black high school, yet we find

little evidence in support of their theory.



B. A Sabotage Model

         Another explanation for racial differences in the relationship between social status

and achievement is that blacks simply sabotage their high achieving peers.43 McWhorter

(2000) is a prominent advocate of this view.

         Consider the following skeletal outline of a sabotage model. Imagine a world with

two neighborhoods: a majority community and a minority community, each containing

many individuals. Individuals come in two flavors: high ability and low ability, which are

determined by Nature and publicly observed within a community. There are two states of

the world: discriminatory and fair; which are unknown. Individuals observe their ability


42
   Oppositional culture might be more prevalent in predominantly black or highly segregated schools and
less prevalent in integrated schools. As opportunities and the likelihood of success increases, the
oppositional culture model predicts that incentives to develop oppositional identities decrease and hence,
‘acting white’ decreases. The countervailing effect is that black identities likely become less salient as the
percentage of blacks in a school increase (similar to “American” identities becoming more prevalent in one
travels abroad). Which effect will dominate is unclear.
43
   There are several mechanisms that could lead to such behavior. The most simplistic is that black and
Hispanic cultures are dysfunctional; punishing successful members of their group rather then rewarding
their success.


                                                                                                           29
type and make a dichotomous human capital decision. Assume that human capital is less

costly to obtain for high ability workers. Individual utility is partly determined by what

others (outside the community) perceive about their ability.

        Firms observe each individuals level of human capital and decides whether or not

to hire them. When the state of the world is discriminatory, firms refuse to hire minority

workers. In a fair state, workers are hired if and only if they have invested in human

capital. Assume that payoffs are such that low ability types never have incentive to

acquire human capital.

        In this framework, low ability agents have incentive to “hold back” individuals

with high ability when the cost of doing so is less than the net benefit; independent of the

state of the world. As more high ability individuals invest in human capital and garner

success, the world may be revealed to be fair, putting the onus of non-achievement on

low ability individuals. Thus, the net benefit of sabotage is increasing in the fraction of

individuals who escape.

        The sabotage theory, irrespective of the details, is at odds with the fact that blacks

in predominantly black schools face no tradeoff between social status and achievement –

the ‘acting white’ coefficient is weakly positive in these schools. The theory also does not

adequately explain why ‘acting white’ is particularly salient in schools with more

interracial contact.



VI. Conclusion

        For nearly 20 years, there has been a debate among social scientists on the extent

and potential impact of negative peer sanctions often referred to as ‘acting white.’ The




                                                                                              30
consensus gentium is: (1) ‘acting white’ does not exist in nationally representative

samples, and (2) to the extent that it is discernible in data, it is concentrated in low-

income minority schools. This paper demonstrates that the facts point in the exact

opposite direction: ‘acting white’ is observable in nationally representative data, but non-

existent in predominantly black schools. There is, however, a crucial point of agreement.

We, like Ferguson (2001), Cook and Ludwig (1997), and Ainsworth-Darnell and Downey

(1998), find no empirical support for the oppositional culture hypothesis described in

Fordham and Ogbu (1986).

        Most importantly, we demonstrate that the relationship between social status and

achievement is categorically different between racial groups, and this difference is

remarkably robust across a variety of different specifications, sub-samples of the data,

and definitions of social status. Particularly interesting is that high achieving students and

students in environments with more interracial contact are most burdened by ‘acting

white.’ Eliminating racial differences in the relationship between popularity and

achievement will have little effect on the mean student or students who attend

predominantly black schools – but could potentially be a major reason for the

underperformance of minorities in suburban schools or the lack of adequate

representation of Blacks and Hispanics in elite colleges and universities.

        Finally, we argue (and provide circumstantial evidence) that ‘acting white’ is an

equilibrium phenomenon, the consequence of two-audience signaling; not self-sabotage

among blacks or the result of an oppositional cultural identity that declares education

useless. While the evidence in favor of the two-audience signaling model is far from




                                                                                            31
overwhelming, it is the only model we consider that does not directly contradict the data

in fundamental ways.




                                                                                        32
           Appendix A: Reconciling our Results with the Previous Literature

         Table 5 estimates the prevalence of ‘acting white’ among eighth and tenth grade

students in the NELS. The equation estimated is identical to that implemented in the

Addhealth data, described by equation (2). Popularity is measured as a dichotomous

variable; equal to one if students in class see the respondent as very popular and equal to

zero if not.44 The independent variables vary by column and are generally increasing

from left to right.

         Columns 1 and 5 of table 5 show that there is a positive relationship between

grades and popularity, though the relationship is smaller for blacks, which is consistent

with ‘acting white.’ The ‘acting white’ coefficient is large and statistically significant for

Blacks in both eighth and tenth grades, but never statistically significant for Hispanics.

Columns 2 and 6 include controls for test score, effort, SES, gender, and extracurricular

activities (athletics, student government, and cheerleading). The coefficient on grades and

the acting white coefficient change little, suggesting that black-white differences in

covariates are not driving the negative ‘acting white’ coefficient (similar to the results in

the Addhealth).45

         Columns 3 and 7 include controls for school characteristics. Private school

attendance is associated with greater reported popularity, but the inclusion of school

characteristics does not alter the ‘acting white’ coefficient. Columns 4 and 8 present

results with the inclusion of school fixed-effects. These results are consistent with our

previous analysis using the Addhealth. There is no statistical difference between

44
   In the raw data, the measure takes on three values, whether or not students see the respondent as: (1) very
popular; (2) somewhat popular; or (3) not popular at all. Only 15% of the 10th grade sample (and 18% of
the 8th grade sample) reported being not popular at all – thus we merged responses (2) and (3). See the data
appendix for details.
45
   Including the interactions Black*Test Score, Black*Effort, or Black*SES does little to alter the results.


                                                                                                           33
Hispanics and Whites in the relationship between popularity and grades in the NELS.

Other coefficients stay essentially the same.



                             Appendix B: Data Description

The Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Addhealth)

Grades

Students were asked “At the most recent grading period, what was your grade in each of

the following subjects?” where the subjects were English/Language Arts, Mathematics,

History/Social Studies, and Science, and possible answers were A, B, C, or “D or lower”.

Assuming student answered that their school grades on a letter basis, we averaged the

grades in these 4 subjects according to a 4.0 scale (i.e. A=4.0, B=3.0, C=2.0, and D or

lower=1.0).



Race

Students were asked “What race are you?” and “Are you of Hispanic or Spanish origin?”

Non-Hispanic white, black, or Asians were coded as separate values. Students answering

yes to the latter question were coded as Hispanic. Answers to the former question could

include multiple races; non-Hispanic mixed race students (i.e. students selecting multiple

races) were also coded separately.



Gender

Students were asked “What sex are you?” Male or female.




                                                                                          34
Age

Students were asked “How old are you?” Answers range from 10 to 19, where 19

indicates age is 19 or older.



Effort

Students were asked “In general, how hard do you try to do your school work well?”

Possible answers were “I try very hard to do my best”; “I try hard enough, but not as hard

as I could”; “I don’t try very hard at all”; and I never try at all”. We coded these on a 1-4

scale where 4 represents the highest level of effort (i.e. the first response) and 1

represents the lowest.



Athletics

Students were asked whether they were participating or planned to participate in a

number of clubs or teams. This variable was coded as one if any of the following teams

were indicated: baseball/softball, basketball, field hockey, football, ice hockey, soccer,

swimming, tennis, track, volleyball, wrestling, or other sport.



Student Government

This variable was coded as one if student indicated he/she participated in the student

council.



Cheerleading




                                                                                             35
This variable was coded as one if student indicated he/she participated in the

cheerleading or dance team.



Parental Education

Student was asked how far in school their mother and father went. This variable is coded

as one if the parent graduated from a college or university, or if they had professional

training beyond a four-year college. If the student doesn’t know the exact level of

education, it is coded as missing. Otherwise, other educational levels are coded as zero.



Parental Occupation

We coded two variables each for the mother and father. The first is based on the

student’s description of their mother or father’s job—whether they are “white collar

professionals”. It was coded as one if according to the student, the parent’s occupation is

“Professional 1” (such as doctor, lawyer or scientist); “Professional 2” (such as teacher,

librarian, nurse); “Manager” (such as executive or director); or “Technical” (such as

computer specialist or radiologist). Other professions are coded as zero. If the parent

doesn’t work or is disabled or retired, it is coded as missing. The second variable is

coded as one if the parent is a housewife or househusband, according to the student, and

zero otherwise.



Urban/Suburban/Rural and Public/Private School




                                                                                           36
We created dummies for whether the school is public or private and whether it is located

in an urban, suburban, or rural setting, according to the school administrator

questionnaire.



Percent Teachers Black/Asian/Hispanic

These variables are taken from the school administrator’s answer to the question

“Approximately what percentage of your full-time classroom teachers are of each of the

following races?” where races listed include black, Asian, and Hispanic.



                                        References


Akerlof, George and Rachel Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 115 (2000) 715-753.


Akerlof, George and Rachel Kranton, “Identity and Schooling: Some Lessons
For the Economics of Education,” Journal of Economic Literature, 40 (2002), 1167-
1201.


Ainsworth-Darnell, James and Douglas Downey, "Assessing the Oppositional Culture
Explanation for Racial/Ethnic Differences in School Performance," American
Sociological Review, 63 (1998), 536-553.


Armor, G. “Why is Black Educational Achievement Rising?” Public Interest (1992), 65-
80.


Austen-Smith, David and Roland Fryer, “The Economics of ‘Acting White’,”
Unpublished Manuscript, Harvard University, 2003.




                                                                                      37
Austen-Smith, David and Roland Fryer, “An Economic Analysis of ‘Acting White’,”
Forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2005.


Bauman, K. 1996. Trying to get ahead: school work and grades in the educational
advance of African-Americans. Institute for Research on Poverty. Washington, DC.

Bergin, David and Helen Cooks. “High School Students of Color Talk about
Accusations of ‘Acting White’,” Urban Review, 34 (2002), 113-34.


Brooks-Gunn, J. and G. Duncan (Eds.), The Consequences of Growing Up Poor. (New
York: Russell Sage), 1997.


Campbell, Jay, Catherine Hombo, and John Mazzeo, “NAEP 1999 trends in academic
progress: Three decades of student performance,” Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education’s Office of Educational Research and Improvement (NCES 2000–469), 2000.


Card, David and Jesse Rothstein, “Racial Segregation and the Black-White Test Score
Gap,” Unpublished Manuscript, Princeton University, 2004.


Carneiro, Pedro and James Heckman, “Human Capital Policy,” Working Paper,
University of Chicago, 2002.


Chapple, Simon, Richard Jefferies, and Rita Walker, “Maori Education
Participation and Performance: A Literature Review and Research Programme,”
Paper for the New Zealand Ministry of Education, 1997.


Coleman, J. S., Campbell, E. Q., Hobson, C. J., McPartland, J., Mood, A. M., Weinfeld,
F. D., & York, R. L. Equality of educational opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1966.


Cook, M. and W. Evans. “Families or Schools? Explaining the Convergence in White
and Black Academic Performance.” Journal of Labor Economics 18:4 (2000), 729-754.


                                                                                      38
Cook, Phillip, Jens Ludwig. Weighing the “burden of ‘acting white’”: are there race
differences in attitudes towards education? Journal of Public Policy and Analysis, 16
(1997), 256-278.


Cook, Phillip, Jens Ludwig. 1998. The Burden of ‘Acting white’: Do black Adolescents
Disparage Academic Achievement? In Christopher Jenks and Meredith Phillips, eds.,
The Black-White Test Score Gap, Brookings Press.


Cross, William and Peony Fhagen-Smith. “Patterns of African American Identity
Development: A Life Span Perspective,” in New Perspectives on Racial Identity
Development: A Theoretical and Practical Anthology, Charmaine L. Wijeyesinghe and
Bailey W. Jackson, eds. New York: New York University Press.


Datnow, Amanda and Robert Cooper, “Peer Networks of African American Students in
Independent Schools: Affirming Academic Success and Racial Identity,” Journal of
Negro Education, 65 (1996), 56-72.


Delpit, Lisa. Other People’s Children: Cultural Conflict in the Classroom. (New York:
New Press), 1995.


DeVos, George, and Wagatsuma Hiroshi, “Japan's Invisible Race: Caste in Culture and
Personality,” (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966).


Echenique Federico and Roland Fryer, “On the Measurement of Segregation,”
Unpublished manuscript, NBER Working Paper No. 11258, 2005.


Farkas, George, Christy Lleras, and Steve Maczuga, “Comment: does oppositional
culture exist in minority and poverty peer groups?” American Sociological Review, 67:1
(2002), 148-155.




                                                                                        39
Ferguson, Ronald. Teacher’s Perceptions and Expectations and the Black-White Test
Score Gap,” in C. Jencks and M. Phillips (Eds.), The Black-White Test Score Gap
(Washington, DC: The Brookings Institute), 1998.


Ferguson, Ronald. Can schools narrow the black-white test score gap? In C. Jencks and
M. Phillips (Eds.), The black-white test score gap (pp. 318-374). (Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution), 1998.


Ferguson, Ronald. “A Diagnostic Analysis of Black-White GPA Disparities in
Shaker Heights, Ohio.” Pp. 347-414 in Brookings Papers on Education Policy
2001, edited by Diane Ravitch. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2001.


Ferguson, Ronald, “What Doesn't Meet the Eye: Understanding and Addressing Racial
Disparities in High-Achieving Suburban Schools,” Working Paper, Wiener Center for
Social Policy, Harvard University, 2002.


Fordham, Signithia. 1996. Blacked Out: Dilemmas of Race, Identity, and Success at
Capital High. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Fordham, Signithia, and John Ogbu, “Black Students’ School Successes: Coping
with the Burden of ‘Acting White’,” The Urban Review, XVIII (1986),
176–206.


Freeman, Linton C. “Segregation in Social Networks.” Sociological Methods and
Research, 6(4) 411-430, 1978.


Fryer, Roland, and Steve Levitt, “Understanding the Black-White Test Score Gap in the
First Two Years of School,” Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXXVI (2004), 447-
464.




                                                                                        40
Fryer, Roland, and Steve Levitt, “The Black-White Test Score Gap through Third
Grade,” NBER Working Paper No. 11049, 2005.


Gans, Herbert, The Urban Villagers: Group and Class in the Life of Italian-Americans,
New York: The Free Press, 1962.


Grogger, Jeffrey, and Derek Neal, “Further Evidence on the Benefits of Catholic
Secondary Schooling,” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 2000, 151-193.


Herrnstein, R. and C. Murray. The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in
American Life, (The Free Press), 1994.


Horn, Roger, and Charles Johnson, Matrix Analysis (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1985).


Horvat, Erin McNamara, and Kristine S. Lewis, “Reassessing the ‘Burden of
‘Acting White’: The Importance of Peer Groups in Managing Academic Success,”
Sociology of Education, 76 (2003), 265-280.


Jencks, Chris, and Meredith Phillips, “The Black-White Test Score Gap: An
Introduction.” In Jencks and Phillips, eds., The Black-White Test Score Gap, p. 1-51,
Brookings, 1998.


Jensen, Arthur. The G Factor: The Science of Mental Ability (Greenwood Publishing
Group), 1998.


Kling, Jeffrey and Jeffrey Liebman. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects on
Youth.” Working Paper. Princeton University, 2004.




                                                                                        41
Kling, Jeffrey, Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence Katz. “Neighborhood Effects on Crime for
Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120:1 87-130, 2005.


McWhorter, John. Losing the Race: Self Sabotage in Black America. New York: Free
Press, 2000.


Neal, Derek and William Johnson. “The Role of Pre-Market Factors in Black-White
Wage Differentials.” Journal of Political Economy 104 (1996), 869-895.


Neal, Derek, “The Effects of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Educational
Achievement,” Journal of Labor Economics, 15 (1997), 98-123.


Neal, Derek, “Has Black-White Skill Convergence Stopped?” mimeo, University of
Chicago, 2004.


Neal-Barnett, Angela. (2001). Being Black: A new conceptualization of acting white. In
A. M. Neal-Barnett, J. Contreras, & K. Kerns (Eds.), Forging Links: African American
Children Clinical Developmental Perspectives. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing
Group.


Ogbu, John, and Signithia Fordham, “Black Students’ School Success: Coping with the
Burden of ‘Acting white’,” The Urban Review, 18:3 (1986), 176-206.


Ogbu, John, and Astrid Davis, Black American Students in an Affluent Suburb: A Study of
Academic Disengagement (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc, 2003).


O’Neill, June. “The Role of Human Capital in Earnings Differences Between Black and
White Men,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 4:4 (1990), 25-46.




                                                                                       42
Phillips, Meredith, James Crouse, and John Ralph, “Does the Black-White Test Score
Gap Widen After Children Enter School?” in The Black-White Test Score Gap, C. Jencks
and M. Phillips, eds. (Washington, DC: The Brookings Institute) pp. 229-272, 1998.


Rodgers, W. and W. Spriggs. “What Does AFQT Really Measure: Race, Wages,
Schooling, and the AFQT Score,” The Review of Black Political Economy 24:4, 1996,
13-46.


Steele, S. and J Aronson. “Stereotype Threat and the Test Performance of Academically
Sucessful African Americans,” in C. Jencks and M. Phillips (Eds.), The black-white test
score gap (pp. 401-430). (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution), 1998.


Tanur, Judith, Questions About Questions: Inquiries into the Cognitive Bases of Surveys
(New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1992).


Tatum, Beverly. Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria? And Other
Conversations About Race. New York: Basic Books, 1997.


Tyson, Karolyn, William Darity Jr., and Domini Castellino. “Breeding Animosity: the
‘Burden of Acting White’ and Other Problems of Status Group Hierarchies in Schools,”
Working paper, Department of Sociology University of North Carolina Chapel Hill,
2004.


Willis, Paul, Learning to Labor: How Working Class Kids Get Working Class Jobs (New
York City: Columbia University Press, 1977).




                                                                                      43
                                                                                Black Popularity                   White Popularity
          Black Popularity                   White Popularity                   Hispanic Popularity
          Hispanic Popularity




 .2
                                                                       .2




-.1



                                                                      -.1
             1                  2                   3           4                  1                  2                   3           4
                                    Grades                                                                Grades
Figure 1A: Spectral Popularity and Grades by Race, Raw Data         Figure 1B: Spectral Popularity and Grades by Race, With Controls
               Black Popularity                   White Popularity
               Hispanic Popularity                                                      Black Popularity                   White Popularity
                                                                                        Hispanic Popularity
.139792
                                                                         .614401




-.30614
                                                                          .13846
                 1                   2                  3            4
                                         Grades                                           1                   2                  3            4
                                                                                                                  Grades
    Figure 2A: Spectral Popularity and Grades by Race, Boys
                                                                             Figure 2B: Spectral Popularity and Grades by Race, Girls
                                                                                       Black Popularity                   White Popularity
              Black Popularity                   White Popularity                      Hispanic Popularity
              Hispanic Popularity
                                                                        .333676
.404686




-.10287                                                                 -.161399
                1                   2                  3            4                    1                   2                  3            4
                                        Grades                                                                   Grades
Figure 3A: Spectral Popularity and Grades by Race, Public Schools        Figure 3B: Spectral Popularity and Grades by Race, Private Schools
                                                                                        Black Popularity                   White Popularity
               Black Popularity                   White Popularity                      Hispanic Popularity
               Hispanic Popularity
                                                                          .25875
 .465963




 -.10953                                                                 -.097461
                 1                   2                  3            4                    1                   2                  3            4
                                         Grades                                                                   Grades
Figure 4A: Spectral Popularity and Grades by Race, Low Segregation       Figure 4B: Spectral Popularity and Grades by Race, High Segregation
 (
u s, α 0 , ω (s );θˆ   )


                                       α0 = 1




                                                  α0 = 0




          0                s1* s0*                     s



Figure 5: The Non-Existence of Fully Separating Equilibrium
σ*                                                      σ*




          θ1 θˆ(δ )                        θ                                         θ
     0                  θ*                                   0    θ1 θˆ(δ )     θ*
     [← Accepted Types → ]                                   [← Accepted Types → ]



                     Figure 6: D1 Equilibria in the Two-Audience Signaling Model
                               Table 1: Summary Statistics by Race, Addhealth
                                        All              Whites             Blacks         Hispanics
Variable                         Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev.
White                            0.524      0.498  1.000      0.000    0.000     0.000  0.000    0.000
Black                            0.156      0.363  0.000      0.000    1.000     0.000  0.000    0.000
Hispanic                         0.170      0.376  0.000      0.000    0.000     0.000  1.000    0.000
Asian                            0.047      0.211  0.000      0.000    0.000     0.000  0.000    0.000
Mixed Race                       0.103      0.304  0.000      0.000    0.000     0.000  0.000    0.000
Popularity                       0.000      1.000  0.142      1.177   -0.024     0.698 -0.141    0.871
Same-Race Friends                2.948      3.173  3.526      3.403    2.483     2.750  1.596    2.159
Other-Race Friends               0.962      1.609  0.773      1.170    1.012     1.586  1.493    2.452
Grade Point Average              2.800      0.808  2.914      0.793    2.561     0.754  2.552    0.801
Age                             14.999      1.706 15.019      1.672   14.922     1.704 15.188    1.750
Male                             0.497      0.500  0.502      0.500    0.466     0.499  0.503    0.500
Effort                           3.092      0.950  3.137      0.798    3.136     1.064  2.926    1.175
Sports                           0.510      0.500  0.540      0.498    0.506     0.500  0.425    0.494
Student Government               0.073      0.260  0.076      0.265    0.090     0.285  0.050    0.219
Cheerleading                     0.080      0.271  0.075      0.263    0.106     0.308  0.070    0.255
Mother College Educated          0.251      0.434  0.292      0.455    0.225     0.417  0.126    0.331
Father College Educated          0.241      0.428  0.304      0.460    0.140     0.347  0.118    0.323
Mother Professional              0.273      0.445  0.311      0.463    0.282     0.450  0.162    0.369
Father Professional              0.240      0.427  0.314      0.464    0.118     0.323  0.126    0.332
Urban                            0.343      0.475  0.243      0.429    0.406     0.491  0.610    0.488
Suburban                         0.559      0.497  0.630      0.483    0.494     0.500  0.357    0.479
Private School                   0.061      0.240  0.074      0.263    0.033     0.179  0.031    0.174
Percent Black in School         12.424 19.756      5.491      9.978   35.399 28.772 14.436 17.382
Percent Hispanic in School       3.351      8.885  1.409      2.905    2.514     6.896 10.877 17.434
Frequency of Missing Values:
 Missing Age                     0.002    0.048    0.001    0.026   0.005    0.068    0.004    0.063
 Missing Mother's Education      0.217    0.412    0.151    0.358   0.254    0.435    0.320    0.466
 Missing Father's Education      0.367    0.482    0.260    0.438   0.573    0.495    0.477    0.499
 Missing Mother's Occupation     0.246    0.431    0.176    0.381   0.337    0.473    0.332    0.471
 Missing Father's Occupation     0.391    0.488    0.287    0.452   0.616    0.486    0.481    0.500
 Missing Effort                  0.005    0.072    0.004    0.060   0.004    0.067    0.008    0.091
 Missing Gender                  0.046    0.209    0.020    0.141   0.072    0.258    0.095    0.293
                          Table 2: The Prevalence of 'Acting White,' by GPA
                            Full Sample         < 2.0        2.0 - 3.0    3.0 - 3.5                > 3.5
                                                  (1)            (2)         (3)                     (4)
Black                            0.148          0.013          0.134        0.488                  0.986
                               0.031**          0.097          0.117        0.487                 0.432*
Hispanic                         0.164          -0.09          0.173        0.761                  0.269
                               0.031**          0.094          0.122       0.409*                  0.372
Grades                           0.135          0.118          0.157        0.223                  0.097
                               0.007**        0.042**        0.034**      0.089**                 0.056*
Black*Grades                    -0.103         -0.035         -0.097       -0.198                 -0.329
                               0.012**          0.066         0.049*        0.157                0.116**
Hispanic*Grades                 -0.171         -0.048         -0.171       -0.347                   -0.2
                               0.011**          0.065        0.051**      0.131**                 0.099*
Effort                          -0.035         -0.009         -0.013       -0.028                 -0.005
                               0.006**          0.006        0.004**      0.006**                  0.007
Male                             0.021          0.015          0.019        0.045                  0.013
                               0.008**          0.015         0.011*      0.016**                  0.018
Age                             -0.014          0.003         -0.038        -0.06                 -0.039
                               0.003**          0.009        0.009**      0.012**                0.014**
Cheerleading                     0.205          0.109          0.187        0.218                  0.284
                               0.016**        0.015**        0.011**      0.016**                0.017**
Athlete                           0.21         -0.001          0.195        0.229                  0.189
                               0.007**           0.05        0.033**      0.036**                0.028**
Student Government               0.195          0.143          0.159        0.221                  0.261
                               0.017**        0.042**        0.025**      0.032**                0.033**
Father Househusband              0.039          0.014          0.035        0.046                  0.009
                               0.013**          0.025         0.017*       0.023*                  0.025
Mother Housewife                 0.057          0.015          0.033        0.029                  0.044
                               0.012**          0.027         0.019*        0.024                  0.027
Father Education                 0.032          0.003          0.035        0.013                  0.072
                               0.012**          0.022         0.016*        0.023                0.024**
Father Professional              0.039          0.059          0.045        0.071                  0.056
                               0.011**         0.027*        0.018**      0.025**                 0.025*
Mother Education                -0.151         -0.019           0.01       -0.029                 -0.043
                               0.041**          0.023          0.019        0.023                 0.024*
Mother Professional             -0.023         -0.038         -0.119       -0.128                 -0.249
                                0.011*          0.058          0.082       0.074*                0.087**
School Fixed Effects?              Y               Y              Y           Y                       Y
Observations                                    9464          24055        15984                  18698
R-squared                                        0.11           0.09         0.1                    0.13

All data are drawn from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. The dependent variable is
Spectral Popularity. Robust standard errors used. Standard errors under coefficients. Dummies for missing
values for all variables except race and grades. Weights used in all regressions. Note: * denotes significant
at 5% level, ** denotes significant at 1% level.
                                                                                     Table 3: Sensitivity Analysis and Extensions of the Basic Model, Full Sample

                                    Grades     Black*Grades       Hispanic*Grades          Grades     Black*Grades       Hispanic*Grades           Grades     Black*Grades        Hispanic*Grades          Grades     Black*Grades       Hispanic*Grades

BASELINE                                     Weighted                                                               Unweighted
                          0.132     -0.103              -0.171                               0.138         -0.094             -0.178
                         .007**    0.012**             0.011**                              .007**        0.011**            0.011**
ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF POPULARITY
                                Non-Normalized Spectral Popularity                                             Same-Race Friends                                      All-Race Popularity                                    Other-Race Popularity
                          1.961     -1.534              -2.544                               0.574         -0.442             -0.731                0.515         -.269               -.447                 -0.010         0.044            0.082
                         .108**    0.175**             0.164**                              .036**        0.066**            0.059**               .038**         .068**               .065**               0.015         0.015**          0.022**
GRADE LEVEL                                Seventh Grade                                                          Ninth Grade                                            Twelth Grade
                          0.084     -0.109              -0.086                              0.202          -0.144             -0.251                0.104         -0.069             -0.156
                        0.014**    0.028**             0.025**                             0.017**        0.027**            0.024**               0.016**        0.034*            0.028**
SCHOOL TYPE                                   Private                                                                Public
                          0.016     0.053               -0.039                               0.138         -0.111             -0.180
                          0.034     0.050                0.054                              .007**        0.012**            0.011**
GENDER                                         Male                                                                 Female
                          0.131     -0.101              -0.181                              0.137          -0.116             -0.170
                         .010**    0.017**             0.016**                              .010*         0.016**            0.015**
URBANICITY                                   Suburban                                                             Urban/Rural
                          0.141     -0.106              -0.169                               0.114         -0.095             -0.157
                         .010**    0.016**             0.015**                              .011**        0.017**            0.016**
PARENTAL EDUCATION                     Both College-educated                                                         Other
                          0.052     -0.030              -0.117                               0.134         -0.104             -0.174
                          .026*    0.040**             0.040**                              .008**        0.012**            0.012**
EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES                    Athletes                                                            Cheerleading                                             Music/Band
                          0.167     -0.131              -0.192                               0.233         -0.238             -0.245                0.164          -0.085             -0.189
                         .012**    0.017**             0.017**                              .035**        0.045**            0.043**               .017**         0.025**            0.024**
CO-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES                Student Government                                                           Clubs                                            National Honor Society
                          0.119      -0.07              -0.183                               0.120         -0.094             -0.148                0.079          -0.024             -0.048
                         .036**      0.05              0.048**                              .016**        0.024**            0.022**                0.043           0.069              0.058
LEVEL OF INTERRACIAL CONTACT              High Segregation                                                      Low Segregation                                            <20% Black                                            >80% Black
                          0.085     -0.055              -0.115                               0.143         -0.136             -0.208                0.133          -0.137             -0.187                -0.007         0.106               ---
                         .008**    0.013**             0.013**                              .010**        0.023**            0.017**               .008**         0.013**            0.013**                0.061          0.083               ---
    --- By Gender                    High Segregation -- Males                                            High Segregation -- Females                               Low Segregation -- Males                              Low Segregation -- Females
                          0.071     -0.034              -0.100                               0.101         -0.076             -0.127                0.153          -0.150             -0.223                 0.136        -0.126             -0.177
                         .012**     0.019               .018**                              .011**         .017**             .017**               .014**          .032**             .024**                .015**        .031**             .022**
All data are drawn from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Separate regressions are estimated for each indicated subsample. The dependent variable is Spectral Popularity, except for the second panel. Regressions run on blacks,
whites, and hispanics as in previous tables. Fixed-effects specification from previous table is used. Robust standard errors used. Standard errors under coefficients. All regressions weighted except for "unweighted" line. Note: * denotes significant at
5% level, ** denotes significant at 1% level.
                                                                     Table 4: Sensitivity Analysis and Extensions of the Basic Model, High Achievers (3.5 GPA or better)

                                    Grades     Black*Grades       Hispanic*Grades           Grades     Black*Grades       Hispanic*Grades            Grades     Black*Grades Hispanic*Grades           Grades      Black*Grades Hispanic*Grades

BASELINE                                     Weighted                                                               Unweighted
                         0.097     -0.329                -0.2                                0.058         -0.345            -0.245
                         0.056    0.116**               0.099                                0.057         .110**             .098*
ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF POPULARITY
                               Non-Normalized Spectral Popularity                                               Same-Race Friends                                    All-Race Popularity                               Other-Race Popularity
                         1.343     -4.548              -2.861                                0.269         -1.918             -1.586                  0.299         -1.686         -2.567               0.025        -.0344399      -.2347519
                         0.834    1.747**               1.522                                0.211         .594**             .535**                 0.227**        .605**          .553**              0.030           .087           .173
GRADE LEVEL                                Seventh Grade                                                           Ninth Grade                                          Twelth Grade
                        -0.048      0.200               0.113                                0.306         -0.393             -0.222                  0.059         -0.099         -0.582
                         0.076      0.224               0.152                                .132*          0.263              0.225                  0.113          .259          .199**
SCHOOL TYPE                                   Private                                                                 Public
                         0.091      0.446              -0.244                                0.089         -0.352             -0.167
                         0.188      0.339               0.411                                0.059         .123**              0.107
GENDER                                         Male                                                                  Female
                         0.139     -0.500              -0.247                                0.069         -0.153             -0.180
                         0.086     .180**               0.147                                0.074          0.153              0.139
URBANICITY                                   Suburban                                                              Urban/Rural
                         0.124     -0.375              -0.278                                0.031         -0.192             -0.075
                         0.077      .173*               0.167                                0.077          0.150              0.131
PARENTAL EDUCATION                     Both College-educated                                                          Other
                         0.106     -0.566              -0.118                                0.074         -0.247             -0.143
                         0.114      .262*               0.256                                0.064           0.13              0.108
EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES                    Athletes                                                             Cheerleading                                          Music/Band
                         0.109     -0.511              -0.373                                0.016          0.254             -0.109                  0.190         -0.354        -0.374
                         0.079     .166**              .141**                                0.215          0.365              0.37                   0.103         0.232          0.192
CO-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES                Student Government                                                            Clubs                                        National Honor Society
                        -0.180      0.006               0.241                                0.026         -0.223             -0.273                 -0.112         0.045         -0.139
                         0.154      0.377                0.3                                 0.094           0.18              0.164                 0.115          0.291          0.256
LEVEL OF INTERRACIAL CONTACT              High Segregation                                                        Low Segregation                                        <20% Black                                          >80% Black
                        -0.021     -0.102              -0.077                                0.147         -0.485             -0.229                  0.105         0.028         -0.295                  ---           1.238          -2.228
                         0.062       0.13               0.118                                0.075          .191*              0.123                  0.059         0.129          .122*                  ---           0.641           1.778
    --- By Gender
                                     High Segregation -- Males                                             High Segregation -- Females                            Low Segregation -- Males                           Low Segregation -- Females
                         0.001     -0.202              -0.088                               -0.038         -0.005             -0.102                  0.209        -0.774          -0.260               0.128          -0.308           -0.282
                         0.092      0.207               0.186                               0.087          0.171               0.151                  0.117        .263**          0.185                0.098          0.255            0.161
All data are drawn from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Separate regressions are estimated for each indicated subsample. The dependent variable is Spectral Popularity, except for the second panel. Regressions run on
blacks, whites, and hispanics as in previous tables. Fixed-effects specification from previous table is used. Robust standard errors used. Standard errors under coefficients. All regressions weighted except for "unweighted" line. Note: * denotes
significant at 5% level, ** denotes significant at 1% level.
                          Table 5: The Relationship Between Social Status and Achievement, NELS
                                                8th grade                                      10th grade
                                 (1)        (2)            (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)            (7)               (8)
Black                          0.261      0.214          0.212     0.210       0.161      0.160          0.171              0.214
                             0.040**    0.040**        0.041**   0.042**     0.057**    0.063*         0.065**            0.052**
Hispanic                       0.086      0.075          0.087     0.094       0.054      0.067          0.081              0.028
                             0.035*      0.035*        0.035*    0.037*        0.054      0.054          0.055              0.043
Grades                         0.034      0.037          0.037     0.037       0.013      0.030          0.030              0.038
                             0.004**    0.006**        0.006**   0.006**      0.006*    0.008**        0.008**            0.008**
Black*Grades                  -0.054     -0.047         -0.047    -0.042      -0.044     -0.052         -0.053             -0.061
                             0.014**    0.014**        0.014**   0.015**      0.021*    0.023*         0.023*             0.019**
Hispanic*Grades               -0.023     -0.022         -0.021    -0.018      -0.020     -0.026         -0.021             -0.006
                               0.012      0.012          0.012     0.013       0.018      0.018          0.017              0.015
Current Test Score                       -0.039         -0.041    -0.038                 -0.038         -0.039             -0.040
                                        0.004**        0.004**   0.004**                0.006**        0.006**            0.005**
Ability Group                             0.061          0.063     0.061                  0.034          0.036              0.041
                                        0.008**        0.008**   0.008**                0.010**        0.010**            0.010**
Effort Measure                           -0.024         -0.025    -0.027                 -0.027         -0.028             -0.027
                                        0.004**        0.004**   0.004**                0.005**        0.005**            0.005**
SES < 25th Percentile                    -0.030         -0.027    -0.038                 -0.025         -0.025             -0.031
                                        0.007**        0.007**   0.008**                0.013*           0.013            0.009**
SES > 75th Percentile                     0.023          0.019     0.028                  0.011          0.011              0.018
                                        0.007**        0.008*    0.008**                  0.011          0.011              0.010
Male                                      0.027          0.027     0.027                  0.005          0.005              0.017
                                        0.006**        0.006**   0.006**                  0.009          0.009            0.007*
Athlete                                   0.080          0.078     0.081                  0.058          0.056              0.071
                                        0.006**        0.006**   0.006**                0.009**        0.009**            0.008**
Student Government                        0.139          0.140     0.145                  0.156          0.153              0.163
                                        0.012**        0.012**   0.012**                0.019**        0.019**            0.018**
Cheerleading                              0.084          0.082     0.086                  0.078          0.078              0.086
                                        0.012**        0.012**   0.012**                0.024**        0.023**            0.018**
Urban School                                             0.002                                          -0.013
                                                         0.009                                           0.015
Suburban School                                         -0.008                                          -0.018
                                                         0.007                                           0.009
% Black in School (0-100)                               -0.000                                          -0.000
                                                         0.000                                           0.000
% Asian in School (0-100)                                0.001                                          -0.001
                                                         0.001                                           0.001
% Hispanic in School (0-100)                            -0.000                                          -0.001
                                                       0.000*                                          0.000*
Private School                                           0.035                                           0.038
                                                       0.009**                                           0.021
School Fixed Effects?             N          N              N         Y           N          N              N                Y
n                             20766      20766          20766     20766       13598      13598          13598              13575
R-squared                       0.01       0.06           0.07      0.13        0.00       0.05           0.05              0.27
All data are drawn from the National Educational Longitudinal Study. The dependent variable is dichotomous version of self-reported
popularity (see Appendix B for details). Robust standard errors used. Standard errors under coefficients. Dummies for missing values
for all variables except race and grades. Regression only on Blacks, Whites, and Hispanics. Weights used in all regressions. Note: *
denotes significant at 5% level, ** denotes significant at 1% level.
