                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      TRADE RESPONSES TO GEOGRAPHIC FRICTIONS:
                         A DECOMPOSITION USING MICRO-DATA

                                            Russell Hillberry
                                            David Hummels

                                         Working Paper 11339
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11339


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




We thank Jack Barron, Tim Cason, Michael Ferrantino, and John Ries for comments on an earlier draft. We
thank Arnold Rezneck of the Center for Economic Studies for his help with the data. All errors are the
responsibility of the authors. Much of the research work occurred while Russell Hillberry was employed by
the U.S. International Trade Commission. This research was supported by grants from Purdue CIBER and
NSF 0318242. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status
researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Center for Economic Studies. Research results and conclusions
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau. This paper
has been screened to insure that no confidential data are revealed. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Russell Hillberry and David Hummels. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Trade Responses to Geographic Frictions: A Decomposition Using Micro-Data
Russell Hillberry and David Hummels
NBER Working Paper No. 11339
May 2005
JEL No. F1, R3

                                           ABSTRACT

A large literature has shown that geographic frictions reduce trade, but has not clarified precisely

why. We provide insights into why such frictions matter by examining which parts of trade these

frictions reduce most. Using data that tracks manufacturers' shipments within the United States on

an exceptionally fine grid, we find that the pattern of shipments is extremely localized. Shipments

within 5-digit zip codes, which have a median radius of just 4 miles, are 3 times larger than

shipments outside the zip code. We decompose aggregate shipments into extensive and intensive

margins, and show that distance and other frictions reduce aggregate trade values primarily by

reducing the number of commodities shipped and the number of establishments shipping. We

consider two broad reasons for these facts and conclude that trade in intermediate goods is the most

likely explanation for highly localized shipments and the dominant role of the extensive margin. In

addition, we find no evidence of state-level home bias when distances are measured precisely and

trade is observed over a very fine grid.


Russell Hillberry
Department of Economics
University of Melbourne
3010 Victoria, Australia
rhhi@unimelb.edu.au

David Hummels
Krannert School of Management
403 West State Street
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310
and NBER
hummelsd@purdue.edu
I. Introduction

       How does trade respond to geographic frictions? A large literature has shown that

frictions associated with distance and state and national borders reduce trade, but has not

clarified precisely why. In this paper we provide some insight into why spatial frictions matter

by focusing on precisely what they matter for. We ask: what parts of trade do these frictions

reduce most?

       To explain, the value of trade used in empirical work on spatial frictions is an

aggregation, first over the price and quantity of each unique variety traded, and then, an

aggregation of unique varieties shipped between origin and destination. (This is true even for

studies that rely on trade disaggregated by commodity.) Empirical work typically assumes that

spatial frictions operate by reducing the traded quantities of each variety. This effect is captured

perfectly well by aggregated values if prices and the number of traded varieties do not co-vary

with frictions. The approach is theoretically consistent with the models invoked most frequently

to underpin the empirical work, and in any case, most researchers lack data sufficiently detailed

to assume anything else.

       We employ the micro-data file of the Commodity Flow Survey (CFS), which reports

establishment-level shipments on an exceptionally fine geographic grid within the United States,

and provides consistent measures of trade quantities and prices across hundreds of industries and

thousands of establishments. These data allow us to decompose bilateral trade values into

several components, and to investigate how each component varies over spatial frictions. We

find that the number of commodities shipped and the number of unique establishment x

destination pairs in which shipments are observed fall dramatically as the destination distance

rises. These distance effects are extraordinarily pronounced, with the number of shipments

dropping almost an order of magnitude between 1 and 200 miles, and being nearly flat thereafter.


                                                                                                    1
In our most detailed data we show that shipments destined within the same 5-digit zip code, i.e.

within a 4 mile radius of the shipper, are 3 times higher than those outside the zip code.

       In marked contrast, average value per unique shipment is relatively constant over short

distances, and falls only gradually with distance as distance gets large. In other words, the

aggregate trade-distance relationship in intra-US trade over short distances is driven entirely by

the fact that most establishments ship only to geographically proximate customers (the extensive

margin), rather than shipping to many customers in quantities that decrease in distance (the

intensive margin). For the small handful of shipments that reach beyond a few hundred miles,

average shipment values do fall gradually with distance, but even at larger distances the

extensive margin remains the primary channel through which spatial frictions reduce trade.

       Why are shipments localized in this particular way? We consider two explanations, each

distinguished by what is assumed about the spatial distribution of demand.

       Our primary hypothesis is that goods produced at a distance are not purchased because

there is no local industrial demand for them. Suppose that region i produces an intermediate

good that is useful only as an input into producing a particular final good. If region j does not

produce that final good, it has no use for region i’s output. To complete the story, the production

“match” (the likelihood that region i produces inputs that region j’s industry wants to consume)

is stronger when the two regions are proximate. In other words, specialized up- and down-

stream establishments are sorted geographically to avoid spatial frictions. In the resulting pattern

of trade, most shipments occur only between highly proximate location pairs. Further, what

appears to be intra-industry trade occurring between these proximate pairs is the exchange of

products at different stages of production (i.e. auto parts for finished autos).

       Our alternative hypothesis is consistent with most of the theoretical models used to study

spatial frictions. In these models consumers substitute away from distant goods because spatial


                                                                                                     2
frictions raise their price relative to local goods. The effects of spatial frictions are most

pronounced, and imports lowest, when local goods are in plentiful supply. Distance costs could

choke off trade entirely, as opposed to merely reducing quantities, if consumers regard local and

distant goods as homogeneous, or if consumers regard them as differentiated but must pay a

fixed cost to import.

        To separate these hypotheses we provide three exercises. First, we combine data on

manufacturing at the zip code level with input usage taken from the U.S. input-output structure

in order to generate predicted industrial demands. These intermediate demands help explain

variation in industry expenditures across regions. Second, we show that the share of industry

imports into a region is positively correlated with that industry’s output and export shares. This

is inconsistent with a model in which distance costs lead consumers to substitute away from

distant and toward local goods. Third, recall that the effect of distance on trade operates

primarily in a 1,0 manner, shutting off distant shipments entirely as opposed to reducing their

quantities. We use probit regressions to show that a region’s output mix, and resulting industrial

demands, affects the likelihood a commodity is shipped to that region.

        This paper contributes to a number of distinct literatures. Very recently, decompositions

that separate trade into extensive margins (number of commodities) and intensive margins (value

per commodity) have appeared in the literature. Our decomposition method is inspired by

Hummels and Klenow (2004) who examine the response of the extensive and intensive margin to

exporter characteristics. Other papers focus on trade policy changes1, and generally show that

tariff liberalizations result in trade growth along both extensive and intensive margins. Unlike

these papers, we focus on the spatial dimension of trade within a country, rather than external

1
  Hillberry and McDaniel (2002) and Kehoe and Ruhl (2003) examine changes in the numbers of trade commodities
in the US after NAFTA, while Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1995) show similar results in the aftermath of trade
liberalization in Costa Rica.


                                                                                                            3
trade. Further, we can identify individual establishments, rather than observing all

establishments that ship a particular commodity aggregated into a single flow. We show that

spatial frictions reduce extensive margins defined in terms of both commodities and unique

establishments.

         This paper contributes to a large literature2 that employs distance in import demand

(gravity) equations, either as a direct object of interest or as a control. Unlike previous work, we

decompose aggregate trade flows into multiple components in an effort to examine what parts of

trade spatial frictions act upon.

         We also contribute to work on “home bias” or border effects in trade. By exploiting the

CFS’ fine geographic grid, we show that state level home bias, like that identified by Wolf

(2000) or Hillberry and Hummels (2003), is an artifact of geographic aggregation. The nature of

the data allows us to examine only internal political boundaries (state borders), and not directly

estimate the effect of national boundaries as in McCallum (1995) and Anderson and van

Wincoop (2003). However, an explanation of why most establishments ship goods only to very

near customers within a country may contribute to understanding why those establishments do

not ship to customers outside the country.

         Finally, we contribute to the literature on equilibrium location choices of firms, and in

particular, models that emphasize the role of intermediate demand in forming industrial

agglomerations.3 We do not offer a formal test of these models, nor do we offer a fully

articulated model of firm location. Nevertheless, our evidence regarding regional absorption

2
  Disdier and Head (2004) identify 78 published papers with an estimated elasticity of trade with respect to distance.
3
  Krugman and Venables (1995) derive a theoretic model in which suppliers of intermediates co-locate with final
goods producers, thereby generating highly localized trade in intermediate goods. Eaton and Kortum (2002) offer
another model with this feature, and fit it to international trade data. One notable feature of the Eaton and Kortum
model is the existence of an extensive margin in trade. Amiti and Cameron(2003) find that Indonesian firms in
closer proximity to intermediate suppliers pay higher wages. Overman, Midelfart-Knarvik and Venables (2001) find
that geographic proximity to intermediate supply and to sources of industrial demand help explain the location of
industry in Europe.


                                                                                                                     4
variation and the reasons that shipments travel very short distances are consistent with these

models.

         Section II describes the data in greater detail. Section III describes our methodology for

and results on decomposing shipments into various components. Section IV provides

explanations for these results and related empirical tests. Section V concludes.



II. Data.

         The primary data source we use is the raw data file from the 1997 U.S. Commodity Flow

Survey (CFS). The CFS is collected every five years by the U.S. Census Bureau, which chooses

a stratified sample of U.S. mining, manufacturing, and wholesale establishments4. The sampled

establishments report characteristics of a random sample of their shipments. Each shipment

record contains the shipment’s weight (in pounds), value and SCTG commodity classification,5

an establishment identifier, the shipper’s (SIC) industrial classification, the zip code of the

shipment’s origin and destination, the actual shipping distance between them, and a sampling

weight for each shipment.6

         These are the best available data documenting intra-national shipments, and are

substantially better for our purposes than the publicly available CFS data used by Wolf (2000)

and Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), or the Statistics Canada data employed by McCallum

(1995) and subsequent authors. There are many advantages to using the CFS raw data file. First,


4
  The Census Bureau unit of analysis is establishments, not firms. Each establishment in multi-establishment firms
is treated as distinct.
5
  The Standard Classification of Transported Goods (SCTG) classification system is related to the Harmonized
System, with some modifications that suit it to studies of transportation. Our data are reported with 5-digit detail,
where there are 512 commodity groupings.
6
  The value and weight of shipments are calculated by multiplying reported estimates by the inverse of the sampling
weight. Other data available in our sample, but unused in this study, include a flag for shipments of hazardous
materials, the shipment mode used to transport the good, a binary variable denoting shipments bound for export, and
the destination of export shipments. Unfortunately, export destination was not a focus of the Census Bureau’s data
collection effort, and reported information on export destination is noisy and incomplete.


                                                                                                                   5
the data are drawn from stratified random samples of actual shipments. This is in sharp contrast

with the Statistics Canada data, which are imputed from at least ten distinct data sources.7

        Second, the total value of trade between two locations is an aggregation over shipments.

Unlike other studies, we observe the shipment level details and can unpack this aggregation.

This allows us to decompose shipment values into the number of shipments and the average

value per shipment. We can also go further, separating values into prices and quantities, and

separating numbers of shipments into number of commodities shipped and numbers of unique

establishment-destination pairs per commodity shipped.

        Third, knowing the SIC code of the establishments allows us to distinguish wholesale

shipments from producer shipments. This distinction is important because manufacturers and

wholesalers serve an entirely different economic function. Typically, products reach consumers

through a spatial value chain: producers ship to wholesalers, and wholesalers ship locally to

retailers. Previous work has shown wholesale shipments to be localized to a far greater degree

than shipments from producers.8 Including wholesalers in the sample both double counts

shipments and imparts a strong bias in favor of highly localized shipments.

        Fourth, because we know the 5-digit postal zip code of the origin establishment and the

5-digit zip code of the destination we are able to describe the geography of shipments on a very

fine grid.9 There are 29,194 such zip codes in our data, with a median population of 2802

persons. The median distance between the central places of a zip code and its closest neighbor is

4 miles. Unlike state or national political borders, these zip codes are allocated in rough

proportion to population density. Where economic activity is dense we have a finer geographic

grid on which to measure it. In many of our exercises, we employ 3-digit zip code detail. There
7
  The Statistics Canada documentation of the imputation algorithm is 48 pages long.
8
  Hillberry and Hummels (2003).
9
  We also know true distances, how far a shipment must travel given existing road and rail lines, and can employ
these rather than “as the crow flies” straight line distances.


                                                                                                                   6
are 873 such codes, with a median population of 218,432 persons, and central places a median

distance of 21 miles from the central place of their nearest neighbor.10

         This detail is critical for properly identifying spatial frictions in the data. Most work on

trade frictions analyzes trade between locations as if they were dimensionless points in space.

But locations, whether measured as nations or as intra-national regions (states or provinces), are

geographical aggregates of many possible origin/destination pairs. This can create measurement

problems in several important instances.

         The literature on home bias examines whether shipments are greater within than across

borders, controlling for measured distances. It is common to include shipments within a

particular location, which requires researchers to approximate internal distances. (If we want to

know whether Texas trades with itself to an unusual degree we must first measure how far is

Texas from itself.)      If constructed internal distance measures overstate how far shipments travel

within a particular geographic grouping, estimates will be biased toward finding that political

borders reduce trade.11 To solve this problem it is necessary to measure actual distances on a

very fine grid.

         Finally, the effects of distance on trade are typically assumed to be log-linear, with

estimated elasticities on the order of -1.0. It is perhaps plausible that doubling distance will

halve trade when the distances in question are 500 and 1000 miles. Is it also plausible that trade

will be halved when the distances in question are 5 and 10 miles? This is not a question that

researchers who lack a very fine geographic grid can answer. Putting in higher order

polynomials is no help either, unless one has shipments data that covers the relevant range of

10
   When measuring distances between 3-digit zip code regions we use the simple average distance of all 5-digit zip
code pairs within those 3-digit regions in which trade occurs.
11
   Related, a robust fact from the literature on spatial frictions is that adjacent regions trade more with each other
than can be predicted by measured distances alone. This finding may be a simple artifact of measurement.
Distances between neighboring states are commonly measured from central place to central place, but much trade
may occur between highly proximate origin-destination pairs lying on either side of a border.


                                                                                                                         7
distance variation.

       We can capture how far a shipment has actually moved (to a precision of 4 miles), rather

than impute it from central place distances. These features allow us to separate the effect of very

short shipment distances from “home bias” spuriously created by poor measures of internal

distance. And, since origin-destination pairs are distributed continuously from 1 to 3000 miles

we are able to assess nonlinear effects of distance on shipments with greater precision.

       We also employ a private sample of the 1997 Census of Manufactures. We use these

data to generate gross output and value added figures for 4-digit SIC industries at the levels of

geography as fine as the 5-digit zip code level. This also allows us to calculate predicted

industrial demands at fine levels of geographic detail, by multiplying the vector of zip code level

production by a matrix of industrial inputs taken from the U.S. Input-output table (Bureau of

Economic Analysis) in 1997.



III. Decomposing trade and spatial frictions

       The effects of spatial frictions on trade are commonly assessed using a gravity model of

trade. As a point of departure, consider a derivation of this model contained in Krugman (1980).

In Krugman, consumers have constant-elasticity of substitution (CES) preferences over

differentiated varieties produced by monopolistically competitive firms. Consumers buy all

varieties in positive quantities. The quantity of a variety from origin region i purchased by

consumers in region j is given by

                   pi−σ tij−σ   
(1)     qij = E j               
                   Pj
                                 

E j is region j’s total expenditure on the differentiated product, assumed to be independent of the




                                                                                                    8
origin region. pi tij is the price of i’s good at destination j, assumed to vary across regions only

because of some iceberg trade cost tij . That is, because demands are CES and because trade

costs are iceberg, or proportional to the value shipped, the same factory gate price is charged to
                                                                                    ~
all destinations. Finally, σ is the elasticity of substitution among varieties, and Pj a

transformation of the region j price index.

           Since the data usually employed do not allow the econometrician to observe the

quantities of a particular unique variety it is necessary to aggregate. This requires additional

assumptions: all varieties in origin region i are symmetric (prices are equal), and destination

region j will consume all these varieties in the same quantity. This allows us to first multiply

quantity per variety by prices to get observable values and second to multiply by the number of

varieties to get total values shipped. This gives

                                      pi1−σ tij −σ   
(2)         Tij = pi ni qij = E j ni                 
                                      Pj
                                                      

Suppose we are interested in assessing the effect of spatial frictions such as distance on the

aggregate value of bilateral trade. The relationship is the same in equations (1) and (2). That is,

bilateral variation in spatial frictions affects aggregate trade values only because they affect qij .12

           Most studies of spatial frictions stop here simply because they cannot separately identify

the individual components in equation (2), except perhaps to estimate commodity level versions

of it. Our data, however, allow a closer look. We examine a less restrictive econometric model

in which quantities, prices and the number of varieties vary across destinations and can co-vary



12
     Apart from the direct effect operating through tij , Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) note that there are indirect
effects of barriers on exporter prices and importer price indices. However, these effects are constant for a given
region, do not vary over partners, and will be controlled for in our estimates. Our focus is on the left hand side of
(2), where qij is the only component of Tij with bilateral variation.


                                                                                                                         9
with spatial frictions.

(3)      Tij = pij nij qij

         Prices (exclusive of shipping costs) may vary across destinations if demand is not CES

(so that a quantity change induced by frictions also changes the relevant demand elasticity and

therefore markups), or if transport costs are not of the iceberg form.13

         The literature has suggested several reasons why the number of traded varieties might co-

vary with spatial frictions. The first and simplest explanation is that the goods produced in

locations i and j are homogeneous. If production costs in the two locations are sufficiently

similar, or the trade costs sufficiently large, these goods will not be traded. Of course, the further

away are trade partners, the more likely goods are to fall into this non-traded category.14 An

example of this phenomenon might be Coca-Cola bottlers, who set up multiple establishments

around the country producing identical goods for local shipment.

         A slightly more complicated version of this story assumes that consumers view output as

differentiated by region, not homogeneous. Starting with the usual CES utility function, demand

per variety is given by equation (1). If shipment requires a fixed cost per variety, then spatial

frictions may reduce quantities exported to the point that firms can no longer cover fixed costs.

In this case, the number of traded varieties will depend negatively on the size of spatial frictions

(i.e. be decreasing in distance). As discussed in the introduction, the idea that not all varieties

will be traded has substantial support when looking at international data, and there is some

evidence that this effect is correlated with ad-valorem costs (tariffs and transport costs). The

literature has much less to say about whether the fixed cost story is relevant for shipments within


13
   Hummels and Skiba (2004) find strong support for the latter contention, and show that factory gate prices for a
particular exporter and product positively co-vary with shipping costs across destinations.
14
   See Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson (1977) for this result in a two-location world, and the generalization to
the n-country case in Eaton and Kortum (2002).


                                                                                                                     10
a particular country15, or whether this effect contributes in an important way to the overall effect

of spatial frictions on trade.16

         A third explanation turns on the idea that not all varieties are consumer goods. Suppose

that region i produces an intermediate good that is useful only as an input into producing a

particular final good. If region j does not produce that final good, it has no use for region i’s

output. To complete the story, the production “match” (the likelihood that region i produces

inputs that region j’s industry wants to consume) is stronger when the two regions are proximate.

If production is footloose and demand for specific inputs is geographically concentrated, up- and

downstream firms will co-locate (see Eaton and Kortum (2002) or Krugman and Venables

(1996)).



III.A Decomposition methodology

         To examine equation (3) empirically we decompose the aggregate value of trade flowing

from region i to region j as follows. Indexing unique shipments by s, Tij =                (∑   Nij
                                                                                                           )
                                                                                                      P Qijs is the
                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                s =1 ij



total value of shipments from region i to region j, N ij is the number of unique shipments (the

extensive margin), and PQ ij is the average value per shipment (the intensive margin), or


(4)      Tij = N ij * PQ ij

“Unique” in this case means that we have at most one observation per origin establishment x

SCTG commodity code x 5-digit destination zip code triplet. If the same establishment ships the


15
   This explanation requires that the fixed costs be paid for each destination, which seems plausible in an
international context, where fixed costs of trade are often described as costs associated with search and information
or establishment of distribution networks. To apply this story in the context of our data requires that fixed costs be
zip code specific and operating at a radius of 4 miles from the shipper’s establishment.
16
   Evans (2001) shows that industries that export a smaller share of output exhibit larger border effects in US-
Canadian trade. However, this is an indirect inference as Evans cannot discern in the trade data the presence or
absence of shipments by individual firms, only aggregate values.


                                                                                                                      11
same product to the same 5-digit destination zip code more than once, we aggregate and count

that as a single shipment. In this way we treat as similar 10 shipments of $100, or 1 shipment of

$1000. In the data sample we employ, the modal and median number of shipments per unique

establishment x commodity x destination is one.17 “Region” is defined flexibly, using zip codes

of origin and destination. In some cases we will use the finest geographic detail (5-digit zips),

while in others we will use less detail (typically 3-digit zip codes).

        There can be multiple unique shipments within an origin-destination region pair. We can

further decompose the number of shipments into N ijk , the number of distinct SCTG commodities

shipped, and N ijF , the average number of shipments between a unique origin establishment and a

unique destination zip code per commodity.

(5)      N ij = N ijk * N ijF

When we are measuring regions at the 5-digit zip code, N ijF > 1 means that we observed more

than one unique establishment per commodity in region i shipping to zip code j. If we are

measuring regions at the 3-digit zip code level, N ijF > 1 could result from seeing more than one

unique establishment per commodity and/or having multiple (5-digit) destination regions within

the 3-digit region j.

        Finally, we decompose the average value per shipment into average price and average

quantity per shipment


(6)      PQ ij   =
                   (∑    Nij   s
                         s =1 ij
                                P Qijs   ) = (∑ P Q ) (∑ Q ) = P *Q
                                              Nij   s
                                              s =1 ij
                                                              s
                                                             ij
                                                                  Nij
                                                                  s =1   ij


                                              (∑ Q ) N
                                               Nij                            ij   ij
                          N ij                                      ij
                                               s =1     ij



Our units are weight (pounds) for all commodities. By using this common unit we are able to

17
  The mean is approximately 2, and is driven by a small number of cases in which we observe a large number of
repeated shipments.


                                                                                                                12
aggregate over dissimilar products, and to compare prices (per pound) across all commodities.

           We now have total trade between two regions, decomposed into four component parts.

Taking logs we have for the first level decomposition

(7)        ln Tij = ln N ij + ln PQ ij

and for the second level decomposition,

(8)        ln Tij = ln N ijk +ln N ijF + ln Pij + ln Qij



III.B. Decomposition Results

           We begin by analyzing how each component in equation (8) covaries with the distance

between origin-destination pairs. We use a kernel regression estimator to provide a smoothed

estimate of the relationship between (levels) of each element in (8) and distance shipped.18

           Figure 1 shows a kernel regression of Tij on distance. Value declines very rapidly with

distance, dropping off almost an entire order of magnitude between 1 and 200 miles, and is

nearly flat thereafter. This figure demonstrates that there is a significant advantage to observing

trade on a very fine geographic grid. Research that employs country level trade data ignores the

pronounced effect of distance on trade over very short distances. Even work that employs state

level trade data and imputes intra-state distances has the potential to misstate very short distance

effects.

           Figure 2 shows kernel regressions on distance of the two components of total value

captured in equation (7). The number of unique shipments drops very rapidly over distance, at

roughly the same rate as total value. In contrast, average value per shipment shows no clear

diminution over space. The plot rises then falls slightly over distance, with similar values at 50

18
  We use the Gaussian kernel estimator in STATA, calculated on n=100 points, and allowing the estimator to
calculate and employ the optimal bandwidth.


                                                                                                             13
and 3000 miles.

         Finally, Figure 3 shows kernel regressions on distance of the four components of total

value captured in equation (8). The number of shipments drops off over space due both to

reductions in the number of commodities shipped and number of shipments per commodity.

Note also that the distance profiles of these components are flatter than that of the total number

of shipments. The graph showing average values per shipment masks interesting variation in its

components. Price per pound rises, and average shipment weight over distance falls.

         Next we use linear regression analysis to decompose the effect of spatial frictions on total

shipment values. The advantage of this technique relative to the kernels is three-fold: we can

control for other covariates; we can address the significance of variables that have appeared in

the literature such as state borders; and by estimating how each component varies over space, we

can precisely gauge its contribution to the overall decline in trade values over distance.

         We take logs of total trade and each of its components given in equations (7) and (8), and

use each in turn as the dependent variable. We regress each on a vector of spatial variables X

after differencing all variables by origin region and destination region means. Referencing

equation (2), differencing in this manner eliminates variation in output and shipment prices

specific to origin regions, and expenditures and price levels that are specific to destination

regions, leaving only bilateral variation in the variables.19 The vector X includes logs of distance

(in miles), the square of log distance, and dummy variables that take a value of one if the flow

took place within the same zip code (ownzip) or state (ownstate). Including distance is standard

in gravity equations. We employ the other terms to investigate nonlinear effects of shipments

over very short distances, and also to see if political boundaries (state lines) that pose no


19
  Anderson and vanWincoop (2003) highlight the dangers of omitting prices and price indices as they are likely to
be correlated with trade frictions. We follow Hummels (2001) in differencing the data to control for these variables.


                                                                                                                  14
apparent impediment to trade survive better measurement of shipment distances.

         Because OLS is a linear operator, we can regress ln Tij on a variable in X, and its

components on the same variable in X, and the resulting coefficients will have a useful additive

property. For example, using the decomposition in (7), regressions of ln Tij , ln N ij , and ln PQ ij

on distance will yield coefficients βT = β N + β pq , where the subscripts refer to the dependent

variable. If doubling distance cuts shipments in half, some part of this effect may occur through

reducing the number of shipments, and some part through reducing the average value per

shipment. We can assess the importance of each by looking at the contribution of each

component to the total, e.g. if β N / βT = .75 then 75% of the total impact of distance on the value

of shipments comes through a reduction in the number of shipments.

         Table 1 reports results of regressions of ln Tij and its components on spatial variables,

with regions measured at the 3-digit zip code level. All our spatial variables are significantly

correlated with total value of shipments. Shipments are steeply declining in distance, but this

effect substantially flattens the further out shipments travel. In the final column of Table 1 we

evaluate the distance elasticity, including the quadratic term, at the sample mean distance of 523

miles. For aggregate trade, the distance elasticity is a third smaller at the sample mean than at

one mile. In addition, intra-state and intra-zip shipments are larger than those outside. Intra-

state shipments are exp(0.55)=1.73 times larger than interstate shipments, a magnitude that is

similar to Hillberry and Hummels (2003) estimates using states as the geographic unit of

measure.20 In addition, shipments within the same 3-digit code are exp(1.05)=2.86 times larger

than shipments outside the zip code. Putting these effects together, shipments inside the same 3

20
  Wolf (2000) finds an intra-state effect three times larger, but his data include wholesaling shipments. As in the
preferred specifications of Hillberry and Hummels (2003), Table 2, we use only manufacturing data, but our
geographic data are 3-digit zip codes rather than states.


                                                                                                                      15
digit zip are 4.95 times larger than those outside the state, after controlling for distance.

         The subsequent rows demonstrate which components of aggregate trade are responsible

for the spatial effects. Looking at the decomposition in (7), 96 percent of the aggregate, first-

order distance effect and 88 percent of the aggregate ownstate effect comes from the number of

shipments, while the aggregate ownzip effect is smaller than the effect operating through number

of shipments. In other words, average value per shipment is actually rising over short distances,

given the negative ownzip coefficient, while the number of shipments drops off very rapidly.21

         At larger distances, both the aggregate distance elasticity, and the fractional contribution

of the extensive margin to it, are falling. For example, at the sample mean of 523 miles, the

extensive margin represents 62 percent of the aggregate distance elasticity.22 It should be noted

that at this point nearly all of the effect of distance on shipment numbers has already been felt.

This can be seen most simply by inspecting the kernel regressions in Figures 1 and 2. Starting

from N > 200 for the most proximate pairs, there are only a handful of unique shipments still

being observed at distances beyond a few hundred miles. While the average value of these

shipments does decline at a similar rate as the number of shipments from this point, their

contribution to the overall trade-distance profile is quite minor.

         The substantial contribution of the extensive margin to falling trade values (especially

over short distances) is the first major result of this paper. It is important to emphasize that the

predominance of the extensive margin is not caused by over-sampling short shipments. There is

no correlation between Census’ sampling weights and the distance shipped. And we have

aggregated sample records in which there are multiple small shipments by the same

establishment, in the same SCTG commodity, to the same destination.

21
   The elasticity of average value per shipment with respect to distance is -0.345 at the sample mean distance of 523.
At 100 and 1000 miles, the estimated elasticities are -0.269 and -0.375, respectively.
22
   The extensive margin accounts for 74 and 57 percent of the trade elasticity at 100 and 1000 miles.


                                                                                                                   16
       Turning to the second-level decomposition of equation (8), we see a pattern similar to

that in the kernel regressions. The decline in number of shipments over space is coming equally

from two places. A larger number of commodities are shipped between proximate geographic

pairs, and proximate geographic pairs see a larger number of unique (establishment x destination

zip code) shipments per commodity

       Also similar to the kernels, we see that while average value per shipment does not change

much over distance, its components do. Increases in shipment distance correspond to increases

in average price per pound and decreases in average pound shipped. Examining the quadratic

terms we see that both effects grow stronger at greater distances. However, the two effects are

highly significant and opposite – mostly canceling one another out in the average value of

shipments measure.

        Viewed in isolation, the sharp declines in average shipment weights over larger distances

might appear to justify traditional theoretic and empirical treatments that assume “iceberg” trade

costs operating on qij as in equation (1). However these models also predict that f.o.b. prices

will be constant over space. Our evidence of offsetting price rises is more consistent with the

work of Hummels and Skiba (2004), who show that if delivered prices are additive in trade

frictions, p* = p + t , and transportation costs are increasing in product weight, average prices

will rise with distance while average quantities fall, the pattern we see in our data. The additive

trade frictions model is broadly consistent with a pattern of changes in the composition of the

traded bundle, i.e. goods with low value to weight ratios like cement travel shorter distances than

goods with high value to weight ratios like electronics. In later robustness checks, we address

whether this compositional change occurs within- or between-industries.

       It is also useful to project the components of equation (8) on spatial variables when




                                                                                                    17
employing the full 5-digit zip code detail provided in the data. The estimates are done in the

same manner, except that the variables are now differenced relative to their 5-digit origin and

destination zip code means, and ownzip now refers to shipments within the same 5-digit zip

code. The median radius of a 5-digit zip code is 4 miles.

        Table 2 reports results for the 5-digit zip code data that are markedly different from the 3-

digit data in Table 1. Concentrating on the total value regression, the regression fit is much

worse in all regressions, with an R2=.01. The elasticity of trade value with respect to distance is

-0.13, 1/10th that of the estimates from Table 1, and the coefficient on the own state variable is

actually negative but very close to zero. The only variable that comes through in a similar

fashion to Table 1 is ownzip; shipments are exp(1.1)=3 times higher within a 5-digit zip code

(median radius = 4 miles) than outside.

        Turning to the decomposition, we see more differences relative to the 3-digit data. While

average shipment values are high for very short distances (positive ownzip), they are thereafter

increasing in distance, and average values are higher outside states than within. Shipment

numbers are still declining in distance, but the elasticities are about 1/5th as large as before.

        We see two reasons for the large difference between the 3- and 5-digit data. The first

comes from employing a more precise distance measure, which shows up in the estimates on the

ownstate and ownzip variables. Earlier studies using CFS data at the state level (Wolf 2000,

Hillberry and Hummels 2003) find strong evidence of state-level home bias. We find that, after

controlling for distance and ownzip effects, there is no evidence of state home bias in the 5-digit

zip code data. In fact, the coefficient is negative. Related, the strength of the ownzip effect is

the same whether the zip code in question has a median radius of 4 miles (5-digit zips) or 30

miles (3-digit zips). This suggests to us that shipments are extremely localized, dropping off

rapidly over even very short distances. When measuring spatial frictions on broader geographic


                                                                                                     18
aggregates, even aggregates as small as 3-digit zip codes, these sharp distance declines are

captured by “home bias” dummy variables. This seems likely to confound any effort to attribute

“home bias” to plausible and measurable border barriers. The absence of state-level home bias

over fine levels of geographic aggregation is the second major result of this paper.

       The other difference between the 3- and 5-digit data is the much smaller effect of

distance on trade, and it is closely related to the dominant role played by number of shipments.

In both cases, average shipment values are mostly flat over distance, and the numbers of

shipments are driving the spatial composition of trade. When evaluated at the 5-digit zip code

level there are over 800 million origin-destination pairs. Our data show shipments between less

than 1 percent of those pairs, and the remaining pairs are dropped from the regression. When we

aggregate geographically we are adding together many 5-digit pairs contained within the 3-digit

pairs. As a result roughly half of the 3-digit zip code origin-destination pairs contain shipments.

       The lesson we take from this extends to broader geographic aggregation, to the level of

states, regions, and perhaps countries. Suppose that there is a low probability of a shipment

being observed between any 5-digit pair, with that probability dropping with distance. As we

aggregate geographically, an essentially binary dependent variable (presence or absence of

shipments) sums into a continuous variable (number of shipments) that co-varies strongly with

distance. Much of that co-variation is lost through censoring of zero values at the 5-digit level.

But when we aggregate from 5-digit to 3-digit, we see more commodities are shipped, and more

establishments shipping to more destinations. We return to this probabilistic view of trade flows

in Section IV.



III.C. Robustness: Commodity Level Decompositions

       There may be pronounced differences across commodities in their response to geographic


                                                                                                   19
frictions. We repeat the decomposition in equation (7) for each of 20 2-digit SIC industries23

using regions defined again at the 3-digit zip code level. The value of shipments in these

regressions is the value of 2-digit industry shipments, and the decomposition follows (1.4)-(1.8).

By mean-differencing the data we now remove variation in output, prices, and price levels that

are specific to origin-industry and destination-industry.

          In the interests of brevity we omit a full table of regression output, but the important

results from Table 1 go through at the commodity level. Most of the covariation between total

values shipped and spatial frictions is driven by the number of shipments. The regression fit is

very low for all dependent variables except those with the number of shipments as the dependent

variable. Focusing on these regressions, we find that the coefficients match the sign pattern from

Table 1 for all explanatory variables in all commodities. In 16 of the 20 industry level

regressions the average value per shipment is either insignificantly related to distance, or is rising

in distance.

          The one result from the aggregate regressions that does not hold up in the industry level

regressions is the spatial pattern of prices and quantities. In the aggregate we found that

quantities (weight) were falling over distance, while prices (per pound) were sharply rising. In

the commodity regressions, prices are either constant or falling over distance in 17 of 20

regressions, while weight is either constant or rising in distance for 17 of the 20. These results

suggest that the effect of distance on average price and average weight from the aggregate

estimates is driven by broad cross-industry, rather than within-industry, substitution in the traded

bundle.

          As a final robustness check, we examined whether industry characteristics could explain

23
  We organize the data by the SIC of the shipping establishment rather than the SCTG code of the commodity
shipped in order to use SIC industry characteristics. In these SIC industry decompositions, we continue to
investigate the number of SCTG commodities shipped per establishment x destination pair.


                                                                                                             20
either the strength of spatial variables (i.e. the coefficients on distance) or the relative

contribution of each component of trade to the aggregate value. We constructed elements of

equation (8) for each ij pair for each 4-digit SIC industry. We then pooled over all industries so

that an ij pair has as many observations as the number of 4-digit industries traded between them.

We regressed each element of (8) on spatial variables as well as an interaction between spatial

variables and industry characteristics including measures of scale (average number of employees

per establishment), tradability (the share of the transportation sector in industry gross output),

and intermediate / final goods status (the share of final consumption in industry sales).24 While

some interactions were statistically significant, they did not result in economically significant

changes in coefficients.

        What have we learned from these regressions? There are four main messages which

appear robust to our choices of geographic and commodity aggregation. First, spatial frictions

matter over even very short distances. At the most extreme, shipments destined within the same

5-digit zip code, i.e. within a 4 mile radius of the shipper, are 3 times higher than those outside

the zip code. Second, spatial frictions primarily reduce trade by reducing the number of

shipments. This effect is especially pronounced over short distances. Third, but related, average

shipment values are flat over short distances, and are only moderately sensitive to spatial

frictions at larger distances. Fourth, state-level home bias observed in more coarse geographic

data disappears when own 5-digit zip code dummies are included, and distance is measured

precisely.




24
  These regressions are similar to those conducted by Chen (2004), who interacts commodity characteristics with
the border dummy in European data. Our left hand side variables also include components of trade value, and our
data offer both finer geography and greater industry detail.


                                                                                                              21
IV. Explanations

       We noted above that most empirical work on spatial frictions is motivated by theoretical

models in which frictions affect only quantity per variety traded, and not the number of varieties.

However, the evidence in Section III suggests that for intra-national flows spatial frictions work

almost entirely through reducing the number of unique shipments, with little effect on the

average value traded per unique shipment.

       The previous literature suggests a few hypotheses that could explain this fact.

Our primary hypothesis is that goods produced at a distance are not purchased because there is

no local industrial demand for them. That is, region i produces an intermediate good that is not

employed by industry in importing region j. Models of co-location, such as Krugman and

Venables (1995) and Eaton and Kortum (2002), suggest that this is more likely to occur when the

two regions are distant. Our alternative hypothesis is that consumers substitute away from

distant goods because spatial frictions raise their price relative to local goods. Distance costs

could choke off trade entirely if consumers regard local and distant goods as homogeneous, or if

consumers regard them as differentiated but must pay a fixed cost to import.

       To sharpen the distinction, under the alternative hypothesis, consumers would buy a good

produced at a distance if the price became competitive with local alternatives. Under our

primary hypothesis of industrial inputs, there might be no demand for the good at any price.

That is, paper mills locate near forests, and auto assemblers near auto part plants. But an auto

assembler’s demand for uncut logs would not rise even if the assembler located near forests.

       One approach to separating these hypotheses might be to study the industrial

classification system, categorize goods as intermediate or final, and examine whether they

respond differently to frictions. The problem is that, at the level we see the data, all industries

contain both intermediate and final goods. And undoubtedly, elements of both hypotheses can


                                                                                                      22
be found in the data. Accordingly, we do not think of the exercises that follow as sharp tests of

any model. Rather they are intended to shed some light about some of the likely sources of the

Section III decomposition results.

       We provide three exercises. First, we examine variation across regions in industry

absorption to see if absorption is related to industrial structure. Second, we relate variation

across regions in import shares to regional variation in output and export shares. Third, the

decomposition results suggest that spatial frictions reduce trade primarily by eliminating

shipments entirely. We use probits to assess whether industrial demands affect the likelihood

that a good will be shipped between two regions.



IV.A. Spatial Variation in Absorption and Imports

       The Commodity Flow Survey data provides a record of commodity shipments into and

out of zip codes within the US. By summing over all incoming shipments, we are uniquely able

to construct absorption as the sum of expenditures on each product in each region. The simple

hypothesis is that regional industrial structure should help explain the pattern of bilateral

shipments. Regions that are large producers of autos should be more likely destinations for

shipments of auto parts.

       Define total actual absorption of a commodity k in region j using the sum of all CFS

shipments (T) from all source regions i, to absorbing region j (including i=j) in that commodity.

(9)     E kj = ∑ i Tijk

Commodity k is defined as a 4 digit SIC category. We also define e kj = E kj / ∑ E kj as the share
                                                                                 k


of k in j’s total absorption. There is a tremendous amount of variation across regions in these

absorption shares. To show this we calculate, for each 4 digit SIC industry, the mean and


                                                                                                     23
standard deviation of e kj over all 3-digit zip codes. The least variable SIC industry has sd/mean

= 1.19, that is, the region that is one standard deviation above the mean has an e kj 119% larger

than the mean. The median SIC industry has sd/mean = 4.11.

        We seek to explain observed absorption, e kj , with predicted absorption e kj , a variable we

construct from the 1997 U.S. Benchmark Input-output tables, and selected measures of regional

output and consumer expenditure. Data availability differs depending on whether we define

region at the state or 3-digit zip code level, and our measure of predicted absorption differs

accordingly. When constructing predicted absorption at the 3-digit zip code region, we employ

manufacturing value added for each zip code x 4-digit SIC industry taken from the non-public

Census of Manufactures data. When constructing predicted absorption at the state level, we use

personal income and Gross State Product by industry taken from the BEA. Gross State Product

data are somewhat more aggregated than the CoM data at the industry level, but provide us with

value added for non-manufacturing activities in addition to manufacturing.

        We construct predicted industrial demands by first calculating the ratio U kl / Y l from the

input-output table, where U kl is the value of industry k shipments in industry l gross output, and

Yl is industry l value added.25 We multiply this ratio by industry l value added in a region, Y jl .

Summing over all industries l in region j gives a measure of predicted industrial demand:

                        kl
                       U
(10)     E kj = ∑ Y jl l
                 l     Y



For 3-digit zip codes the summation runs only over manufacturing industries, and provides our


25
  We first concord Input-Output industries to the 4-digit SIC level. The concordance is complicated by a one-to-
many problem between I-O sectors and SIC industries. We address this problem by allocating 1/n of I-O sector use
to each of n SIC sectors in those lines where there is a one to many problem.


                                                                                                              24
complete measure of predicted absorption. For states this summation runs over all

manufacturing and services industries. To this industrial demand we add personal consumption

expenditures, constructed by multiplying final consumption expenditure shares for each industry

taken from the IO table by each state’s personal income. We then express the level of j’s

predicted absorption of k in shares, as above.

         We regress the share of industry k in region j’s absorption (taken from the Commodity

Flow Survey), on imputed share of industrial demands for k in j (constructed from data on

output, incomes, and input-output tables).

(11)     e kj = α k + β e kj + ε kj .

We conduct the regression in levels, pool over all commodities26 and include a commodity fixed

effect.27

         An important feature of our data is that the right and left hand sides of the estimating

equation come from different datasets. The more common approach to measuring absorption is

                                                                                                        k         k
to calculate output less net exports, which means that the level of output enters both e j and e j .

In our data the two are not correlated by construction.

         Results are reported in Table 3. The first two columns define a region as a state. The

first column includes all expenditure, and the second column excludes personal consumption

expenditures from imputed absorption, leaving only intermediate demands. The third column

defines a region as a 3-digit zip code, and calculates imputed demands arising only from

manufacturing output.

         Our estimates suggest that imputed industrial demands do help predict regional

26
   We also estimated equation (11) separately for each 4 dig SIC sector. Results are qualitatively similar, though in
general the coefficients are larger and the regression fit is somewhat worse.
27
   The fixed effect soaks up some of the variation due to concordance problems, and serves as a control for relative
industry size. Regressions that omit industry fixed effects yield similar coefficients, but a lower regression fit.


                                                                                                                      25
expenditure patterns. The coefficient on imputed industrial demands is positive, and precisely

estimated, but less than one in every case.28 Despite data limitations, we find that the production

structure of US regions, and their resulting industrial demands, are strongly related to

idiosyncrasies in the absorption patterns of those regions. This result is in marked contrast to the

literature on international shipments. Harrigan (1995) finds no relationship between the

commodity structure of a country’s imports and the output mix of the country.



IV.B. Regional import shares: coals to Newcastle?

         Our alternative hypothesis, that consumers substitute away from “foreign” goods because

distance costs raise their price relative to local goods, contains a useful implication. Holding

constant demand, consumers are more likely to import distant goods if local goods are

unavailable. Put another way, imports should be negatively related to local output of the good.29

         In contrast, industry imports may be positively correlated with local output in that

industry if spatial variation in absorption is driven by industrial demands. To explain, simple

inspection of input-output relationships shows that a substantial portion of industrial expenditure

on intermediate inputs goes toward the purchase of own-industry output. For example, SIC

industry 3711 “Motor Vehicles and Passenger Car Bodies” includes both finished cars and

unfinished car parts like bodies and chassis. As a consequence, a region may have both high

output (cars) and high imports (chassis) in a particular SIC industry.

         To examine this, we construct the total value of industry k imports into region j as

M kj = ∑ i ≠ j Tijk = E kj − T jjk , or industry absorption less shipments from j to itself. We then

28
   While we would expect a coefficient of one, mismeasurement of predicted demands caused by concordance
problems in the IO table could cause attenuation bias toward zero.
29
   In a homogeneous goods model, fix the demand curve and the foreign supply price, and shift the supply curve in.
This results in a fall in the quantity supplied locally and a rise in imports. In a model with CES differentiated goods,
reducing the number of varieties of local goods will raise the price index, making foreign goods more attractive at a
given price, increasing imports.


                                                                                                                     26
express this as a share of j’s total imports, m kj = M kj / ∑ M kj and regress it on industry k’s share
                                                                k



of gross output in region j, g kj = GO kj / ∑ GO kj , as reported in the Census of Manufactures.
                                              k



(12)     m kj = α k + β g kj + u kj

We pool the regression over all 4-digit SIC industries, including a fixed effect for each industry

to capture relative industry size. Regions are defined flexibly as 2, 3, and 5 digit zip codes.

        Our results are reported in table 4. At all three levels of geographic aggregation, we find

that regions that are large producers of a given industry tend to be large importers of that

industry’s products. The effect is stronger when importing regions are defined over larger areas.

The estimated coefficient on 2-digit shipments is 0.132, and on 5-digit zip codes is 0.074.30

These positive coefficients indicate a pervasive “coals to Newcastle” effect in U.S.

manufacturing shipments.

        Positive estimates of β in (12) could be consistent with a model in which region j has, for

some unknown reason, idiosyncratically large consumer demand for some constant returns to

scale industry k. In this case, satisfying local consumption might require high levels of both

local output and imports. To address this, we repeat the estimates, replacing gross output shares

in region j with export shares out of region j, taken from the CFS. The results, also reported in

Table 4, reveal very similar results. Regions that export idiosyncratically large shares of a given

industry also import idiosyncratically large shares of that industry.31 While the strength of the

coals-to-Newcastle effect is smaller when exports are the independent variable, the coefficients

remain positive and statistically significant.

30
   The regressions include many cases where either the production or import share of industry k was zero. This is
less likely at the two digit zip code level, and probably is responsible for the larger coefficient in the more
aggregated regression.
31
   Recall that we have excluded wholesale shipments from the data, so we are not observing wholesalers’ re-exports
of industry k output.


                                                                                                                27
         The coals-to-Newcastle effect we find is related to, and could be caused by, the home

market effect proposed by Krugman(1980), and identified empirically in work by Davis and

Weinstein (2003), Hanson and Xiang (2004) and Head and Ries (2001). The home market effect

works as follows. If region j has idiosyncratically large demand for industry k whose production

is subject to increasing returns to scale, output of k in j may rise by more than the demand shock.

In principle this could result in region j simultaneously having idiosyncratically high absorption,

imports, and exports in industry k. However, the unanswered question in the home market effect

literature is where, precisely, these idiosyncratic demand shocks come from. One natural

explanation is that intermediate demands are a key source of the demand variation observed in

empirical studies of the home market effect.32



IV.C. Probits.

         Recalling Table 1, the aggregate trade-distance relationship in intra-US trade is largely

driven by the fact that most establishments ship only to geographically proximate customers,

rather than shipping to many customers in values that decrease in distance. Conditional on a

shipment taking place, its values are largely unaffected by spatial frictions. In this section we

turn to a probit analysis of the likelihood that trade in a given origin-destination pair is observed.

The most general specification is as follows:

                       β k + β k ln Dist + β k ( ln Dist )2 + β k Ownzip + β k Ownstate 
(13) Pr( Iij = 1) = Φ                                                                   ,
           k              0     1        ij   2          ij      3            4

                       + β k ln GOk + β k ln Popk + β k ln E k + β k ln GOk + ε k      
                       5           i     6         j   7      j    8       j    ij      

where I ijk = 1 if industry k ships from region i to region j.

         The first four independent variables – distance, distance squared, ownzip and ownstate –

32
  Presumably, this effect would go away if trade data, and input-output linkages, were sufficiently granular that we
could separate specific final goods from the specific intermediate inputs they employ.


                                                                                                                  28
are the spatial frictions that appear in our decomposition regressions from Section III. We also

include a “supply” variable, GOik , the value of industry k gross output in origin region i, as

measured by the Census of Manufactures, and control for the size of demand by including the

population of the destination region ( POPjk ).

         Our primary interest lies in variables that might help explain the composition of demand.

We include predicted industrial demand ( E kj ) as constructed in Section IV.A to see if destination

region output mix, and the implied demand for inputs, helps predict the presence of shipments.

Following the “Coals to Newcastle” results from the section IV.B., we also experiment with

including the gross output of industry k in destination region j ( GO kj ). If distance operates

through consumer substitution toward local varieties, greater output of commodity k in

destination region j should lower the likelihood that k is shipped to j. A positive coefficient on

ln( GO kj ) would be consistent with the coals to Newcastle effect operating, in part, through the

extensive margin.

         We conduct our analysis at the 3-digit zip code level of geography, estimating probit

models pooled over all observations within a two-digit SIC category.33 Coefficients on spatial

frictions match those from Table 1 for all commodities. We report estimated coefficients on

ln(GOik ) , ln( Pop j ) , ln( E kj ) and ln(GO kj ) in Table 5.34 As expected we find that increases in

origin region i output and destination region j population raise the propensity of two regions to

trade. In 13 of 20 industries, the coefficient on our constructed industrial demands is positive

and statistically significant, as expected. The coefficient estimate on destination region output is

33
   It would be interesting to perform this estimate at the 5-digit zip code level, or for more disaggregated SIC data,
but this would have exceeded memory constraints.
34
   We also estimated (4.3) excluding destination region output. This had no impact on the spatial frictions, but
generally raised the estimated coefficient on industrial demands, making it positive and statistically significant in
two more cases.


                                                                                                                     29
positive and significant in 18 of 20 sectors. Similar to the evidence on import shares, having

more industry k output in the destination region increases, rather than decreases the likelihood of

shipments. These results provide further support for our hypothesis that trade in intermediate

inputs is responsible for the large extensive margin.



V. Conclusions and Implications

       We employ a unique data set, the Commodity Flow Survey, which allows us to track

shipments on a very fine geographic grid within the United States. We use these data to shed

light on why spatial frictions matter for trade by isolating which components of trade they most

affect. Our decomposition provides several new findings.

       First, spatial frictions matter, and indeed have the greatest impact, over very short

distances. Shipments destined within the same 5-digit zip code, i.e. within a 4 mile radius of the

shipper, are 3 times higher than those outside the zip code. Trade values fall an order of

magnitude between 1 and 200 miles, and are relatively flat thereafter.

       The highly nonlinear effect of distance on trade may help explain some results in the

“home bias” literature. While our estimates on 3-digit zip code data reveal that intra-state

shipments are significantly higher than cross-state shipments, this effect disappears entirely when

shipment distances are measured more accurately using 5-digit zip codes. We instead find that

the “borders” between 5-digit zip codes represent a sizeable barrier to trade. We consider these

zip-code effects the reductio ad absurdum of the home bias literature. While one can imagine

many barriers to trade that operate at national borders, it is harder to conceive of what barriers

plausibly operate at state borders, and harder still to imagine those associated with 5-digit zip

codes. Our results suggest that “home bias”, at least in state borders, is an artifact of geographic

aggregation. Since shipments drop off extraordinarily rapidly over very short distances, attempts


                                                                                                     30
to measure border effects on larger geographical groupings are nearly certain to ascribe the

nonlinear effects of distance to “home bias” dummy variables.

        Second, and in contrast with the theoretical models typically used to underpin gravity

models of trade, we show that spatial frictions reduce trade primarily by reducing the number of

shipments. That is, the aggregate trade-distance relationship in intra-US trade is driven by the

fact that most establishments ship only to geographically proximate customers, rather than

shipping to many customers in quantities that decrease in distance. Conditional on a shipment

taking place, its value is largely unaffected by spatial frictions.

        To explain these results, we examine two hypotheses about why spatial frictions matter.

The first hypothesis, consistent with the modeling framework in most of the literature on spatial

frictions, focuses on final demand for consumer goods. It asserts that demand is uniform but

goods are not imported because local substitutes are available at lower prices. The second

hypothesis focuses on intermediate inputs. It asserts that demand is not uniform, and goods are

not imported because there is no local industrial demand for them.

        We find three pieces of evidence to support the intermediate inputs hypothesis. We show

that industry level absorption varies considerably across regions, and is ably predicted by

industrial structure and demand for intermediate inputs. Similarly, the likelihood of a particular

shipment occurring is closely related to industrial structure: goods are more likely to be imported

into a region when industrial demand for that good is high Finally, and in contrast to models

where local consumer goods substitute for expensive “foreign” alternatives, regions import

intensively those industries in which they have both high output, and high exports. That is, we

observe intra-industry trade even at the level of 5-digit zip codes. This seems most plausibly

explained by the intra-industry exchange of intermediate inputs for assembled outputs.

        These results complement work showing that relatively few firms ship internationally


                                                                                                   31
(Bernard and Jensen, 1999; Bernard et al 2003), and that conditional on exporting, firms ship to

relatively few destinations (Eaton, Kortum, Kramarz 2004). Our data show that shipping to

few, local, markets also characterizes shipments within a country. These authors emphasize cost

advantages of firms, showing that the most productive firms export, and export to more

destinations, while we emphasize specialized industrial demands. We leave to future work

whether there might be gains from trade between these explanations. That is, can differences in

productivity help explain which firms ship to more markets within a country, and can

specialization in input demands shed light on why so few firms export internationally?




                                                                                               32
Bibliography



Amiti, Mary and Lisa Cameron 2003, “Economic Geography and Wages,” University of
     Melbourne, mimeo.

Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop 2003, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
    Puzzle,” American Economic Review, 93, pp. 170-92.

Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum, 2003, “Plants and
     Productivity in International Trade”, American Economic Review, 93, pp. 1269-1290.

Bernard, Andrew and Bradford Jensen. 1999, “Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause,
     Effect, or Both?” Journal of International Economics, 47, pp 1-25.

Chen, Natalie 2004, “Intra-national versus international trade in the European Union: why do
    national borders matter?” Journal of International Economics, 63, pp. 93-118.

Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein 2003, “Market Access, Economic Geography, and
     Comparative Advantage: An Empirical Test,” Journal of International Economics, 59, pp.
     1-23.

Disdier, Anne-Célia and Keith Head 2004, “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on
     Bilateral Trade,” University of British Columbia, mimeo.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fisher, and Paul Samuelson 1977, “Comparative Advantage, Trade
    and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic
    Review, 67, pp. 823-839.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, 2002, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
     70, pp. 1741-1779.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz, 2004, “An Anatomy of International
     Trade: Evidence from French Firms” mimeo. NYU.

Evans, Carolyn L. 2001, “Border Effects and the Availability of Domestic Products Abroad”
    Federal Reserve Bank of New York, mimeo.

Hanson, Gordon H. and Chong Xiang 2004, “The Home Market Effect and Bilateral Trade
    Patterns,” American Economic Review, 94, pp. 1108-1129.

Harrigan, James 1995, “The Volume of Trade in Differentiated Intermediate Goods: Theory and
     Evidence,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(2), (May) pp. 283-293.




                                                                                               33
Head, Keith and John Ries 2001, “Increasing Returns Versus Product Differentiation as an
    Explanation for the Pattern of US-Canada Trade, American Economic Review, 91, pp. 858-
    876.

Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels 2003, “Intra-national Home Bias: Some Explanations,”
     The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), pp. 1089-1092.

Hillberry, Russell and Christine McDaniel 2002, “A Decomposition of North American Trade
     Growth since NAFTA,” USITC Working Paper 2002-12-A (July).

Hummels, David 2001, “Toward a Geography of Trade Costs,” Purdue University, mimeo.

Hummels, David and Peter Klenow 2004, “The Variety and Quality of A Nation’s Exports,”
   American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Hummels, David and Alexandre Skiba 2004, “Shipping the Good Apples Out? An Empirical
   Confirmation of the Alchian Allen Conjecture” Journal of Political Economy, 112(6), pp.
   1384-1402.

Kehoe, Timothy J and Kim J Ruhl 2003, “How Important is the New Goods Margin in
    International Trade?” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report 324.

Klenow, Peter and Andres Rodriguez-Clare 1997, “Quantifying Variety Gains from Trade
     Liberalization,” Stanford University, mimeo.

Krugman, Paul 1980, “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
    American Economic Review, 70, pp. 950-959.

Krugman, Paul and Anthony Venables 1996, “Integration, Specialization, and Adjustment,”
    European Economic Review, 40, pp. 959-967.

McCallum, John 1995, “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade Patterns,”
   American Economic Review, 85, pp. 615-623.

Midelfart-Knarvik, Karen-Helene, Henry Overman and Anthony Venables 2001, “Comparative
    advantage and Economic Geography; Estimating the Location of Production in the EU,”
    CEPR Discussion Paper 2618.

Romer, Paul 1994, “New Goods, Old Theory and the Welfare Costs of Trade Restrictions”
    Journal of Development Economics, 43, pp. 5-38.

Wolf, Holger C. 2000, “Intra-national Home Bias in Trade,” The Review of Economics and
     Statistics, 82(4) (November), pp. 555-563.




                                                                                            34
                                                          Figure 1: Kernel Regressions


                             Kernel regression: value on distance

                   247125
Thousand Dollars




                   2834.17
                              0 200     500        1000                          2000    3000
                                                                         Miles
                                                  Figure 2: Kernel Regressions

                                 Kernel regression: average shipment value on distance

                   1877.69




Thousand Dollars




                   900.819
                                  0 200     500       1000                     2000      3000
                                                                       Miles


                         Kernel regression: number of shipments on distance

         204.836




         2.61877
                             0    200     500        1000                     2000       3000
                                                                      Miles
                                                                                   Figure 3: Kernel Regressions

                            Kernel regression: number of commodities on distance

                   19.999                                                                                                     Kernel regression: number of shipments per commodity on distance

                                                                                                                   7.48131
   Number




                                                                                                         Number
                  1.83705                                                                                          1.27749
                              0 200     500        1000                    2000       3000                                     0 200     500        1000                     2000                3000
                                                                   Miles                                                                                             Miles


                            Kernel regression: price on distance                                                             Kernel regression: weight on distance

                  190833                                                                                          3.01559




                                                                                                  Thousand Tons
Dollars per ton




                  22857.3                                                                                         .205851
                             0 200     500        1000                     2000      3000                                     0 200     500        1000                      2000                3000
                                                                   Miles                                                                                             Miles
                                         Table 1. Decomposing Spatial Frictions
                                                  (3-digit zip code data)

                                dist        dist2    ownzip      ownstate      constant        Adj. R2         N         εD
value                           -1.348      0.035     1.051        0.549        -20.992         0.13        333021     -0.910
( Tij )                        (0.045)     (0.004)   (0.084)      (0.020)       (0.141)
# of shipments                  -1.292      0.058     1.232        0.481         -7.021         0.36        333029     -0.566
( N ij )                       (0.016)     (0.001)   (0.031)      (0.007)       (0.051)


      # of trading pairs        -0.638      0.037     0.813        0.161         -2.907         0.16        333029     -0.175
                 (N
                       F
                           )   (0.010)     (0.001)   (0.018)      (0.004)       (0.031)
                      ij



      # of commodities          -0.653      0.021     0.419        0.319         -4.114         0.32        333029     -0.391
                       k
                  ( N ij )     (0.011)     (0.001)   (0.022)      (0.005)       (0.036)

avg. value                      -0.057      -0.023    -0.182       0.069        -13.971         0.02        333021     -0.345
( PQ ij )                      (0.038)     (0.003)   (0.071)      (0.017)       (0.119)


              avg. price        0.389       0.032     -0.232       -0.385        2.909          0.14        333021      0.790
                   ( Pij )     (0.035)     (0.003)   (0.065)      (0.016)       (0.110)


             avg. weight        -0.445      -0.055    0.051        0.454        -16.880         0.12        333021     -1.135
                  ( Qij )      (0.054)     (0.004)   (0.101)      (0.024)       (0.169)

Notes:
1. Regression of (log) shipment value and its components from equations (7) and (8) on geographic variables. Dependent variables in left hand
column. Coefficients in right-justified rows sum to coefficients in left justified rows.
2. Standard errors in parentheses.
3. ε D is the elasticity of trade with respect to distance, evaluated at the sample mean distance of 523 miles.
                                             Table 2. Decomposing Spatial Frictions
                                                      (5-digit zip code data)

                                    dist         dist2    ownzip    ownstate    constant      Adj. R2       N          εD
value                               -0.137       -0.004    1.102     -0.024      -13.393       0.01      1290788     -0.187
( Tij )                            (0.009)      (0.001)   (0.030)   (0.007)      (0.026)

# of shipments                      -0.294       0.017     0.883     0.043        -1.413       0.10      1290840     -0.081
( N ij )                           (0.002)      (0.000)   (0.008)   (0.002)      (0.007)


          # of trading pairs        -0.159       0.008     0.540     0.029        -0.888       0.05      1290840     -0.059
                    (N
                          F
                               )   (0.002)      (0.000)   (0.007)   (0.002)      (0.006)
                         ij



          # of commodities          -0.135       0.009     0.342     0.014        -0.525       0.10      1290840     -0.022
                     (N )
                           k       (0.001)      (0.000)   (0.003)   (0.001)      (0.003)
                          ij

avg. value                          0.157        -0.021    0.219     -0.067      -11.980       0.00      1290788     -0.106
( PQ ij )                          (0.008)      (0.001)   (0.028)   (0.006)      (0.024)


                 avg. price         -0.032       0.036     -0.115    -0.154       0.021        0.08      1290788      0.419
                      ( Pij )      (0.007)      (0.001)   (0.024)   (0.006)      (0.020)


               avg. weight          0.189        -0.058    0.334     0.087       -12.001       0.05      1290788     -0.537
                      ( Qij )      (0.011)      (0.001)   (0.037)   (0.009)      (0.031)

Notes:
1. Regression of (log) shipment value and its components from equations (7) and (8) on geographic variables. Dependent variables in left hand
column. Coefficients in right-justified rows sum to coefficients in left justified rows.
2. Standard errors in parentheses.
3. ε D is the elasticity of trade with respect to distance, evaluated at the sample mean distance of 523 miles.
          Table 3. Predicting Absorption with Industrial Demands.

                         Region = state                                    Region = 3-digit zip
Imputed absorption Manufacturing +                Manufacturing +          Manufacturing
includes           services + personal            services
                         consumption

e kj                    0.684                    0.412                    0.313
                         (0.020)                  (0.012)                  (0.002)
Adj. R2                  0.47                     0.46                     0.142
N                        16000                    16000                    395819
Notes:
1. Estimation of equation (11). Dependent variable is industry k share of region j absorption.
2. Industry k fixed effects included.
3. Standard errors in parentheses. All coefficients significant at the 1% level.
         Table 4. Coals to Newcastle? Predicting regional import shares

                              5-digit zip code               3-digit zip code               2-digit zip code
gross output share        0.074                          0.110                          0.132
                          (0.0003)                       (0.001)                        (0.002)
export share                            0.045                          0.069                           0.119
                                        (0.0003)                       (0.001)                         (0.002)
adjusted R2               0.026         0.022            0.124         0.111            0.398          0.393
N                         5200440       5200440          390939        390939           44394          44394
Notes:
1. Estimation of equation (12). Dependent variable is industry k share of region j imports.
2. “Export” shipments are shipments that leave the zip code, but are bound for U.S. destinations.
3. SIC fixed-effects included
4. Standard errors in parentheses. All coefficients significant at the 1% level.
                                         Table 5. Probit estimation

             Origin          Destination     Imputed industrial    Destination own-
SIC       gross output       population          demand           sector gross output   Log-likelihood        N
20            0.314             0.282              0.009                 0.024           -281011.82       4,790,782
             (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.000)               (0.001)
21            0.083             0.233              0.005                 0.020             -6554.09        37,057
             (0.005)           (0.015)            (0.005)               (0.005)
22            0.227             0.294              0.005                 0.016            -122903.58      1,431,521
             (0.001)           (0.004)            (0.001)               (0.001)
23            0.274             0.283              0.000                 0.008            -224152.68      3524023
             (0.001)           (0.003)            (0.001)               (0.001)
24            0.412             0.208              0.016                 0.021            -188309.69      3,257,916
             (0.002)           (0.003)            (0.000)               (0.001)
25            0.346             0.359              -0.001                0.000            -199739.27      2,239,096
             (0.001)           (0.003)            (0.000)               (0.001)
26            0.280             0.344              0.004                 0.011            -165056.37      1,847,676
             (0.002)           (0.003)            (0.001)               (0.001)
27            0.296             0.245              0.027                 0.019            -256926.12      3,497,694
             (0.001)           (0.003)            (0.001)               (0.001)
28            0.259             0.275              0.026                 0.013            -260554.40      3,271,360
             (0.001)           (0.003)            (0.001)               (0.001)
29            0.220             0.249              -0.026                0.015            -39150.69        576,079
             (0.002)           (0.006)            (0.001)               (0.001)
30            0.331             0.301              0.012                 0.020            -252998.37      2,642,778
             (0.001)           (0.003)            (0.001)               (0.001)
31            0.250             0.237              0.000                 0.018            -49465.01        625,710
             (0.002)           (0.005)            (0.001)               (0.001)
32            0.315             0.304              -0.019                -0.002           -167122.59      3,027,507
             (0.002)           (0.003)            (0.001)               (0.001)
33            0.252             0.302              0.010                 0.014            -135426.31      1,594,647
             (0.002)           (0.003)            (0.001)               (0.001)
34            0.326             0.293              -0.009                0.018            -387176.33      6,089,828
             (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.000)               (0.001)
35            0.297             0.229              0.002                 0.048            -461600.67      6,797,738
             (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.000)               (0.001)
36            0.253             0.345              0.010                 0.008            -276317.64      4,047,346
             (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.000)               (0.001)
37            0.195             0.265              0.017                 0.004            -145136.50      2,068,732
             (0.001)           (0.003)            (0.000)               (0.001)
38            0.254             0.337              0.012                 0.004            -203245.82      2,590,116
             (0.001)           (0.003)            (0.001)               (0.001)
39            0.306               0.302            0.005                  0.006            -236787.91      2,545,089
             (0.001)             (0.003)          (0.000)                (0.001)
Notes: Estimation of equation (13). The specification also included dist, dist2, ownzip and ownstate as independent
variables. Standard errors in parentheses.
