                    NBER WORKING PAPEB SERIES




           THE CHANGING RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AGGREGATE
                        PRICE AND OUTPUT:
                      THE BRITISH EXPERIENCE


                        Richard T. Froyen

                          Roger N. Waud




                     Working Paper No. 11314




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                           June 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and riot those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #1134
                                                   June 1983


            The Changing Relationship Between Aggregate Price

                   and Output: The British Experience

                                ABSTRACT


      Over the past two and a half decades Great Britain has exhibited the

most noticeable increase in inflation variability among the ten major

noncommunist industrialized countries. In addition, there has been an

apparent worsening in the output—inflation tradeoff. This paper attempts

to identify and empirically assess possible causes qf the deterioration

in the British output—inflation tradeoff in the context of a new class-

ical—type model. Supply—side shocks can cause an increase in the infla-

tion rate and a decrease in real output, and it is estimated that such

shocks interacted with inflation variability to reduce real output

roughly 3.3 percent between the period 1957-1 968 and the period 1969—

1980. Also contributing to the deterioration in the output—inflation

tradeoff, it is estimated that the decline in the natural rate of real

output due to inflation variability (as hypothesized by Milton Friedman)

amounted to about 2.3 to 2.5 percent between these two subperiods.


                                   Richard T. Froyen
                                          and
                                   Roger N. Waud

                                  Department of EcQnomics
                                  Gardner Hall 017A
                                  University of North Carolina —
                                    Chapel Hill
                                  Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27514

                                  (919) 966-5332
      Over the past two and a half decades Great Britain has exhibited the most

 noticeable increase in inflation variability among the ten major noncommunist

 industrialized countries.1 In addition, there has been an apparent worsening in the

 output—inflation tradeoff in Great Britain. The unusually high variability of the

 British inflation rate, together with the large supply—side shocks of the last

 decade, poses an interesting question. Namely, to what extent can the deterioration

 of the out?ut—inflation tradeoff in the British economy be explained in terms of

each of the following?

1) the effect of aggregate demand variability according to the new classical view

    of the output—inflation tradeoff, first specified by Robert Lucas (1972; 1973);

2) the effect of supply—side shocks, particularly energy price shocks;

3) the effect of inflation variability on the natural rate of real output, as

    hypothesized by Milton Friedman (1977).

This paper attempts to empirically assess this question within a framework which

allows a separate and identifiable role for each of these three effects.

     The first type of effect, according to the new classical view, arises because

real output responds only to unanticipated changes in aggregate demand, and because

that response is inversely related to the variability of inflation and aggregate

demand. Hence, the apparent worsening of the output—inflation tradeoff could be

explained by increased variability of inflation and aggregate demand.

     The second type of effect, due to supply—side shocks such as the sudden

increases in energy prices during the 1970s, could cause an increase in the

inflation rate and a decrease in real output, other things equal. This effect

might account for at least some of the apparent shift in the output—inflation tradeoff.

     The third type of effect——Friedman's view (1977, pp. 464—468)——is allegedly due

to the increased variability of the inflation rate causing a reduction in the

allocative efficiency of the price system, which in turn causes a reduction in the

natural rate of real output. This effect would give rise to a negative relationship

between the inflation rate and real output because high inflation rates tend to be
                                         2


 associated with greater inflation variability, again contributing to a deterioration

 in the output—inflation tradeoff.

      In section I we construct a model which potentially allows each of the three

effects to contribute in a separate, identifiable way to explaining the apparent

deterioration in the output-inflation tradeoff. The model extends the Lucas—type

model (as modified by Cukierman and Wachtel (1979)) to explicitly incorporate

supply—side factors, such as energy prices. In addition, the model is modified to

allow for a natural rate that varies for the kinds of reasons suggested by the

Friedman view. The interpretation of the three effects within the context of the

model is discussed in section II. Empirical specification and related issues are

discussed in section III. Estimates of the model for Great Britain for the years

1957—1980 are presented in section IV of the paper; the implications of these

estimates are examined to assess the possible significance of each of the three

effects for the observed shift in the output—inflation tradeoff in Great Britain.

Our conclusions are presented in section V.


I. The Model

     The model of this study is an extension of the Lucas—type model (1973) as amended by

Cukierman and Wachtel (1979). While their models explicitly capture the type—i

effect noted above, they do not allow for the type—2 and type—3 effects——respectively,

the effects of supply—side shocks and the effects of inflation variability on the

natural rate of output. The Lucas—type framework is extended to incorporate these

effects in the following way.

     First, like Lucas and others, we assume that the economy is made up of a large

number of "scattered, competitive markets" (Lucas, 1973, p. 327). Then for each of

these markets we derive output supply equations. These are based on derived factor

demand equations for energy and labor as well as labor supply functions at the

individual market level. Market—specific supply is a function of the market—

specific product price, the market—specific capital stock, and the expected general

price level. It is assumed that the supply shocks in the model arise from changes
                                              3


in the price of the energy input used in the production process. Aggregate demand is

assumed unit elastic2 with the demand side of the model specified following Cukierman

and Wachtel (1979); expectations formation is characterized in a manner consistent

with the way actual aggregate price is determined in the model. Finally, the derived

aggregate output equation of the model is
                                     g
-)          g0
                    l—g20
                                 + l—g8t +        g3(t)
where y is aggregate real output,           is the change in nominal income or aggregate

demand shock,       is the mean of          is the aggregate energy price disturbance,

(t) is a function of time, and Kt is the aggregate capital stock (all variables in logs).3

The coefficients in (1) are functions of 0 'and the supply equation parameters (the g's). Thi

parameter 0 embodies the information structure of the model because it can be shown to be a

function of the variances of economy—wide and market—specific shocks.

     In deriving (1) we have made the following assumptions about expectations

formation and the nature of economy—wide and market—specific shocks. Expectations

in a market are conditioned by the current market—specific product price, the

distributions of market specific and aggregate demand shocks, and the lagged values

of aggregate demand. It is assumed that the market specific demand shocks are

normally distributed with mean zero, and that the aggregate demand shock

is normally distributed with mean        and variance a. As regards market specific

and aggregate energy prices, q(v) and         respectively, it has been assumed that

                   + n(v)
        =        + t) + i_It

where n.(v) is the market—specific energy price disturbance,        is the aggregate

output price, p(t) is a time trend in the relative price of energy, and         is the

aggregate energy price disturbance, and where

            't' N(O, 02) for all v

        N(O, 02)
and n(v) and        are independently distributed and serially uncorrelated.4
                                          4                                          -




II.    Interpretation of the Three Effects Within the Model

      We will now explain the manner in which the three effects described above

are incorporated in the model.

      It is important for the type 1 and 2 effects that the information parameter 0

appears in the coefficients in (1) which characterize the real output response to

aggregate demand and supply shocks, A and p respectively. In particular, since U is a

function of the variances of economy—wide and market—specific shocks, the coefficients

containing 0 will also depend on these market—specific and aggregate variances. Moreover,

it can be shown that 0 is an increasing function of the variances of market—specific

supply and demand shocks, and a decreasing function of the variances of the aggregate suppi-

and demand shocks.5
11.1 The Type 1 Effect
    The type 1 effect, the effect of aggregate demand variability, enters through the

coefficient on (Ix_S) in (1). Examination of this coefficient indicates that real

output response to aggregate demand shocks is a declining function of the variability

of the aggregate demand shock and an increasing function of the variability of

market—specific demand shocks, a result analogous to that of previous Lucas—type models.

However, our model also includes supply shocks, and inspection of the coefficient on

(x—) in (1) reveals that the real output response to an aggregate demand shock is a

declining function of the variability of aggregate supply shocks and an increasing

function of the variability of market—specific supply shocks. Hence in our model the

type 1 effect is augmented by the fact that the real output response to the aggregate

demand shock,xe is a function of the variability of both demand and supply—side shocks.

If the variability of the aggregate demand and/or the aggregate supply' shocks

increases, then the coefficient on (Axt_5) becomes smaller and there is a deterioration

in the output—inflation tradeoff. That is, for a given size aggregate deniand shock,

      (the change in nominal income), the resulting increase in the price leyal is

larger relative to the increase in real output.
                                             5


11.2 The Type 2 Effect: Supply—Side Shocks

     The type 2 effect is incorporated into our model through the direct effect of

the aggregate supply shock        on aggregate real output and the price level, as

indicated by the presence of p in equation (1). For example, holding all other

independent variables in (1) constant, a positive shock        in the energy price will

cause real output y to decline (since g3/(l--g20) in (1) is negative) and the price

level to rise (given the nominal income level x           + x1). Such shocks would

certainly contribute to an apparent deterioration in the output—inflation tradeoff.


     Just as the variability of demand and supply shocks affect the size of

the coefficient on             in (1), their variability also affects the size of

the coefficient on         and hence the size of the output response to     Re-

calling the way in which this variability affects the size of 0, inspection of

     coefficient (g3/[l-.g20]) shows that the output response is an increasing

function of the variability of both the aggregate demand and aggregate supply

shocks, and a decreasing function of the variability of market—specific de-

mand and supply shocks. The relationships between output responses to aggre-

gate demand an supply shocks and the variability of aggregate and market—

specific shocks can   be   given an economic interpretation in terms of aggregate

demand and supply curves in aggregate price and output space. Increases in

the variability of aggregate demand or supply shocks cause the aggregate

supply curve to become more steeply sloped. Hence a given aggregate demand

shock, represented by a horizontal shift in the aggregate demand curve along

the aggregate supply curve, will cause output to change less. On the other

hand, a given aggregate supply shock, represented by a horizontal shift in the

aggregate supply curve along the aggregate demand curve, will cause output to

change more.
                                             6

11.3 The Type 3 Effect: Inflation Variability and the Natural Rate

        Friedman (.1977) has suggested that because of rigidities due to institutional and

political arrangements, high variability of inflation——whether caused by variability

of aggregate demand or supply-—causes a loss of efficiency in the price system and a

likely rise in unemployment. Friedman would expect this positive relationship

between inflation variability and unemployment to show up as a positive association

between the level of the inflation rate and the level of the unemployment rate,

because high inflation rates and greater inflation variability have tended to go

together. Since a rise in the unemployment rate typically implies a decline in

real output, we would observe a deterioration in the output-inflation tradeoff.6

While Friedman suggests that the positive (negative) relationship between inflation

variability and unemployment (output) "seems plausible," he does not argue that such

a relationship follows as a necessary implication of a theory;7 Friedman's view is an

empirical proposition.

       To incorporate the Friedman view or type 3 effect, the effect of inflation

variability on the natural rate of output, we follow Lucas (1973) and divide the

factors which influence output in equation (1) into those affecting the natural rate

(
'an,   t.                                              '
            and those that cause cyclical fluctuations (v
                                                           c,t
                                                                 around the natural
                                                                                 — rate:-


(2)         =         +
                = g0 + g34(t) + g4K

                    g20               g3
4)              =               +
            l—g20             1—g20
We get Lucas's specification of the natural rate if in (3) it is assumed that 4(t) and

Kt follow a linear trend.8 Friedman's view suggests that, in addition, the natural

rate of output depends on the variability of inflation. It can be shown that in our

model the variability of inflation will depend on the variability of aggregate supply and

demand.9

       To capture the type 3 effect the Friedman view suggests that the natural rate

be specified
                                                7


                                         —2
            =a   + bt +      (2      -              <o
                             \ip,t        Ap)
         2
where          is the variance of the inflation rate at t anda2 is the mean of that
         Ap, t
variance.10 Any increase in the variability of the inflation rate, as measured by

         causes a decline in the natural rate of output——the type 3 effect. (The

empirical proxy for            is discussed below.) Hence, for given values of all the

other independent variables in (4) and (5), particularly the change in nominal

income       real output y in (2) will fall and the price level must rise thus

contributing to a deterioration in the output—inflation tradeoff.


III. Empirical Specification of the Model

     The output equation implied by our model is equation (1) modified to specify

the natural rate as given by equation (5).

111.1 Measuring Inflation Variability

     If inflation variability tends to change over time, we need to construct a

time—varying measure of inflation variability——a proxy for               The variability

of the variance of the distribution of the inflation rate is difficult to measure

because we observe only one outcome from the distribution of the inflation rate at

each point in time, and this alone is not enough to construct an estimate of               at

each point in time. As a proxy for              we construct a moving variance of actual

changes in the inflation rate, cpt.

     It is unavoidedly an arbitrary choice as to how many periods should be used to

construct          .   We compute         at each point in time using observations from the
            Ap,t
past 8 quarters, exclusive of the current quarter. The moving variance proxy at time t

is computed from data in past periods so that it will not contain information

unavailable to agents at time

111.2 Detrending Aggregate Demand Growth

             Examination of the data for the change in the log of nominal in-

come, Lx, over the sample period 1957—80 suggested that L,x contained a

statistically significant upward trend, instead of having a constant mean 6.
                                                       8


     Hence we measured the aggregate demand shock iix as the detrended change in

  nominal income. It can be shown that the trend growth in Lx has no effect

  on output in our model because such growth is anticipated by economic agents.


     111.3 Adjustment Lag

                     Following Lucas (1973), we assume that due to adjustment lags

     there is sce persistence to movement in output. We represent this persis-

     tence by including a lagged value of the dependent variable as an independent

  variable in the output equation. Lucas (1975) and Sargent (1977) have de-

  veloped rationales for such persistence.


  111.4 Specification for Estimation

                     Modifying (1) by the natural rate specification (5), the detrended

  aggregate demand shock             and the addition of the lagged dependent variable,

 our model characterizes the behavior of detrended real output y as

               =     +              g26             g30
     (6)                                    txt +
                                    1-gao           l—g2 Pt + ti
     where 3= lp Deviation of output from trend, the dependent variable,
     has a slightly different interpretation here than in the usual Lucas—type

     model where the deviation of output from trend is the cyclical component of

     output. In (6) output may deviate from trend both because of cyclical

     factors (xt and          and because of the effect of inflation variability on

     the natural rate of output.'2

           In order to allow for the existence of type 1 and type 2 effects, in

particular variation in the coefficients °n                (a type 1 effect) and   (a

type 2 effect), we need to implement an empirical specification which captures

the way such effects occur in our model. As already discussed, the coefficients

on          and      are functions of the variances of both aggregate and market spe—

cific demand and supply shocks; the coefficient on               is a decreasing function

of the variance of aggregate demand,                and/or supply, c, while the coeffi-
cient on           is an increasing function of these variances. Moreover, the
                                                              9



 variance of the inflation rate is an increasing function of                            and

 Therefore the coefficient on Lxt is a decreasing function and the coefficient

on       an increasing function of the variance of the inflation rate.


III.4.a Inflation Rate Variability and Type 1 and 2 Effects

                If the variances of aggregate deDand and supply are changing over

time, then so is the variance of the inflation rate, and, in turn, the coeffi-

cients on        and           Hence to capture type 1 and 2 effects we allow the co-

efficients on both             and       to depend explicitly on our estimated measure of

inflation variability, the moving variance of the inflation rate p,t

Letting          and           be the coefficients on Lx and                      respectively, these

coefficients are assumed to be functions of the following form:14


                                                                      2
                                                     +
                                   x,t         a10       a11      p,t
                                                                  2
                                               a20 + a21
                                                              p,t



                                                              i
where ct11<0<o2,. With these substitutions, equation (6) now becomes


                       =                                 +
                                i p,t

                           +
                               2O    +
                                         a21
                                                               +
                                                                      t-l
or consolidating terms


 (8)             yt            i     p,t — a1O&           -


                                                2
                           +
                               a20 + a2lp            tt +

       The two interaction terms between                          and       and    measure the degree to
which the coefficients on                and                      and       respectively) vary as a con-

sequence of changing inflation variability, as measured by the moving variance

proxy pt• Examination of the signs and significance of the estimated
                                               10

coefficients on these interaction terms, a and a21, will indicate whether or

not         and          vary systematically in a manner consistent with the existence
      x,t         3j,t

of type 1 and 2 effects, respectively. Regarding the measurement of
                                                                                   p,t
while Friedman's (1977) analysis and the new classical view, as expressed by Lucas

(1973) for example, focus an inflation variability, other research has concentrated

on inflation uncertainty [Evans (1978), Levi and Makin (1980)]. To test for the

difference this distinction might make we detrended the inflat:ion rate to remove the

                                                                        in the same manner
predictable   trend part of the rate, and then constructed

already described. Use of the measure using the detrended inflation rate made no

significant difference in our results what—so—ever. It is the results using the

detrended inflation rate which are reported in Table 1.

      Since the variance of the inflation rate is a function of the variances of

aggregate demand and supply in our model, and since these variances (cr2 and a2)

appear explicitly through 0 in the coefficients on            and ii,   it    is also of

interest to consider a specification which allows an identification of the separate

contributions to a type 1, 2 or 3 effect due to changing aggregate demand variability

on the one hand, or changing aggregate supply variability on the other. Analogous

to equations (7) and (8), this can be done by specifying the natural rate and the

coefficients on          and     in our estimating equation to depend explicitly on

estimated time moving variances of aggregate demand and supply,          2 and a2
                                                                             x,t

respectively. (We        construct   these proxies in exactly the same way that the proxy

            constructed, as described previously.)
p,t
III.4.b Autocorrelation of the Supply Shock

      Examination of the data suggested the existence of first order autocorrelation

in the supply shock ji,     whether measured by the energy price or the import price

shock. Hence the aggregate supply shock should be specified

(           pt—1 + c
                               1 >     > 0.

Given this modification, the cyclical component of output becomes'5
                                                        11

                                                        g
                                       +
 (4')
         c,t       =
                           1—gO
                                  Ax
                                           g p_        1—g20 C•
 Unlike       demand—side shocks, equation (4') implies that both the anticipated and the

 unanticipated components of a supply shock will affect real output.

         It   is    readily apparent that the terms involving P1 and                in (4') can be

rewritten, using (9), so that they are replaced by tne terms
          ________                     3b2
 (10)
              (i—gO) t                 (l—g20)
                                                 t—l
It   is econometrically easier to take account of the serial correlation in
                                                                                                Pt
using     (10) in (4') because (10) does not require that we generate estimates

of the disturbance term c1. Given that                              0 >   0 and g2, g3 <   0,
                                                        g1, g4, ,
the signs on the estimated coefficients on                    and          should be negative.


IV. Model Estimates

        The data used in this study are for the period 1957:1 to 1980:IV. The

actual sample period for estimation of (6) is 1959:II—l980:IV, because one

quarter is lost in first differencing nominal income (Ax) and eight quarters are

used to create the proxy for the moving variance of the inflation . rate.                       Two

different measures of the supply shock p were used: a measure of the price of

energy, and a measure of the price of imports)6


IV.1 Estimates Allowing for Type 2 and 3 Effects

        If we assume that the variability of inflation changes over time, so that

                       ,   then we allow for a type 2 and a type 3 effect when we estimate the

specification. given by (6). That is, we allow for the effect of inflation variability

on the natural rate of output, the type 3 effect, as well as the type 2 effect caused

by the direct effect on real output of the aggregate supply shock

        Lines 1 and 3 of Table 1 give the estimates of (6). Indeed, the estimates of

     (the constant) are significant and positive, and the estimates of                      are significant

and negative, consistent with the a priori specification. All coefficient estimates

are significant and of the expected sign in line 3, where the import—price measure
                                               12

 is used for p. In line 1, where the energy price measure is used for            all

coefficient estimates have the expected sign, but the coefficient on p is not

significant. Thus the estimates suggest the existence of a significant type 3

effect, using either measure of the supply shock ii, and the existence of a type 2

effect when the import price measure is used.17


IV.2 Estimates Allowing for Type 1, 2, and 3 Effects

       To allow for the existence of all three effects at once, we estimate the spe-

cification of our model given by equation (8). These estimates are reported in

Table 1, lines 2 and 4.

       When the energy price measure of the supply shock is used, line 2, the interaction

term               is not significant, suggesting the lack of a type 1 effect, though demand

side shocks ix do have        significant impacts on real output y. When the import

price measure is used, line 4, the results are very similar——demand side shocks

appear significant, but the interaction term                does not.

       On the basis of the estimates in line 2, using the energy price measure of the

supply shock, there is no evidence of a significant type 2 effect due to the direct

effect of p on y. Given the apparent insignificance of the interaction term

           there    -   -        -                      -        .   -
                   is also no evidence ot a type Z ettect arising trom a change in the
                                                                                       -




size of the coefficient on             The estimates using the import price measure of the

supply shock, line 4, tell a somewhat different story, however, because there the

interaction term             is significant, though the direct effect of the supply shock

is not. Hence the estimates of line 4 do suggest the existence of a type 2 effect

because the coefficient on           has increased.

       The estimates in both lines 2 and 4 strongly suggest the existence of a type 3

effect. Indeed, the estimates of the coefficient on 0Apt are very similar in both

size and significance to those in lines 1 and 3.

    When we specified the natural rate and the coefficients on            and p to depend

explicitly on time moving variances of aggregate demand and supply, 2 and
                                                                  x,t               1i,t
                                        13

respectively, the estimated coefficient on the lagged dependent variable      was

implausibly high. In fact, for several of these specifications the point estimate of

this coefficient was greater than one, violating the a priori specification of the

adjustment lag in the model and raising doubts about the reliability of the other

estimated coefficients in these specifications.18

     Finally, when we allowed for the existence of serial correlation in the supply

shock by using the specification (10) in our estimating equation, the coefficient on

     was significant with the expected sign while the coefficient on    was not

significant. The estimated coefficients on the other independent variables did not

differ significantly from those in Table 1.


 IV.3 Specification Tests

      Regression specification error tests were performed in order to see if the estimated

equations reported in Table 1 were misspecified due to omitted variables, incorrect

functional form, or correlation between the explanatory variables and the disturbance

term; the last possibility is of particular concern because of the presumed exogeneity

of Ax and u. The procedure used to test for the existence of these problems was

first suggested by Ramsey (1969) and subsequently examined by. nse of Monte Carlo experiments

by Thursby and Schmidt (1977). Thursby and Schmidt examined several different ways of

implementing Ramsey's procedure and concluded that the test which seemed generally best

was one based on the inclusion in the regression of higher ordered powers of the

explanatory variables. An F—test is used to see if the inclusion of these additional

variables suggests the existence of misspecification due to omitted variables, incorrect.

functional form, or correlation between the explanatory variables and the disturbance term.

     Such tests were performed for the estimated equations reported in Table 1 by adding

second and third order powers of tx and       to the regressions. The F—statistics for

these tests are reported in the last column of Table 1. The only F—statistic significant

at the 5 percent level was for the specification using the import price measure of the

supply shock, omitting the interaction terms which allow for the type 1 effect, line 3.

When the interaction terms are added to give the specification reported in line 4 the
                                               14


F—statistic is no longer significant. These results are consistent with our finding of a

significant interaction effect for                   in line 4; the omission of this term in the

regression of line 3 appears to be the reason why that regression is misspecified according

to the F—statistic. Similarly, the absence of significant interaction effects in line 2

is consistent with the finding that the specification omitting these effects in line 1

is appropriate according to the F—statistic.


IV.4 Quantitative Significance of Estimates

    We noted at the outset that Great Britain has exhibited the most noticeable increase

in inflation variability among the ten major noncounis.t industrialized countries during

the period from the latter half of the 1950ts through 1980. The variance of the inflation

rate in Great Britain during the subperiod 19691—19801V was roughly two and a half

times as large as during the subperiod 195711—19681V. Against this background it is of

interest to consider the quantitative implications of our estimates in Table 1.

     Consider first the estimates using the energy price measure of the supply shock,

lines 1 and 2 of Table 1, which strongly suggest the existence of a type 3 effect. We

focus on the estimates of line 1 since the estimates of line 2 suggest that the interaction

terms,
           ,t \x
               t   and 2
                       LJJ,t t
                                 ,   were not significant. Some idea of the quantitative

significance of the type 3 effect is obtained by considering the impact of the increase

in the size of the average value of the moving variance proxy p,t between the first

subperiod, 195711—19681V, and the second subperiod, 19691—19801V.19 This increase

multiplied by the coefficient estimate of              (from equation 8 or 5), the coefficient on

      equal —60.5116 in Table 1, suggests that increased inflation variability operating

via the type 3 effect caused about a 2.5 percent reduction in the natural rate of real

output y, and hence the actual level of real output                 (from equation 2), ceteris
           20
paribus.

     Consider the estimates using the import price measure of the supply shock, in

particular line 4 of Table 1. These estimates suggest that inflation variability gave

rise to both a type 3 effect and a type 2 effect, the latter due to the changing size

of the coefficient on the supply shock              as indicated by the significant estimate of
                                           15


 21 (equation 8), the coefficient on the interaction term             The combined effect

 of inflation variability, due to both the type 2 and type 3 effects, can be calculated

 in a manner analogous to that used for the case of the energy price measure of the

 supply shock. This is done by using the coefficient estimates on the terms         and

      p ,   from line 4 of Table 1, in conjunction with the increase in the average values
  Ap,tt
 of a2    and a2   p between the two subperiods, 195711—19681V and 19691—19801V.
     Ap,t      Lp,t t
The calcuation suggests that increased inflation variability operating via both the

type 2 and 3 effects caused about a 5.5 percent reduction in the level of real output

     (from equation 2), ceteris_paribus.22 The amount of this change due to the type 2

effect, the interaction of inflation variability with the supply shock, is roughly 3.3

 percent, while the remaining 2.2 percent is due to the type 3 effect.

      Both of the above calculations give the decline in the level of real output between

 the earlier and later subperiods for a given level of nominal income. These calculations,

therefore, imply commensurate increases the average price level betwen the two periods,

again ceteris paribus, due to type 3, or type 2 and type 3 effects.


V. Conclusions

      At the outset of this paper it was noted that over the period from 1957 to 1980 there

appears to have been a deterioration in the output—inflation tradeoff in Great Britain.

To what extent do our model estimates indicate that this deterioration
                                                                         may be explained
in terms of the type 1, 2, and 3 effects?

      Aggregate demand shocks Lix were always found to have a significant effect on real

output with the expected positive sign. However, we found no evidence that the coefficient
on      changed significantly in the manner suggested by the existence of a type 1 effect.

Our results do provide some evidence that a type 2 effect played a role. In particular,

that evidence suggests that the type 2 effect took the form of an increase in the absolute

size of the coefficient on the supply shock p, brought about by an increase in the

variability of the inflation rate, as proxied by our measure apt. The type 3 effect

appears to play a significant role in explaining the deterioration in the output—inflation
                                       16




                                                                                  p,t
tradeoff. The role of the changing variability of the inflation rate (proxied by a2

given by the natural rate specification in our model, was always significant with a

negative sign.
                                                            TABLE

                                                         MODEL ESTIMATES
                                                        1959:11 — 1980:IV


     A.    Energy Price Measure of the Supply Shock

     Constant                                                           "2                           "2
                                                                                                                        D.h)      F—stat
                                                                                       p,ttxt        °Lp,tPt



1.   0.00750*      0.90938*            —0.00313       0.90938*
     (3.408)       (26.28)             (—0.236)                                                                 0.905   0.518         0.573
                                                      (19.55)         (—4.053)
2.   0.00765*      0.90098*            —0.00748       0.90113*                         42.2511
     (3.376)       (19.37)                                                                           65.4904    0.908   0.515         0.852
                                       (—0.445)       (17.92)         (—3.423)         (0.168)       (0.1156)
     B.    Import Price Measure of the Supply Shock

     Constant                                                          "2              "2            "2
                                           .                                           0Ap   tt

3    0.00557*      0.   91130*        _O.03628*       0.91176*       _4594*                                     0.912
     (2.798        (27.50)            (—2.437)        (20.50)                                                           0.051         2.645±
                                                                     (—3.46)
4. 0.00623*        0.91204*            0.00376        0.93663*       _37.46*          143.589
     (3.221)       (21.95)             (0.191)                                                     _325.935*    0.921   1.322         1.253
                                                      (21.45)        (—2.800)         (0.621)       (—2.944)

     aThe numbers in parentheses beneath the
                                             coefficients are                    t   statistics.
     *
         Coefficient    ont;tmaLe significant at the 5
                                                                percent level.
     bvaiue    of the Durbin h
                               statistic, see          Durbin     (1970).

     CSpecification error test—statistics for regressions including second and third order                                      and
                                                                                           powers of

     tSignificant at the         5   percent level.
                                   FOOTNOTES



     1The ten countries are Belgium, Canada, France, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands,
Switzerland, Great Britain, the United States, and West Germany.

     2We will examine this assumption further below. This assumption considerably
simplifies the analysis since with it no detailed specification of the elements of aggregate
demand is required. Nelson's (1979), (1981) estimates provide support for such a recursive
structure between nominal income and real output in the United States. Alberro (1981)
tested the Lucas specification of aggregate demand for a wide sample of countries
including the U.K. and found little evidence to refute that specification. (See also
Froyen and Waud [1980, P. 4201).

     3An appendix describing the complete derivation of (1) is available from the authors
on request.

     4Below we will examine the case where the aggregate energy price shock is serially
correlated. Also, note that the specification of the energy price presumes that the
aggregate price of energy is perfectly indexed to the aggregate domestic price level.
Blinder (1981) considers the case where energy prices are imperfectly indexed. In that
case, the monetary (or other policy) authority could potentially manipulate the relative
price of energy by aggregate demand policy, a possibility not allowed for here. The
model here could be modified to allow the aggregate energy price to be indexed to the
expected rather than the actual, aggregate domestic price level without changing the
generic form of the income equation estimated below.

     5This is shown in the appendix cited in footnote 3.


     6Evans (1978) points out that Keynes (1924) also posited a negative
relationship between instability of the aggregate price level and the level
of output. Okun (1981) recently argued, along somewhat different lines, that
increased variability of aggregate demand would both steepen the Phillips
curve and cause the curve to shift upwards, increasing the "inflation rate
associated with the cycle average unemployment rate."

     7Evans (1978) has shown that within a labor market model where both the
supply and demand for labor depend on the degree of uncertainty about the
aggregate price level, employment may either increase or decrease in response
to an increase in uncertainty. The ambiguity stems from the uncertain re-
sponse of labor supply to an increase in aggregate price uncertainty. A
recent paper by Azariadis (1981) demonstrates the ambiguity of the relation-
ship between price level uncertainty and the natural rate of output within a
general equilibrium model. Evans (1978), Levi and Nakin (1980), and Nulli—
neaux (1980) provide empirical evidence for the United States supporting the
view that increased aggregate price uncertainty depresses the natural rate of
employment or output. As Levi and Nakin (1980, p. 1023) note, the relationship
between employment and inflation uncertainty is somewhat different from the
relationship between inflation variability and output or employment suggested
by Friedman. Friedman's notion would seem broader than those investigated by
Evans, Levi and Makin, or Nullineaux in that increased uncertainty is only
one channel by which increased inflation variability might affect output or
employment.
      8Note that within the overall framework of our model the systematic or time trend
 part of the energy price will show up in the natural rate      via (3).


      9This is shown in the appendix cited in footnote 3. Within our model, since the
 lagged value of the price level is given, the variance of the inflation rate can be shown
 to equal the variance of the aggregate price level. Within the model, the variance of the
 aggregate price level will (through 8) also depend upon the variances of the market
 specific demand and supply shocks. These variances are unobservable and are modeled here as
 part of the additive error term in our final estimating equation.


      10Ths specification does not rule out the possibility that
 zero. Rather it allows for the possibility that in some long—run, "natural
 rate," sense there is always some variability in the inflation rate.

     '11n Friedman's analysis changes in the variability of inflation, and
 therefore of aggregate demand or supply, would affect output whether these
 changes were perceived or not. Therefore, whether our proxies for the
 moving variances contain information not available to market participants
 would not appear to matter. The role of changes in aggregate demand and
 supply variability within the Lucas model does, however, depend on whether
 the changes in variability are perceived by market participants. Since we
 plan to use these same proxies to measure the effects of continuous changes
 in demand and supply variability on the terms of the output—inflation
 tradeoff within the modified Lucas model of cyclical fluctuations in income,
 we construct the proxies using only information available to market partic-
 ipants.


      12Nelson (1979) (1981) provides evidence for the U.S. that the residuals
from a deterministic trend representation of real output are nonstationary and
therefore do not measure the cyclical proportion of real output. Nelson
suggests that, rather than a fixed trend for natural output, there is instead
a negative relationship between the natural rate of output and the level of
inflation, along lines suested by Friedman. Our specification of detrended
real output would appear to be consistent with this view.


     3This follows from footnote 9, the fact that 0 is a decreasing function of a2
and a, and is demonstrated in the appendix cited in footnote 4.                  X

         caveat should be borne in mind. Since the theoretical relationships between the
coefficients on tx and p and a2
             2 2                    are nonlinear, and since these coefficients also
depend upon a and a, our specification of these coefficients given by (7) is only an
approximation. (The nature of the nonlinearity is shown in the appendix cited in footnote
3.)


     '5Given the behavior of the energy price shock specified by (9), now the lagged value
of the energy price conveys information about the current energy price level. Hence
equation (4') is not simply derived by substituting (9) into (4), but requires a modification
of the way price expectations are formed taking account of this information.
     '6The quarterly data used are: for real output y, real gross domestic
product; for nominal income Xf nominal gross domestic product. These
series along with the series For the import price are from International
Financial Statistics, International Monetary Fund; except for the most
recent observation the data was taken from the, IMF computer tape. The
energy price series is the index "Basic Materials and Fuel Used in Manu-
facturing Industry" from the Monthly Digest of Statistics, Central Statis-
tical Office, London, various issues.

         17
              If it is assumed that inflation variability is constant over time,

so that p,t            then0 (    -        cancels lp,t in (6) and   there   can

be no type 3 effect. Also there can be no type 1 or type 2 effect due to changes
in the coefficients on     or    caused by changing inflation variability.
However, there can be a type 2 effect caused by the direct effect of the
supply shock ji . Estimates of (6) under the constant inflation variability
assumption indicated that the coefficients on x ,    , and      were all significant
with the expected sign, whether    was measured y te energy price shock or
the import price shock.


        18Bearing this caveat in mind, for either measure of the supply shock
  ,   the estimated coefficients on ix had the expected sign and were significant,
Jiile those on    were not. For the energy price measure of the supply shock,
the estimates suggested that the type 3 effect is due to the changing variability
of the supply shock, 2      The interaction effects were all insignificant
except for 2      whicl4'owever had the wrong sign. For the import price measure
of the suppl'shock, the estimates suggested that the type 3 effect is due to
the changing variability of both aggregate demand and supply, ô and a2 re—
                                                                '


a p,
sectfvely. The one significant interaction effect was for
        suggesting that the type 2 effect operating via the changing
c6èfcient on p , indicated in line 4 of Table 1, is due to changing aggregate
demand variabiliy.

      19The increase is approximately 40 percent. Note that the average value of
the moving variance proxy for a subperiod is not the same thing as the variance
of the inflation rate calculated over the whole subperiod. We focus. on the moving
variance proxy       because it is the measure used in the regressions reported
in Table 1.


      20Note that this calculation takes intd account the adjustment lag implied
by the estimated coefficient on the lagged dependent variable        These
calculations make use of the fact that the difference in the log of a variable
is approximately equal to the percent change in the variable.

      21The average value of the interaction term à         increased roughly
755 percent between these two subperiods.

       22The comment in footnote 20 applies here as well.
                                    REFERENCES


 Alberro, Jose, "The Lucas Hypothesis on the Phillips Curve: Further Inter-
      national Evidence," Journal of Monetary Economics, 7 (March 1981),
       239—251.

Azariadis, Costas, "A Reexamination of Natural Rate Theory," American Economic
     Review, 71 (December 1981), 946-60.

Bltrder, Alan S., "Monetary Accornodations of Supply Shocks Under Rational
     Expectations," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 13 (November 1981),
     425-38.

Cukierman, Alex and Wachtel, Paul, "Differential Inflationary Expectations
     and the Variability of the Rate of Inflation," American Economic Review,
     69 (September 1979), 595—610.

Durbin, J., "Testing for Serial Correlation in Least—Squares Regression When
     Some of the Regressors Are Lagged Dependent Variables," Econornetrica,
     38 (May 1970), 410—422.

Evans, Paul, "Monetary Uncertainty and Employment," unpublished manuscript,
     Stanford University, 1978.

Friedman, Milton, "Inflation and Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy,
     85 (June 1977), 451-72.

Froyen, Richard and Waud, Roger, "Further International Evidence on Output-
     Inflation Tradeoffs," American Economic Review, 70 (June 1980), 409-21.

Keynes, John M., Tract on Monetary Reform. New York: Harcourt Brace and
     Company, 1924.

Levi, Maurice D. and Makin, John N., "Inflation Uncertainty and the Phillips
     Curve: Some Empirical Evidence," American Economic Review, 70 (December
     1980), 1022—27.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal
     of Economic Theory, 4 (April 1972), 103—24.

_____________________ "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation
     Tradeoffs," American Economic Review, 63 (June 1973), 326-34.

____________________ "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal
     of Political Economy, 83 (December 1975), 1113—44.

Mullineaux, Donald J., "Unemployment, Industrial Production and Inflation
     Uncertainty in the United States," Review of Economics and Statistics,
     62 (May 1980), 163-69.
Nelson, Charles R., "Recursive Structure in U.S. Income, Prices, and Output,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 87 (December 1979), 1307—27.

_________________   "Adjustment Lags Versus Information Lags," Journal of
    Money, Credit. and Banking, 13 (February 1981), 1-11.

Okun, Arthur, Prices and Quantities. Washington: The Brookings Institution,
     1981.

Ramsey, James B., "Tests for Specificalfion Errors in Classical Linear Least
     Squares Regression Analysis," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
     Ser. B, 31 (1969), 350—71.

Sargent, Thomas, "The Persistence of Aggregate Employment and the Neutrality
     of Money," unpublished manuscript, University of Minnesota, 1977.

Thursby, J.G. and Schmidt, P., "Some Properties of Tests for Specification
     Error in a Linear Regression Model," Journal of the American Statistical
     Association, 72 (1977), 635—641.
