                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         NEW-KEYNESIAN MACROECONOMICS AND THE TERM STRUCTURE

                                             Geert Bekaert
                                            Seonghoon Cho
                                            Antonio Moreno

                                         Working Paper 11340
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11340


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




We benefited from the comments of Glen Rudebusch, Adrian Pagan and seminar participants at Columbia
University, Carleton University, Korea Development Institute, Universidad de Navarra, Singapore
Management University and the 2004 Meeting of the Society for Economic Dynamics in Florence. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Geert Bekaert, Seonghoon Cho, and Antonio Moreno. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
New-Keynesian Macroeconomics and the Term Structure
Geert Bekaert, Seonghoon Cho, and Antonio Moreno
NBER Working Paper No. 11340
May 2005
JEL No. E4, E5, G2

                                           ABSTRACT

This article complements the structural New-Keynesian macro framework with a no-arbitrage affine

term structure model. Whereas our methodology is general, we focus on an extended macro-model

with an unobservable time-varying inflation target and the natural rate of output which are filtered

from macro and term structure data. We obtain large and significant estimates of the Phillips curve

and real interest rate response parameters. Our model also delivers strong contemporaneous

responses of the entire term structure to various macroeconomic shocks. The inflation target

dominates the variation in the "level factor" whereas the monetary policy shocks dominate the

variation in the "slope and curvature factors".

Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway/802 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu

Seonghoon Cho
Korea Development Institute
shcho@kdi.re.kr

Antonio Moreno
Universidad de Navarra, Spain
antmoreno@unav.es
1     Introduction

Structural New-Keynesian models, featuring dynamic aggregate supply (AS), aggregate
demand (IS) and monetary policy equations are becoming pervasive in macroeconomic
analysis. In this article we complement this structural macroeconomic framework with a
no-arbitrage term structure model.

  Our analysis overcomes three deficiencies in previous work on New-Keynesian macro
models. First, the parsimony of such models implies very limited information sets for
both the monetary authority and the private sector. It is well known, however, that
monetary policy is conducted in a data-rich environment. Recent research by Bernanke
and Boivin (2003) and Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz (2005) collapses multiple observable
time series into a small number of factors and embeds them in standard vector autorre-
gresive (VAR) analyses. In this article we use perhaps the most efficient information of
all, term structure data. The critical variables in most macro models are the output gap,
expected inflation and a short-term interest rate. It is unlikely that lags of inflation, the
output gap and the short-term interest rate suffice to adequately forecast their future
behavior. However, under the null of the Expectations Hypothesis, term spreads embed
all relevant information about future interest rates. Additionally, a host of studies have
shown that term spreads are very good predictors of future economic activity (see, for
instance, Harvey (1988), Estrella and Mishkin (1998), Ang, Piazzesi, and Wei (2003))
and of future inflation (Mishkin (1990) or Stock and Watson (2003)). In our proposed
models, the conditional expectations of inflation and the de-trended output are a func-
tion of the past realizations of macro variables and of unobserved components which are
extracted from term structure data through a no-arbitrage pricing model.

    Second, the additional information from the term structure model transforms a ver-
sion of a New-Keynesian model with a number of unobservable variables into a very
tractable linear model which can be efficiently estimated by maximum likelihood or the
general method of moments (GMM). Hence, the term structure information helps recover
important structural parameters, such as those describing the monetary transmission
mechanism, in an econometrically efficient manner.

   Third, incorporating term structure information leads to a simple VAR on macro
variables and term spread information but the reduced-form model for the macro vari-
ables is a complex VARMA model. This is important because one disadvantage of most

                                             1
structural New-Keynesian models is the absence of sufficient endogenous persistence.
We generate additional channels of endogenous persistence by introducing unobservable
variables in the macro model which must be identified from the term structure.

    The approach set forth in this paper also contributes to the term structure literature.
In this literature it is common to have latent factors drive most of the dynamics of the
term structure of interest rates. These factors are often interpreted ex-post as level,
slope and curvature factors. A classic example of this approach is Dai and Singleton
(2000), who construct an arbitrage-free three factor model of the term structure.1 While
the Dai and Singleton (2000) model provides a satisfactory fit of the data, it remains
silent about the economic forces behind the latent factors. In contrast, we construct a
no-arbitrage term structure model where all the factors have a clear economic meaning.
Apart from inflation, the de-trended output and the short term interest rate, we introduce
two unobservable variables in the underlying macro model. While there are many possible
implementations, our main application here introduces a time-varying inflation target and
natural rate of output. Consequently, we construct a 5 factor affine term structure model
that obeys New-Keynesian structural relations.

   Our main empirical findings are as follows. First, the model matches the persistence
displayed by the three macro variables despite being nested in a parsimonious VAR(1) for
macro variables and term spreads. Second, in contrast to previous maximum likelihood
(MLE) or GMM estimations of the standard New-Keynesian model, we obtain large and
significant estimates of the Phillips curve and real interest rate response parameters.
Third, our model exhibits strong contemporaneous responses of the entire term structure
to the various structural shocks in the model.

      Our article is part of a rapidly growing literature exploring the relation between the
term structure and macro economic dynamics. Kozicki and Tinsley (2001) and Ang and
Piazzesi (2003) were among the first to incorporate macroeconomic factors in a term
structure model to improve its fit. Evans and Marshall (2003) use a VAR framework
to trace the effect of macroeconomic shocks on the yield curve whereas Dewachter and
Lyrio (2002) assign macroeconomic interpretations to standard term structure factors.
Our paper differs from these articles in that all the macro variables obey a set of struc-
tural macro relations. This facilitates a meaningful economic interpretation of the term
structure dynamics. For instance, we can trace not only the impact of macroeconomic
  1
      Other examples include Knez, Litterman, and Scheinkman (1994) and Pearson and Sun (1994).


                                                 2
shocks but also of changes in the behavior of the private sector and the monetary author-
ity on the term structure. Moreover, the implied interactions between macro and term
structure factors are more general in our framework than in the articles we mentioned.
Diebold, Rudebusch, and Aruoba (2003) empirically characterize the dynamic interac-
tions between the macro economy and the term structure. They find that macro factors
have strong effects on future movements in interest rates and that the reverse effect is
much weaker, which seems to contradict some of the earlier work on term structure based
forecasts of output and inflation. In our framework, we can explore the structural origin
of these dynamic interactions. Our effort is contemporaneous to articles by Rudebusch
and Wu (2004) and Hordahl, Tristani, and Vestin (2003) who also append a term struc-
ture model to a New-Keynesian macro model. We discuss how our approach differs from
theirs below.

  The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the structural
macroeconomic model, whereas Section 3 outlines how to combine the macro model
with an affine term structure model. Section 4 provides some preliminary data analysis.
Section 5 discusses the estimation methodology and considers the fit of different model
variants with the data. Section 6 analyzes the macroeconomic implications while section
7 studies the term structure implications of our model. Section 8 concludes.



2    New-Keynesian Macro Models with Unobservable
     State Variables

We present a standard New-Keynesian model featuring AS, IS and monetary policy
equations with two additions. First, we assume the existence of a natural rate of output
which follows a potentially persistent stochastic process. Second, the inflation target is
assumed to vary through time according to a persistent linear process. The monetary
authorities react to the output gap which is the deviation of output from the natural
rate of output. We allow for endogenous persistence in the AS, IS and monetary policy
equations. The resulting model requires numerical techniques to solve for the linear
Rational Expectations (RE) equilibrium and the equilibrium may not be unique. Our
solution approach closely follows Cho and Moreno (2004). This method essentially selects
the solution that generates a stationary equilibrium. In what follows, we describe each


                                            3
equation in turn and describe the model solution. In the appendix we describe the
microfoundations of the AS and IS equations. Related theoretical derivations can be
found in Clarida, Galı́, and Gertler (1999) or Woodford (2003).


2.1    The IS Equation

A standard intertemporal IS equation is usually derived from the first-order conditions for
a representative agent with power utility as in the original Lucas (1978) economy. Stan-
dard estimation approaches have experienced difficulty pinning down the risk aversion
parameter, which is at the same time an important parameter underlying the mone-
tary transmission mechanism. Another discomforting feature implied by a standard IS
equation is that it typically fails to match the well-documented persistence of output.
We derive an alternative IS equation from a utility maximizing framework with exter-
nal habit formation similar to Fuhrer (2000). We also explicitly model labor supply in
the utility function but assume additive separability. In particular, we assume that the
representative agent maximizes:
                  ∞
                  X                                        ∞
                                                           X               ·                        ¸
                            s−t                                      s−t       Fs Cs1−σ − 1 Ns1+χ
             Et         ψ         U (Cs , Ns ; Fs ) = Et         ψ                         −            (1)
                  s=t                                      s=t
                                                                                  1−σ        1+χ

where Ct is the composite index of consumption, Nt is the labor supply, Ft represents an
aggregate demand shifting factor; ψ denotes the time discount factor, σ is the inverse of
intertemporal elasticity of consumption and χ represents the inverse of elasticity of labor
supply. We specify Ft as follows:
                                                   Ft = Ht Gt                                           (2)

where Ht is an external habit level, that is, the agent takes Ht as exogenously given,
even though it may depend on past consumption. Gt is an exogenous aggregate demand
shock that can also be interpreted as a preference shock. Following Fuhrer (2000), we
                     η
assume that Ht = Ct−1    where η measures the degree of habit dependence on the past
consumption level. It is this assumption that delivers endogenous output persistence.

   Since labor supply does not affect the marginal utility of consumption, we show in
the appendix that the Fuhrer-type IS equation is preserved:

                  yt = αIS + µEt yt+1 + (1 − µ)yt−1 − φ(it − Et πt+1 ) + ²IS,t                          (3)

                                                           4
                                               1
where it is the short term interest rate; φ = σ+η and µ = σφ. The IS shock, ²IS,t = φ ln Gt ,
is assumed to be independently and identically distributed with homoskedastic variance
  2
σIS .


2.2    The AS Equation (Phillips Curve)

The standard New-Keynesian aggregate supply (AS) curve relates inflation to the output
gap. The Calvo (1983) pricing model implies a positive relation between real marginal
cost and inflation. Even though under certain conditions the output gap is proportional to
marginal cost, in practice, structural estimates of the Phillips curve based on output gap
measures seem less successful than those based on marginal cost (see Galı́ and Gertler
(1999)). Moreover, the standard AS curve fails to account for the observed inflation
persistence. By assuming that the fraction of price-setters which does not adjust prices
optimally, indexes their prices to past inflation, we obtain endogenous persistence in the
AS equation:
                             πt = δEt πt+1 + (1 − δ)πt−1 + $ŝt                        (4)

where πt is inflation and ŝt is the deviation of the log of real marginal cost from its steady
state level. $ captures the short run tradeoff between inflation and the real marginal
cost and (1 − δ) characterizes the endogenous persistence of inflation.

   We consider two specifications for the real marginal cost. First, we assume that
real marginal cost is proportional to the current output gap, which is standard in the
literature. Second, the real marginal cost is assumed proportional to the past output gap
as well as the current output gap. This specification follows from considering an explicit
labor market equilibrium condition coupled with external habit. We refer to Appendix
B for the derivation. Consequently, we analyze the following two AS curves:

      πt = δEt πt+1 + (1 − δ)πt−1 + κ(yt − ytn ) + ²AS,t                                   (5)
      πt = δEt πt+1 + (1 − δ)πt−1 + κ((yt − ytn ) − λ(yt−1 − yt−1
                                                              n
                                                                  )) − ζ²IS,t + ²AS,t      (6)

where yt is de-trended output, ytn is the natural rate of output that would prevail in the
case of perfectly flexible prices and ²AS,t is a negative technology shock with standard
deviation σAS . The IS shock, ²IS,t , enters in the AS equation because real marginal cost
depends on the exogenous aggregate demand shock, Gt . The parameter λ captures the


                                              5
                                                  η
endogenous persistence of output and equals σ+χ      in terms of the structural parameters.
It is the one-period lag structure in the external habit specification that drives this result.
Appendix C shows how the model produces endogenously the dynamics for ytn :

                                     ytn = αyn + λyt−1
                                                   n
                                                       + ²yn ,t                                    (7)

where αyn is a constant and ²yn ,t can be interpreted as a negative markup shock with
standard deviation σyn .


2.3     The Monetary Policy Rule

We assume that the monetary authority specifies the nominal interest rate target, i∗t , as
in the forward-looking Taylor rule proposed by Clarida, Galı́, and Gertler (1999):


                            i∗t = [ı̄t + β (Et πt+1 − πt∗ ) + γ (yt − ytn )]                       (8)

where πt∗ is a time-varying inflation target and ı̄t is the desired level of the nominal
interest rate that would prevail when Et πt+1 = πt∗ and yt = ytn . We present three
alternative specifications for ı̄t :

                                        ı̄t = r̄ + Et πt+1                                         (9)
                                        ı̄t = r̄t + Et πt+1                                       (10)
                                        ı̄t = ı̄                                                  (11)

Specification (9) makes the desired nominal rate consistent with the Fisher hypothesis,
so that the real rate in the IS equation is a constant whenever inflation hits the target
and output equals potential. Because expected inflation enters the desired nominal rate
in specifications (9) and (10), the long-run response of the interest rate to expected
inflation - a typical measure of the Fed’s stance against inflation - is 1 + β.2 Equation
(10) is analogous to (9), except that the desired rate of interest, r̄t , is allowed to vary
   2
     Replacing Et πt+1 by πt∗ in equations (9) and (10) leads to observationally equivalent rules where
this long-run response is captured by β.




                                                   6
over time. We specify r̄t as in Woodford (2003), so that:

                                    1£      n             n
                                                                   ¤
                            r̄t =      µEt yt+1 + (1 − µ)yt−1 − ytn .                    (12)
                                    φ

That is, the desired rate of interest follows from the IS equation evaluated at the natural
rate of output. The desired real rate thus coincides with the Wicksellian real rate, the
real rate at which there are no monetary pressures on either the output gap or inflation.
Finally, equation (11) specifies a constant desired nominal interest rate.

   Our motivation for considering alternative monetary policy specifications is two-fold.
First, different researchers have estimated alternative monetary policy rules. For instance,
Rudebusch and Wu (2004) use our specification (9), whereas Hordahl, Tristani, and
Vestin (2003) employ equation (11). We can assess whether alternative specifications
imply different estimates for the structural parameters or different dynamics for the
macro and term structure variables and which specification fits the data better. Second,
our study lets both the desired real rate and the inflation target vary through time, so
that the desired nominal rate variation can stem from alternative sources.

    We further assume that the monetary authority sets the short term interest rate as
a weighted average of the interest rate target and a lag of the short term interest rate
to capture the tendency by central banks to smooth interest rate changes (see Clarida,
Galı́, and Gertler (1999)):

                                 it = ρit−1 + (1 − ρ) i∗t + ²M P,t                       (13)

where ρ is the smoothing parameter and ²M P,t is an exogenous monetary policy shock,
assumed to be i.i.d. with standard deviation, σM P . The resulting monetary policy rule
for the interest rate is given by:

              it = ρit−1 + (1 − ρ) [ı̄t + β (Et πt+1 − πt∗ ) + γ (yt − ytn )] + ²M P,t   (14)


2.4    Inflation Target πt∗

We close our model by specifying a stochastic process for the inflation target, πt∗ . Little
is known about how the monetary authority sets the inflation target. Presumably, the


                                                 7
inflation target is anchored in the expectations of long-run inflation by the private sector,
in addition to some exogenous information. Therefore, we define πtLR as the conditional
expected value of a weighted average of all future inflation rates.
                                                          ∞
                                                          X
                                        πtLR = (1 − d)          dj Et πt+j                             (15)
                                                          j=0


with 0 ≤ d ≤ 1. This equation can be succinctly written as:

                                        πtLR = dEt πt+1
                                                    LR
                                                        + (1 − d)πt                                    (16)

When d equals 0, πtLR collapses to current inflation, when d approaches 1, long-run
inflation approaches unconditional expected inflation. We assume that the monetary
authority anchors its inflation target around πtLR , but smooths target changes, so that:

                                      πt∗ = ωπt−1
                                              ∗
                                                  + (1 − ω)πtLR + ²π∗ ,t                               (17)

We view ²π∗ ,t as an exogenous shift in the policy stance regarding the long term rate of
inflation or the target, and assume it to be i.i.d. with standard deviation σπ∗ . Substituting
out πtLR in Equation (17) using equation 16, we obtain:

                                πt∗ = ϕ1 Et πt+1
                                             ∗         ∗
                                                 + ϕ2 πt−1 + ϕ3 πt + ²π∗ ,t                            (18)

                 d               ω
where ϕ1 =     1+dω
                    ,   ϕ2 =   1+dω
                                      and ϕ3 = 1 − ϕ1 − ϕ2 .

    We call equation (18) the new inflation target specification. We also consider an
inflation target specification which is quite popular in the literature:

                                       πt∗ = ϕ2 πt−1
                                                 ∗
                                                     + ϕ3 πt−1 + ²π∗ ,t                                (19)

This equation can be theoretically justified postulating that long-run inflation is formed
in a backward-looking manner.3 We call equation (19) the standard inflation target
specification.
   3
                                       P∞
     In particular, when πtLR = (1 − d) j=0 dj πt−j−1 and πt∗ = πtLR + ²π∗ ,t , the inflation target follows
this process: πt∗ = dπt−1
                      ∗
                          + (1 − d)πt−1 + ²π∗ ,t




                                                      8
2.5     The Full Model

Bringing together all the equations, we have a 5 variable system with three observed and
two unobserved macro factors:
                                 £                                 ¤
  πt = δEt πt+1 + (1 − δ)πt−1 + κ (yt − ytn ) − λDUt (yt−1 − yt−1
                                                              n
                                                                  ) − DUt ζ²IS,t + ²AS,t
                                                                                                     (20)
  yt = αIS + µEt yt+1 + (1 − µ)yt−1 − φ(it − Et πt+1 ) + ²IS,t                                       (21)
  it = αM P + ρit−1 + (1 − ρ) [ı̄t + β (Et πt+1 − πt∗ ) + γ (yt − ytn )] + ²M P,t                    (22)
               n
 ytn = αyn + λyt−1 + ²yn ,t                                                                          (23)
              ∗
 πt∗ = ϕ1 Et πt+1       ∗
                  + ϕ2 πt−1 + ϕ3 Υt + ²π∗ ,t                                                         (24)

For the πt∗ process, we either have Υt = πt or we set ϕ1 = 0 and Υt = πt−1 . There are two
specifications for ŝt depending on whether DUt = 1 or DUt = 0 and three specifications
for ı¯t . Consequently, we have a total of 12 possible models. They can be expressed in
matrix form as:
                                Bxt = α + AEt xt+1 + Jxt−1 + C²t                                     (25)

where xt = [πt yt it ytn πt∗ ]0 and ²t = [²AS,t ²IS,t ²M P,t ²yn ,t ²π∗ ,t ]0 . α is a 5 × 1 vector
of constants and B, A, J, C are appropriately defined 5 × 5 matrices. The Rational
Expectations (RE) equilibrium can be written as a first-order VAR:

                                        xt = c + Ωxt−1 + Γ²t                                         (26)

Hence, the implied model dynamics are a simple VAR subject to a set of non-linear
restrictions.4 Note that Ω cannot be solved analytically in general. We solve for Ω
numerically using the QZ method (see Klein (2000) and Cho and Moreno (2004)). Once
Ω is solved, Γ and c follow straightforwardly.

    It can be shown that the reduced-form representation of the vector of observable
macro variables follows a VARMA(3,2) process. By adding unobservables, we potentially
deliver more realistic joint dynamics for inflation, the output gap and the interest rate,
and overcome the lack of persistence implied by previous studies.
   4
   A closed-form solution is available when the model is fully forward-looking. Because the observed
macro factors do not Granger-cause the term structure in this case the model is empirically uninteresting.



                                                    9
3     Incorporating Term Structure Information

We derive the term structure model implicit in the IS curve that we presented in section
2. In contrast, Rudebusch and Wu (2004) and Hordahl, Tristani, and Vestin (2003)
formulate exogenous kernels, not linked to a utility function. This effort results in an
easily estimable linear system in observable macro variables and term structure spreads.


3.1    Affine Term Structure Models with New-Keynesian Factor
       Dynamics

Affine term structure models require linear state variables dynamics and a linear pricing
kernel process with conditionally normal shocks (see Duffie and Kan (1996)). For the
state variable dynamics implied by the New-Keynesian model in equation (26) to fall
in the affine class, we assume that the shocks are conditionally normally distributed,
²t ∼ N (0, Dt−1 ). The pricing kernel process Mt+1 prices all securities such that:

                                    Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ] = 1                              (27)

                                                 P
In particular, for an n-period bond, Rt+1 = n−1,t+1
                                                  Pn ,t
                                                        with Pn,t the time t price of an
n-period zero-coupon bond. If Mt+1 > 0 for all t, the resulting returns satisfy the no-
arbitrage condition (Harrison and Kreps (1979)). In affine models, the log of the pricing
kernel is modelled as a conditionally linear process. Consider, for instance:

                                              1
                      mt+1 = ln(Mt+1 ) = −it − Λ0t Dt Λt − Λ0t ²t+1                  (28)
                                              2

Here Λt = Λ0 + Λ1 xt , where Λ0 is a 5 × 1 vector and Λ1 is a 5 × 5 matrix. First, setting
Dt = D, we obtain a Gaussian price of risk model. Dai and Singleton (2002) study such
a model and claim that it accounts for the deviations of the Expectations Hypothesis
(EH) observed in U.S. term structure data. An alternative model sets Λt = Λ and
²t ∼ N (0, Dt−1 ) with Dt = D0 + D1 diag(xt ), where diag(xt ) is the diagonal matrix with
the vector xt on its diagonal. This model introduces heteroskedasticity of the square-root
form and has a long tradition in finance (see Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985)). Finally,
setting Λt = Λ0 and Dt = D results in a homoskedastic model.

    All three of these models imply an affine term structure. That is, log bond prices,

                                            10
pn,t are an affine function of the state variables. The maturity-dependent coefficients
follow Ricatti difference equations. The three models have different implications for the
behavior of term spreads and holding period returns. First, the homoskedastic model
implies that the EH holds: there may be a term premium but it does not vary through
time. Both the Gaussian prices of risk model and the square root model imply time-
varying term premiums. Second, our model includes inflation as a state variable and the
real pricing kernel (the kernel that prices bonds perfectly indexed against inflation) and
inflation are correlated. It is this correlation that determines the inflation risk premium.
If the covariance term is constant, the risk premium is constant over time and this will
be true in a homoskedastic model.

    The kernel model implied by the IS curve derived above fits in the homoskedastic
class. It is possible to modify the pricing framework into one of the two other models,
but we defer this to future work. Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (2001) show that
a model with minimal variation in the term premium suffices to match the evidence
regarding the Expectations Hypothesis for the US.


3.2    The term structure model implied by the macro model

Because our derivation of the IS curve assumed a particular preference structure, the
pricing kernel is given by the intertemporal consumption marginal rate of substitution of
the model. That is:

              mt+1 = ln ψ − σyt+1 + (σ + η)yt − ηyt−1 + (gt+1 − gt ) − πt+1            (29)

The no-arbitrage condition holds by construction. In a log-normal model, pricing a one
period bond implies
                              Et [mt+1 ] + 0.5Vt [mt+1 ] = −it                         (30)

Hence, we can express the pricing kernel as:

                                          1
                              mt+1 = −it − Λ0 DΛ − Λ0 ²t+1                             (31)
                                          2

where Λ is a vector of prices of risk entirely restricted by the structural parameters,

                         Λ0 = [1 σ 0 0 0]Γ − [0 (σ + η) 0 0 0]                         (32)

                                            11
The bond pricing equation is affine:

                                       pn,t = an + b0n xt                               (33)

where, by log-normality,

                                                  1
                    pn,t = Et (mt+1 + pn−1,t+1 ) + Vt (mt+1 + pn−1,t+1 )                (34)
                                                  2

Using an induction argument and equations (26) and (31), we find:

                  an = an−1 + b0n−1 c + 0.5b0n−1 ΓDΓ0 bn−1 − Λ0 DΓ0 bn−1
                  b0n = −e03 + b0n−1 Ω

with e3 a 5 × 1 vector of zeros with a 1 in the third row. Therefore, the bond yields are
an affine function of the state variables:

                                                 an b0n
                                     yn,t = −      − xt                                 (35)
                                                 n  n

Term spreads are also an affine function of the state variables:

                                              an    bn
                                  spn,t = −      − ( + e3 )0 xt                         (36)
                                              n     n

where spn,t ≡ − pn,t
                 n
                     − it is the spread between the n period yield and the short rate.
This model provides a particular convenient form for the joint dynamics of the macro
variables and the term spreads. Let zt = [πt yt it spn1 ,t spn2 ,t ]0 , where n1 and n2 refer
to two different yield maturities for the long-term bond in the spread. Then

                                   xt = c + Ωxt−1 + Γ²t                                 (37)
                                   zt = Az + Bz xt                                      (38)

where                                                           
                               03×1            I3       03×2
                              an1              bn1              
                        Az =  − n1  , Bz =  −( n1 + e3 )0       
                                 a                b
                               − nn22          −( nn22 + e3 )0




                                                12
Using xt = Bz−1 (zt − Az ), we find:

                                  zt = az + Ωz zt−1 + Γz ²t                          (39)

where

                             Ωz = Bz ΩBz−1
                              Γ z = Bz Γ
                              az = Bz c + (I − Bz ΩBz−1 )Az

In other words, the macro variables and the term spreads follow a first-order VAR with
complex cross-equation restrictions.



4     A First Look at the Data

4.1     Data Description

The sample period is from the first quarter of 1961 to the fourth quarter of 2003. We
measure inflation with the CPI (collected from the Bureau of Labor Statistics) but check
robustness using the GDP deflator, from the National Income and Product Accounts
(NIPA). We measure de-trended output as linearly de-trended output. Output is real
GDP from NIPA. We use the 3-month T-bill rate, taken from the Federal Reserve of St.
Louis database, as the short-term interest rate. Finally, our analysis uses term-structure
data at the one, three and five year maturities from the CRSP database.


4.2     Macro and Term Structure Interactions

If term spreads indeed predict macro variables, expanding the agents’ information set
adding term structure information may lead to a more accurate estimation of the struc-
tural parameters. Diebold, Rudebusch, and Aruoba (2003) stress the strength of the
predictive power of macro variables for term structure variables. Consequently, we per-
form Granger-causality (GC) tests in both directions. To identify macroeconomic shocks
and structural parameters, it is at least as important to correctly identify contemporane-


                                             13
ous correlations. Therefore, we also assess the significance of contemporaneous projection
coefficients.

    We investigate a first-order VAR containing inflation, de-trended output, the interest
rate and two term spreads for the 3 and 5 year maturities. Table 1 reports the results
for two inflation measures, the CPI and GDP deflator. The Granger causality results
are rather mixed. Term spreads Granger-cause inflation when it is measured using the
CPI index, but not when it is measured using the GDP deflator. There is no evidence of
term spreads predicting output.5 In contrast, the evidence of macro variables Granger-
causing the long term spreads is more significant and uniform. This conclusion remains
valid if the interest rate is omitted from the macro variables. The evidence for significant
contemporaneous correlations is much stronger and most of our tests reject the null of no
correlation at the 5% level. This suggests that there are indeed important interactions
between macro and term structure variables, but they may not necessarily be the ones
most stressed in the literature to date, which primarily focused on feedback parameters.


4.3     Persistence

One motivation for introducing additional unobserved variables into a standard macro-
model is to generate more persistent dynamics. Estimates of empirical VAR models use
many lags, sometimes as many as 12, which leads to over-parameterized systems. How-
ever, structural macro-models have difficulty generating endogenous persistence sufficient
to match the persistence in the data.

    In our model the unobserved variables also inject more persistence into the endogenous
dynamics for inflation and the output gap. We can provide some preliminary data-based
motivation for why our approach may be successful. First, consider a standard lag
selection criterion, in particular the Schwarz criterion (BIC). We contrast the number
of lags the BIC criterion would select in an empirical VAR system with only macro
variables (inflation, the output gap and the interest rate) with how many lags would be
necessary for a VAR that also embeds term spreads. We find that the optimal lag length
for the macro system is 2 (the Akaike’s criterion selects 3), requiring the estimation of
18 feedback parameters. If we look at individual equations, the BIC criterion selects
   5
    Studies finding that spreads predict future output typically use output growth rather than de-trended
output (Estrella and Mishkin (1998)).


                                                   14
three lags for de-trended output and the interest rate. Hence, we take as our empirical
benchmark, a VAR of the three macro variables with three lags, which we call the macro
VAR(3). Our model can potentially replicate its dynamics, because the reduced form
for the macro variables implied by our model is a VARMA(3,2). When we add the term
spreads, the optimal lag length selected by BIC is 1 (the Akaike criterion selects 2). In
individual equations, the BIC criterion selects two lags only for the inflation and output
equations. Consequently, the empirical evidence is generally consistent with our model,
which has a first-order VAR reduced form when the term spreads are added. Of course,
our model tries to fit the feedback dynamics of the system (which unconstrained has 25
parameters) in a structural fashion, using only 10 parameters.

   Second, we investigate the autocorrelograms of the data directly. Panel A of Table
2 produces the empirical autocorrelograms of the 5 variables and Panel B shows the
autocorrelogram implied by an unconstrained first order VAR. Note that the inflation
and interest rate autocorrelograms decay slower than what is implied for a first-order
autoregressive model. However, for both output and the term spreads the opposite is
true. The unconstrained first-order VAR still fails to fully match these patterns, but it
is possible that our structural model will perform better.



5     Estimation and Model Fit

In this section, we first present the general estimation methodology and then analyze the
goodness of fit of the various models we estimate.


5.1    Estimation Methodology

All the models we consider imply a first-order VAR on zt , with complex cross-equation,
non-linear restrictions. Because we are not interested in the drifts, we perform the
estimation on de-meaned data, z̄t = zt − Êzt with Êzt the sample mean of zt . The
structural parameters to be estimated are therefore θ = (δ κ σ η ρ β γ λ ω d σAS
σIS σM P σyn σπ∗ ). Assuming normal errors, it is straightforward to write down the
likelihood function for this problem and produce Full Information Likelihood Estimates
(FIML) estimates. To accommodate possible deviations from the strong normality and


                                           15
homoskedasticity assumptions underlying maximum likelihood, we use a version of GMM
instead. To do so, re-write the model in the following form:

                                z̄t = Ωz z̄t−1 + Γz ²t = Ωz z̄t−1 + Γz Σut                    (40)

where ut = Σ−1 ²t ∼ (0, I5 ) and Σ = diag([σAS σIS σM P σyn σπ∗ ]0 ), that is Σ2 = D.

   To construct the moment conditions, consider the following vector valued processes:

                                         h1,t = ut ⊗ z̄t−1                                    (41)
                                         h2,t = vech(ut u0t − I5 )                            (42)
                                          ht = [h01,t h02,t ]0                                (43)

where vech represents an operator stacking the elements on or below the principle diag-
onal of a matrix. The model imposes E[ht ] = 0. The 25 h1,t moment conditions capture
the feedback parameters; the 15 h2,t moment conditions capture the structure imposed
by the model on the variance-covariance matrix of the innovations. Rather than using
an initial identity matrix as the weighting matrix, which may give rise to poor first-stage
estimates, we use a weighting matrix implied by the model under normality. That is
under the null of the model, the weighting matrix must be:

                                             Wt = (E[ht h0t ])−1                              (44)

Using normality and the error structure implied by the model, it is then straightforward
to show that the optimal weighting matrix is given by:
                           "            PT                                              #−1
                                    1                0
                               I⊗   T    t=1 z̄t−1 z̄t−1             025×15
                  Ŵ0 =                                                                       (45)
                                        015×25              I15 + vech(I5 )vech(I5 )0

This weighting matrix does not depend on the parameters. Then we minimize the stan-
dard GMM objective function:
                                           ³       ´0  ³       ´
                                        Q = Ê[ht ] Ŵ0 Ê[ht ]                               (46)

                  1
                      PT
where Ê[ht ] =   T    t=1   ht . This gives rise to estimates that are quite close to what would
be obtained with maximum likelihood. Given these estimates, we produce a second-


                                                       16
stage weighting matrix allowing for heteroskedasticity and 5 Newey-West (Newey and
West (1987)) lags in constructing the variance covariance matrix of the orthogonality
conditions. We iterate this system until convergence. This estimation proved overall
rather robust with parameter estimates varying little after the first round, except for the
micro-founded model, where we failed to obtain convergence for all of the model variants
but one. Hence, we consider a total of 7 specifications.


5.2    Model Fit

Before we examine the goodness of fit, Table 3 proposes a taxonomy for the models
we estimated. There are 3 different Taylor rule specifications and two inflation target
specifications. All the acronyms in the table refer to the standard AS curve model.
Because there is only one micro-founded model that converged, we simply add the MF
qualifier for this model. The micro-founded model that converged has a constant desired
nominal rate and the new inflation target specification.

   The standard GMM test of the over-identifying restrictions follows a χ2 distribution
with 25 degrees of freedom because there are 40 moment conditions but only 15 param-
eters. We find that the test fails to reject all models at the 5% level when 5 Newey-West
lags are used in the construction of the weighting matrix (the p-value is around 17%),
but rejects strongly when only three Newey-West lags are used. This in itself suggests
that the orthogonality conditions still display substantial persistence. The test values are
similar across models and hence do not yield a useful criterion to differentiate models.

    We consider several points statistics that compare the fit of the model with different
features of the dynamics of the data. There is not a clear “winning” model, with certain
models fitting particular aspects of the data better than others. For example, the micro-
founded model does best in matching the feedback coefficients of a first-order VAR but
does less well in matching individual autocorrelograms. Overall, it is one of the top
two models, together with the [CR,EI,N] model. Let’s illustrate the performance of the
various models with respect to important features of the data. We start with persistence.

     Table 4 focusses on how well the model fits the autocorrelogram of the 5 variables in
zt . For each variable we set a loss function in terms of the autocorrelogram fit as follows:
0.5 (ρ1 −ρ1,mod ) + 0.3 (ρ4 −ρ4,mod ) + 0.2 (ρ8 −ρ8,mod ), where ρj represent data correlations


                                              17
at the j-th lag and mod refers to the autocorrelations implied by the model. Our point
statistic is the square of this value divided by an estimate of its standard deviation. The
table produces the statistic values plus a p-value based on the χ2 (1) distribution. For
inflation, none of the models does particularly well. The output gap persistence is hard
to fit too, but models [MF], [CR,EI,N] and [TVR,EI,N] do a reasonable job. The lowest
function value is for model [TVR,EI,N]. Most models have no problem fitting interest rate
dynamics. The lowest function value occurs for model [CR,CI,N]. The spread dynamics
are hard to fit, but model [CR,CI,N] again does very well for both spreads. Nevertheless,
model [CR,EI,N] does even better for the 5-year spread. Model [CR,EI,N] is the only
model that fails to reject at the 5% level in 4 out of 5 cases. This is the model we will
focus on in what follows.

   To view the fit of persistence differently, Figure 1 compares the autocorrelograms
implied by the model [CR,EI,N] and the macro VAR(3). The macro VAR(3) fits the
data very well, but our model also manages to generate very slow decay. For the infla-
tion process, this comes at the cost of a too high first-order autocorrelation coefficient.
Nevertheless, the autocorrelogram for each of the macro variables implied by the model
is within the 95 % confidence interval around the data correlogram.

   We also explore whether the various models replicate the dynamic behavior of zt . In
Table 5, we compare the reduced form feedback coefficients for model [CR,EI,N] with
their counterparts for an unconstrained VAR(1) model. The model captures the relative
magnitude of the diagonal elements quite well, generating strong autocorrelation feedback
for the output gap, the interest rate and the five-year spread and less so for inflation and
the three-year spread. Most of the off-diagonal elements are insignificantly different from
zero in the data. Nevertheless, de-trended output has predictive power for all of the term
structure variables, including the interest rate, and the model reproduces this feature
near perfectly. The data also show strong cross-feedback between the two term spreads.
The model gets the sign right, but makes the effects even larger. Whereas some other
feedback coefficients do not appear to be as well matched, they are mostly not significant.
Moreover, comparing the magnitude of individual coefficients may be misleading. For
instance, the two term spreads predict inflation and interest rates with the wrong sign,
but the spreads are highly correlated so the joint effect is likely more important.

   To see this more clearly, Table 6 shows correlation coefficients between forecasts using
a VAR(1) and model-based forecasts at different horizons. For ease of interpretation, we

                                            18
average the forecast correlations over different horizons, producing short-term, medium-
term and long-term correlations. The results are similar across models. Short-run pro-
jections by the model are highly correlated with those by a VAR for all five variables.
That correlation decreases monotonically for all variables at medium and long horizons.
Whereas the correlations of the spread projections become negative at long-horizons (8-
10 quarters) the correlations remain very high for interest rates and moderately high for
inflation. For the output gap, the correlation is very much model dependent, with the
MF model and the standard inflation target specification performing the best. When we
compute a quadratic statistic based on the deviations of the model feedback parameters
from the VAR(1) parameters using the inverse of the empirical variance-covariance ma-
trix as the weighting matrix, the MF model performs best, followed by the [CR,CI,N]
and the [CR,EI,N] models.

  In Table 7, we compare the correlation structure of the innovations implied by the
model with those implied by an unconstrained VAR(1). The correlations of the macro
variables with the term structure variables display a poor fit with the VAR implied ones,
with the signs being mostly reversed. However, the correlations are not significantly
different from zero in the unrestricted VAR. The correlations between the term structure
variables are fit well by the model.

      Note that in Tables 5 and 7 we use bootstrapped standard errors. We were concerned
that the GMM estimation may under-predict the sampling error of the parameter esti-
mates (see also below) and therefore conducted the following bootstrap experiment. We
bootstrap from the 172 observations on the vector of structural standard errors (²t ) with
replacement and re-create a sample of artificial data using the estimated parameter ma-
trices (Ω, Γ) and historical initial values. For each replication, we create a sample of 672
observations, discard the first 500 and retain the last 172 observations to create a sample
of length equal to the data sample. We then re-estimate the model, obtain parameters,
impulse responses, and other statistics for these artificial data. We use 1,000 replications
to create small sample distributions and use the standard deviation of the empirical dis-
tribution as an estimate of the true sampling error of the parameter, or derived statistic
(for instance, VAR feedback parameter, impulse response, or regression slope).6
  6
    Our bootstrap also reveals a number of biases in estimated parameter coefficients. We defer a
discussion of small sample inference in this context to future work but refer the reader to Cho and
Moreno (2004) and Fuhrer and Rudebusch (2004) for related analyzes of small sample biases in the
estimation of New-Keynesian models.


                                                19
6     Macroeconomic Implications

6.1    Structural Parameter Estimates

The second to fourth columns in Table 8 show the parameter estimates of model [CR,EI,N]
and their GMM and bootstrap standard errors. All the parameter estimates have the ex-
pected sign and are significantly different from zero with the exception of γ, the response
of the monetary authority to the output gap. Columns 5 through 8 show the mean, stan-
dard error, maximum and minimum parameter estimates within the set of seven models
which were estimated. All the estimations yielded a stationary and unique solution.
Interestingly, most of the parameter estimates are similar across specifications, that is,
the cross-model standard deviation is small. Consequently, unless otherwise noted, our
discussion below focusing on model [CR,EI,N] is robust to the specification of the Taylor
rule and the inflation target.

    A first important finding is the size and significance of κ, the Phillips curve parameter.
As Galı́ and Gertler (1999) point out, previous studies fail to obtain reasonable and
significant estimates of κ with quarterly data. Galı́ and Gertler (1999) do obtain larger
and significant estimates using a measure for marginal cost replacing the output gap. Our
estimates of κ, using the output gap and term spreads are even larger than those obtained
by Galı́ and Gertler (1999). The estimate is also highly significant. While the standard
error may be under-estimated, the cross-model standard deviation of the κ estimate still
suggests a large and significant κ. Using the (larger) standard error from the bootstrap,
κ remains statistically significantly different from zero. The forward-looking parameter
in the AS equation is estimated close to 0.61 consistent with previous studies.

  When structural models are estimated with efficient techniques such as GMM or
MLE, they often give rise to large estimates of σ rendering the IS equation a rather
ineffective channel of monetary policy transmission. Two examples are Ireland (2001)
and Cho and Moreno (2004)). As Lucas (2003) points out, a curvature parameter in
the representative agent’s utility function consistent with most macro and public finance
models should be between 1 and 4. While the Lucas’ statement does not strictly apply
to models with habit persistence, in our multiplicative habit model σ still represents
local risk aversion and our estimation yields a small and significant estimate of σ. Note
that σ’s bootstrapped standard error is substantially higher than the asymptotic one,


                                             20
making its significance more marginal. Model [CR,EI,N] yields a significant estimate
of σ slightly larger than 3, but the σ estimate is never larger than 5 in any model.
Smets and Wouters (2003) and Lubik and Schorfheide (2004) find small estimates of σ
using Bayesian estimation techniques. Rotemberg and Woodford (1998) and Boivin and
Giannoni (2003) also find small estimates of σ but they modify the estimation procedure
towards fitting particular impulse responses. Our model exhibits large habit persistence
effects, as the habit persistence parameter, η, is close to 4. Other studies have also found
an important role for habit persistence (Fuhrer (2000), Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher
(2001)).7 In summary, the parameter estimates for the AS and IS equations imply that
our model delivers large economic effects of monetary policy on inflation and output.

    Why do we obtain large and significant estimates of κ and σ? Two channels seem to
be at work: First, expectations are based on both observable and unobservable macro
variables. Therefore, an important variable in the AS equation, such as expected inflation
is directly affected by the inflation target. As a result, changes in the inflation target
shift the AS curve. As we show below in the variance decompositions, the inflation target
shock contributes significantly to variation in the inflation rate. Similarly, the natural
rate shock significantly contributes to the dynamics of de-trended output. Second, our
measure of the output gap is different from the usual de-trended output and contains
additional valuable information extracted from the term structure. For instance, the first
order autocorrelation of the implied output gap is 0.92, which is smaller than 0.96, the
first order autocorrelation of linearly de-trended output. The Phillips curve coefficients
found in previous studies reflect the weak link between de-trended output and inflation
in the data and the large difference in persistence between these two variables. In our
model, even though κ is rather large, the relationship between inflation and the output
gap is still not strongly positive because the inflation target also moves the AS-curve.
When the variability of the inflation target is reduced and fixed in estimation, we ob-
tain larger κ’s, a decrease in the autocorrelation of the output gap and strong positive
cross-correlations between inflation and the output gap. In sum, the presence of both
the inflation target and the natural rate of output in the AS equation implies a sig-
nificantly positive conditional co-movement between the output gap and inflation, even
though the unconditional correlation between them remains low as it is in the data. The
   7
    Our habit persistence parameter is not directly comparable to that derived by Fuhrer (2000). There
is however a linear relationship between them: η = (σ − 1)h, where h is the Fuhrer (2000) habit
persistence parameter. Our implied h is close to 2, larger than in previous studies.


                                                 21
unobservables are also critical in fitting the relative persistence of the output gap and
inflation. Similarly, the φ parameter still fits the dependence of the output gap to the
real interest rate, but the real interest rate is now an implicit function of all the state
variables, including the natural rate of output.

   The estimates of the policy rule parameters are similar to those found in the literature.
For all models, the estimated long-run response to expected inflation is larger than 1.
The response to the output gap is always close to 0 and insignificantly different from 0.
Finally, the smoothing parameter, ρ, is estimated to be 0.72 for model [CR,EI,N] and
lies mostly in a [0.7-0.9] range, similar to previous studies.

   The two unobservables are quite persistent, but clearly stationary processes. The
natural rate of output’s persistence is close to 0.96, while the weight on the past inflation
target in the inflation target equation is 0.88. Furthermore, the weight on current inflation
in the construction of the long-run inflation target is close to 0.15. These parameters are
reasonably robust across specifications. Finally, the five shock standard deviations are
significant, with the monetary policy shock standard deviation larger than the others.
There has been some evidence pointing towards a structural break in the β parameter
(see, for instance, Clarida, Galı́, and Gertler (1999) or Lubik and Schorfheide (2004)).
The large estimate of σM P may reflect the absence of such a break in our model. However,
different models can yield quite different standard deviations for the monetary policy
shocks and the shocks for the latent variables.


6.2    Output Gap and Inflation Target

One important feature of our analysis is that we can extract two economically important
unobservable variables from the observable macro and term structure variables. The
output gap is of special interest to the monetary authority, as it plays a crucial role in the
monetary transmission mechanism of most macro models. Smets and Wouters (2003) and
Laubach and Williams (2003) also extract the natural rate of output for the European
and US economies from theoretical and empirical models respectively. An important
difference between our work and theirs is that we use term structure information to filter
out the natural rate, whereas they back it out of pure macro models through Kalman
filter techniques. The dynamics of the inflation target are particularly important for
the private sector, as the Federal Reserve has never announced targets for inflation and

                                             22
knowledge of the inflation target would be useful for both real and financial investment
decisions.

   The top Panel in Figure 2 shows the evolution of the output gap implied by Model
[CR,EI,N] together with the average of the output gap across our seven models.8 The
two series are very similar. It also displays a band of two cross-model standard deviations
around the average. Several facts are worth noting. Before 1980, the output gap stayed
above zero for most of the time. A positive output gap is typically interpreted as a proxy
for excess demand. A popular view is that a high output gap made inflation rise through
the second half of the 70s. Our output gap graph is consistent with that view. However,
right before 1980, the output gap becomes negative. The aggressive monetary policy
response to the high inflation rate is probably responsible for this sharp decline. After
this, the output gap remains negative for most of the time up to 1995. This negative
output gap was mainly caused by a surge in the natural rate of output, which remains
above trend well into the mid-90s. Finally the output gap grows during the mid-1990s
and starts to fall around 2000, coinciding with the latest recession.

   The bottom Panel in Figure 2 analogously presents the natural rate of output implied
by Model [CR,EI,N], the average of the natural rate across our seven models, together
with a confidence band. Note that, first, there is a steady upward trend in the natural
rate throughout the 60s. While it is possible that the natural rate did increase during
that period, we think that the linear filtering of output overstates this growth. As the
confidence bands show, the uncertainty is larger precisely at the beginning and the end of
the sample. Second, the natural rate falls around 1973 and the late 70s. While the natural
rate is exogenous in our setting, this may reflect the side-effects of the productivity slow-
down brought about by oil price increases. Third, the natural rate stayed high throughout
most of the 80s. Fourth, the natural rate did fall coinciding with the recession of the
early 80s, but it remained above trend during the rest of the 80s. In the early nineties it
fell below trend and has stayed close to trend since the mid nineties.

       Figure 3 focusses on the inflation target. The top Panel shows the filtered inflation
target from model [CR,EI,N], the average of the target across our seven models together
with the confidence bands.9 The bottom Panel shows the CPI inflation series for com-
   8
     The output gap is measured as the percentage deviation of de-trended output with respect to the
natural rate of output. Therefore, the means of the output gap, de-trended output and the natural rate
of output are 0. We show the de-meaned series, consistent with the estimation procedure.
   9
     Because we estimate the model with demeaned data, we add the mean of inflation back to the actual


                                                 23
parison. Three well differentiated sections can be identified along the sample. In the
first one, the inflation target grows steadily up to the early 80s. Private sector expec-
tations seem to have built up through the 60s and 70s contributing to the progressive
increase in inflation. In the second one, the inflation target remains high for about 5
years. Finally, since the mid-eighties, the inflation target declines and remains low for
the rest of the sample, tracking inflation closely. Much like in the case of the output
gap, uncertainty about the inflation target is higher at the beginning and the end of the
sample. Uncertainty is also high during the early 80s, when the inflation target was high.


6.3     Implied Macro Dynamics

In this section, we characterize the dynamics implied by the structural model using
standard impulse response and variance decomposition analysis. Figure 4 shows the
impulse response functions of the five macro variables to the structural shocks for model
[CR,EI,N]. The AS shock is a negative technology or supply shock which decreases the
productivity of firms. A typical example of an AS shock is an oil shock, as it raises overall
marginal costs. As expected, the AS shock pushes inflation almost 2 percentage points
above its steady state, but it soon returns to its original level, given the highly forward-
looking nature of our AS equation. The monetary authority increases the interest rate
following the supply shock. Because of the strong reaction of the Fed to the AS shock
(the Taylor principle holds), the real rate increases and output exhibits a hump-shaped
decline for several quarters. The inflation target initially increases after the AS shock
but then decreases and stays below steady state due to the decline in inflation.

    Our IS shock is a demand shock, which can also be interpreted as a preference shock
(see Appendix A). Consistent with economic intuition and the results in the empirical
VARs of Evans and Marshall (2003), the IS shock increases output, inflation, the interest
rate and the inflation target for several quarters.

    The monetary policy shock reflects shifts to the interest rate unexplained by the state
of the economy. Given our strong monetary transmission mechanism, a contractionary
monetary policy shock yields a strong decline of both output and inflation. The inflation
target also declines, reinforcing the contractionary effect of the monetary policy shock on
inflation target. This procedure is consistent with our model, where the mean of the inflation target
coincides with that of inflation.


                                                 24
inflation and output. The interest rate increases following the monetary policy shock, but
after three quarters it undershoots its steady-state level. This undershooting is related
to the strong endogenous decrease of output and inflation to the monetary policy shock.
As we show below, this reaction of the short-term interest rate to the monetary policy
shock has implications for the reaction of the entire term structure to the monetary policy
shock.

     The microeconomic mechanism for our natural rate shock is an increase in the number
of firms, which decreases the wedge between prices and marginal costs (a negative markup
shock) and increases output. In other words, a natural rate shock shifts the AS curve
down and not surprisingly, we see that an expansive natural rate shock increases output
and lowers inflation. Through the monetary policy rule, the interest rate follows initially
a similar path to inflation, decreasing substantially. Eventually, inflation rises above
steady state again and so does the interest rate, both overshooting their steady state
during several periods. As a result, the inflation target, which partially reflects expected
inflation, raises above steady-state almost immediately. Notice how output converges
towards its natural level after 10 quarters following the natural rate shock and moves in
parallel with it from then onwards.

   An expansionary inflation target shock is an exogenous shift in the preferences of the
Fed regarding its monetary policy goal. Because the inflation target is a long-term policy
objective, a positive inflation target shock is akin to a persistent expansionary monetary
policy shock. As a result, output and inflation exhibit a strong hump-shaped increase
in response to the target shock, making the interest rate increase. Notice that in our
setup, the strong response of inflation to a target shock is due to the relation between
the inflation target, inflation expectations and inflation.

   Figure 5 shows the variance decompositions at different horizons for the five macro
variables in terms of the five structural shocks. The variance decompositions show the
contribution of each macroeconomic shock to the overall forecast variance of each of the
variables at different horizons. Inflation is mostly explained by the AS shock at short
horizons. However, at medium and long-run horizons inflation dynamics are mostly
driven by the monetary policy shock and the inflation target shock. Short-run output
dynamics are mostly due to the IS and monetary policy shocks. The natural rate shock
has a growing influence on output dynamics as the time horizon advances, reflecting the
fact that in the long-run output tends to its natural level. Interest rate dynamics are

                                             25
dominated by the monetary policy shock at short horizons whereas in the long-run the
inflation target shock has more influence. The inflation target shock dominates inflation
target dynamics at all horizons, whereas the natural rate of output is always explained
by its own shock due to our AR(1) specification. Given that the monetary authority is
responsible for both the monetary policy and inflation target shocks, our results reveal
monetary policy to be a key driver of macro dynamics. Smets and Wouters (2003) also
find monetary policy shocks to play a key role in explaining macro dynamics in the Euro
area.


6.4    Why do term spreads predict output and inflation?

A substantial empirical literature, including Mishkin (1990), Estrella and Mishkin (1998)
and Ang, Piazzesi, and Wei (2003) has demonstrated the relevance of term structure
dynamics in predicting future output and inflation. In a recent paper, Estrella (2003) ex-
plores the structural sources of this predictability, including the monetary policy regime.

   While the simple model in Estrella (2003) has the advantage of transparency, it is
useful to re-examine this issue in a more empirically relevant model. To do so, we consider
our reduced form model solution, which implies that (in demeaned form):

                                        Et zt+1 = Ωz zt

Let ωπ,sp1 , ωπ,sp2 , ωy,sp1 , and ωy,sp2 the 1-4, 1-5, 2-4 and 2-5 elements of Ωz . We study the
relation between term spreads and macro variables by adding up the spread coefficients
of each equation. So, for instance, the overall influence of spreads on inflation will be
measured by the sum of ωπ,sp1 and ωπ,sp2 . Both our model and the one in Estrella (2003)
impose the expectations hypothesis. Hence, term spreads predict future output and
inflation because output and inflation are interest rate factors. However, the degree of
predictability (and even its sign) will naturally depend on the structural parameters.

   We examine the effect of the monetary’s authority anti-inflationary stance as captured
by the β parameter. We perform a sensitivity analysis for different values of β, the
monetary policy response to the gap between expected inflation and the target. Table 9
shows the projection coefficients of the macro variables on the spreads implied by Model
[CR,EI,N]. Except in one case, the coefficients on the spreads are positive for all β’s. In


                                               26
the case of inflation, this sum increases with β, but the opposite is true for output. One
important qualification is that the reduced-form coefficients of inflation on the spreads
implied by the model were not in agreement with the data (see Table 5), unlike their
counterparts in the output equation. The reduced-form coefficients of inflation on the
interest rate are an increasing function of β. However, the overall effect of the short-term
rate on inflation and output is found by subtracting the spread coefficient from the one
on the interest rate. The sign is then negative, as one would expect given our structural
model. The fourth and last columns of table 9 show that the contractionary effect of
the interest rate on inflation and output gets smaller as β increases. This result is also
reported by Cho and Moreno (2004) in the context of a standard New-Keynesian model.
The reason is that under large β’s, the Fed tries to aggressively offset any departure of
inflation and output from their steady-states. As a result, the effects of all structural
shocks –including the monetary policy shock– on macro dynamics will be smaller.



7     Term Structure Implications

7.1     Model Fit for Yields

Our model represents a 5-factor term structure model with three observed and two unob-
served variables. Dai and Singleton (2000) claim that a model with three latent factors
provides an adequate fit with the data. A quick test to see how well our model fits the
complete term structure is to see how well it fits the yields not used in the estimation. We
compute the difference between the actual and model-predicted yields. This difference
can be viewed as measurement error and if the model fits the data well, this measurement
error should not be too variable. We find that the measurement error for the one and
ten-year yields is 45 and 54 basis points (annualized) respectively.10 While this is signif-
icantly different from zero, the fit can be considered reasonable given the parsimonious
structural nature of our model.

    While our model imposes the Expectations Hypothesis, it nevertheless fits these one
  10
     The 10 year zero-coupon yield was constructed splicing two series. We use the McCulloch and Kwon
series up to the 3rd quarter of 1987; from the 4th quarter of 1987 to the end of the sample, we use the
10 year zero-coupon yield estimated using the method of Svensson (2004). We thank Refet Gurkaynak
for kindly providing with this second part of the series.



                                                  27
year and 10 year yields much better than pure macro models, which have been the norm
in the macro literature. Let’s consider the macro VAR(3) model, which was shown before
to explain the dynamics of macro variables extraordinarily well. In Figure 6 , the left
hand side graphs plot the one year and 10 year yields and their predicted values from the
structural model. On the right hand side, we compute the one-year and 10 year yields
using the VAR(3) model. The fit is visibly much worse for the 10-year yields, although
similar for the one-year yield. Indeed, the implied measurement error of the 1 and 10
year yields are 45 and 169 basis points, respectively. The “shifting endpoint” specification
of Kozicki and Tinsley (2001) essentially circumvents this poor fit by embedding term
structure information in the drift of the factor dynamics.


7.2    Structural Term Structure Factors

It is standard to label the three factors that are necessary to fit term structure dynamics
as the level, the slope and the curvature factors. We measure the level as the equally
weighted average of the three month rate, 1 year and 5 year yields, the slope as the 5
year spread and the curvature as the sum of the three month rate and 5 year rate minus
twice the one year rate. Figure 7 shows the impulse responses of the level, slope and
curvature factors to the five structural shocks. The AS shock initially raises the level,
but then it undershoots the levels steady state for several quarters. As explained in
section 6.3, the interest rate undershooting is related to the strong endogenous response
of the monetary policy authority to inflation, which ends up lowering inflation beyond its
steady-state during some quarters. The Expectation Hypothesis implies that the initial
rise in yields is strongest at short maturities. Consequently, it is no surprise that the
AS shock initially lowers the slope, then, when the level effect turns negative, raises the
slope above its steady-state. The curvature effect follows the slope effect closely.

    Similarly to Evans and Marshall (2003), the IS or demand shock raises the level
factor during several years. The IS shock also lowers the slope and curvature during
some quarters. These two responses are again related to the hump-shaped response of
the short-term interest rate to the IS shock and the fact that the expectation hypothesis
holds in our setup. Essentially, a positive IS shock causes a flattening upward shift
in the yield curve. The monetary policy shock initially raises the level, but then it
produces a strong hump-shaped negative response on the level. This is again related to


                                            28
the undershooting of the short-term interest rate after a monetary policy shock. The
slope initially decreases after the monetary policy shock but then it increases during
several quarters. The initial slope decline happens because a monetary policy shock
naturally shifts up the short-end of the yield curve, while it lowers the medium and long
part of the yield curve, through its effect on inflationary expectations. The subsequent
slope increase arises because the short rate undershoots after a few quarters. Finally, the
curvature of the yield curve increases for 10 quarters after the monetary policy shock.

   The natural rate, or essentially a productivity shock, not surprisingly induces an initial
decline in the level of the yield curve. After 4 quarters the level exhibits a persistent
increase, mimicking the response of the short-term rate to the natural rate shock. Both
the slope and the curvature factors increase after the natural rate shock during ten
quarters. As Figure 4 shows, the natural rate shock raises the future expected short-
term rates whereas it lowers the current short rate. Since the expectations hypothesis
holds in our setup, that implies that the spread increases. Figure 9 below corroborates
this intuition.

    Finally, the inflation target shock has a very pronounced positive effect on the level
of the yield curve. This has to do with the strong persistent hump-shaped response of
the interest rate to the target shock. It also makes the slope and the curvature decline
during several periods, since the target shock has a stronger positive effect on short term
rates than on long rates.11

    To complement the impulse response functions, Figure 8 shows the variance decompo-
sitions of the three factors at different time horizons. The inflation target shock explains
more than 50% of the variation in the level of the term structure at all time horizons and
over 75% at short horizons. After the 5th quarter, the monetary policy shock explains
around 25% of the level dynamics. In the short-run, the IS shock explains around 15%,
whereas in the long-run, it is the natural rate shock which explains around 15% of the
variation in the level factor.

   The monetary policy shock is the dominant factor behind the slope dynamics at all
horizons, as it primarily affects the short end of the yield curve.12 This fact is especially
  11
     Rudebusch and Wu (2004) obtain the opposite reaction of spreads to their level shock. This is
probably related to the fact that they incorporate a time-varying risk premium in the term structure
whereas we maintain the expectation hypothesis throughout.
  12
     In the context of a business-cycle model with adjustment costs, Wu (2001) also finds that monetary
policy shocks explain most of the slope fluctuations.


                                                  29
evident at short   horizons, where almost 90% of the slope variance is explained by the
monetary policy    shock. The inflation target shock, which has a dominant effect at the
long end of the    yield curve gains importance at longer horizons. The IS shock and
the natural rate   shock explain each around 10% of the slope dynamics at virtually all
horizons.

    The variance decomposition of the curvature factor yields similar results to the slope
factor, with the monetary policy shock being the dominant factor again, explaining
around 60% of the curvature factor dynamics at all horizons. Finally, it is worthwhile
noting that the AS shock influence on the dynamics of the term structure is overall very
small.

   An implication of our study is that the inflation target shock is the level factor whereas
the monetary policy shock drives both the slope and curvature factors. Our results are
consistent with the framework in Rudebusch and Wu (2004), where the unobservable
variables are directly labelled level and slope.


7.3      “Endogenous” Excess Sensitivity

Our model can shed light on two empirical regularities that have received much attention
in recent work : The excess sensitivity and the excess volatility of long term interest rates.
Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2003) recently show a particularly intriguing empirical
failure of standard structural models: they fail to generate significant responses of forward
interest rates to any macro economic and monetary policy shocks. However, in the data,
US long-term forward interest rates react considerably to surprises in macroeconomics
data releases and monetary policy announcements. They use a model with a slow-moving
inflation target to better match these empirical facts. Now we show that our model yields
a strong contemporaneous response of the term structure to several shocks in our model.

    Figure 9 shows the contemporaneous responses of the entire term structure to our five
structural shocks. The AS shock shifts the short end of the yield curve but has virtually
no effect on yields of maturities beyond ten quarters. Our model-predicts a long-lasting
response of the bond to the IS shock and the shocks to the unobservable macro variables.
The IS shock produces an upward shift in the entire term structure, but affects more
strongly the yields of maturities close to one year, leading to a hump-shaped response.


                                             30
The IS and natural rate shocks have inverse but symmetric effects on the term structure.
While the IS shock shifts the term structure upwards, the natural rate shifts the term
structure down for maturities down up to 5 years. This is to be expected as the IS shock
is a demand shock, whereas the natural rate shock is essentially a supply shock.

   The monetary policy shock shifts the short end of the curve upward but it has a neg-
ative, if small, contemporaneous effect on yields of maturities of five quarters and higher.
Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2003) also show this pattern, but in their exercise, the
monetary policy shock starts having a negative effect on bond rates at longer maturities.
Our result is again due to the interest rate

   undershooting in response to the monetary policy shock. Since the expectations
hypothesis holds, future expected decreases in short-term rates imply declines of medium
and long-term rates. Finally, the inflation target shock produces a very persistent, strong
and hump-shaped positive response of the entire term structure. As agents perceive
a change in the monetary authority’s stance, they adjust their inflation expectations
upwards so that interest rates increase at all maturities.

    Note that the sensitivity of long rates to the inflation target, the natural rate and
the IS shocks remains very strong even at maturities of 10 years. Ellingsen and Soder-
strom (2004) and Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2003) show that their structural macro
models can explain the sensitivity of long-rates to structural macro shocks. While their
models use several lags of the macro variables to generate persistence with a slow decaying
component, our model can account for the variability of the long rates with a parsimo-
nious VAR(1) specification. More importantly, whereas Ellingsen and Soderstrom (2004)
stress the importance of the monetary policy shock, in our model the IS shock and the
shocks to the unobservable macro variables are much more important in explaining the
sensitivity of the long rates than the monetary policy shock is.

    Ellingsen and Soderstrom (2004) provide a simple direct test of the excess sensitivity
of long interest rates. They regress changes in long rates on changes in short rates.
It is straightforward to show that these projection coefficients are quite sensitive to
the persistence generated by the model and the magnitude of the reaction of the term
structure to the shocks. We create a simple test statistic where we weight the deviations
of the model-implied projection coefficients from the empirical projection coefficients
using the inverse of the data covariance matrix. We perform this test for all of our


                                            31
models, finding that the microfounded model matches this evidence perfectly. The test
does reject for the other models but the [CR,EI,N] model (the one we have focused most
of our discussion on) and the [CR,CI,N] model still perform significantly better than the
other models.



8     Conclusions

The first contribution of our paper is methodological. We show how to use a no-arbitrage
term structure model to help identify a standard New-Keynesian macro model with
additional unobservable factors. Whereas there are many possible implementations of
our framework, in this article we introduce the natural rate of output and time-varying
inflation target in an otherwise standard model.

    From a macroeconomic perspective our contribution is that we use term structure
information to help identify structural macroeconomic and monetary policy parameters
and at the same time impart additional persistence to the macro system. From a finance
perspective, our contribution is that we derive a no-arbitrage tractable term structure
model where all the factors obey New-Keynesian structural relations.

   Our key findings are as follows. First, our structural estimation robustly identifies
a large Phillips curve parameter and a large response of output to the real interest
rate. Second, the model mimics much of the salient empirical macro dynamics uncovered
through long-lagged VARs in previous work, even though our reduced-form model is
simply a first-order VAR. Third, the unobservable inflation target process is the most
important level factor whereas the monetary policy shocks dominate the variation in
slope and curvature factors.

    There are a number of avenues for future work. First, the finance literature has
stressed the importance of stochastic risk aversion in helping to explain salient features of
asset returns (see Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Bekaert, Engstrom, and Grenadier
(2004)). Dai and Singleton (2002) show how time-varying prices of risk play a critical
role in explaining deviations of the Expectations Hypothesis for the U.S. term structure.
However, their model has no structural interpretation. Piazzesi and Swanson (2004) find
risk premiums in federal funds futures rates which appear counter-cyclical. A follow-up
paper will explore the effect of stochastic risk aversion on our findings. Second, New-

                                             32
Keynesian models continue to be plagued by the poor measurement of the output gap.
The fact that most measures impose deterministic trends is one potential reason for
the poor performance of the output gap based estimates in these models. We intend
to propose a model with stochastic trends where the output gap is filtered through the
model and output growth data, rather than measured directly from the data.




                                         33
Appendix
   In this appendix we provide the microfoundations of the New-Keynesian macro model
presented in the main text. Since the model is fairly standard, we briefly explain how
the IS and AS equation exhibit endogenous persistence.



A      IS Equation under External Habit Formation

The representative agent’s utility function has the following form:

                                                 Ft Ct1−σ − 1 Nt1+χ
                           U (Ct , Nt ; Ft ) =               −                          (47)
                                                    1−σ        1+χ

where Ct is the level of real consumption, σ is the local risk aversion coefficient and the
inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, Nt is the labor supply, χ is the
inverse of the intertemporal labor supply elasticity. Ft represents an aggregate demand
shifting factor. Specifically, Ft is composed out of two parts:

                                           Ft = Ht Gt                                   (48)

where Ht is an external habit level, that is, the agent takes Ht as exogenously given even
though it may depend on past consumption, and Gt is an exogenous aggregate demand
shock that can also be interpreted as a preference shock. Analogously to Fuhrer (2000),
                        η
we assume that Ht = Ct−1   where η measures the degree of habit dependence on the past
consumption level. The maximization of equation (1) is subject to the following budget
constraint:
                                0                        0
                       Pt Ct + dt Qt = Wt Nt + (Dt + Qt ) dt−1                    (49)

where Pt is the price level, dt is a vector of portfolio weights, Qt a vector of asset prices
and Dt is a vector of dividends. We do not consider the government sector explicitly.

   Because of the assumption of the additive separability of the preference specification
over consumption and labor supply, the marginal disutility of work does not affect the
optimal consumption decision. Consequently, the marginal utility of consumption does
not depend on the labor supply and we can construct the nominal intertemporal marginal



                                                  1
rate of substitution in consumption as follows:

                               UC (Ct+1 , Nt+1 ; Ft+1 )Pt    C −σ Ft+1 Pt
                    Mt+1 = ψ                              = ψ t+1
                                UC (Ct , Nt ; Ft )Pt+1       Ct−σ Ft Pt+1

The variable Mt+1 can also be viewed as a nominal stochastic discount factor and will
price all financial assets in this economy. In particular, the nominal interest rate, it ,
satisfies:
                                    Et [Mt+1 (1 + it )] = 1

After imposing the resource constraint, Ct = Yt , we apply logs to obtain:

              mt+1 = ln ψ − σyt+1 + (σ + η)yt − ηyt−1 + (gt+1 − gt ) − πt+1          (50)

where gt = ln Gt is an i.i.d shock with mean zero. By assuming that yt has a deterministic
trend, equation (50) also holds for de-trended output. From now on, yt refers to de-
trended output. Under the assumption of log-normality, the Euler equation is given by:

                               Et mt+1 + 0.5Vt (mt+1 ) = −it                         (51)

Using the definition of mt+1 , we get the IS equation:

                 yt = αIS + µEt yt+1 + (1 − µ)yt − φ(it − Et πt+1 ) + ²IS,t          (52)

              σ          1
where µ = σ+η   , φ = σ+η  , αIS = −φ(ln ψ + 0.5Vt (mt+1 )) and ²IS,t = φgt . Note that
Vt (mt+1 ) depends on the state variable dynamics of the model. If the innovations of the
model are homoskedastic, the pricing kernel variance is constant.



B     AS Equation with inflation indexation

In order to set up an explicit price optimization problem, Calvo (1983) and the subsequent
literature have assumed monopolistic competition in the intermediate product markets. A
retail distributor combines the differentiated output of a continuum of monopolistically
competitive firms, Yt (i), into a composite product, Yt , with elasticity of substitution




                                              2
between goods ε > 1:
                                                      ·Z       1                    ¸ 1−ε
                                                                                       ε
                                                                            ε−1
                                             Yt =                  Yt (i)    ε    di                          (53)
                                                           0

The demand for the product of each firm i is obtained by the usual expression (see
Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987)):
                                                                   ·         ¸−ε
                                                            Pt (i)
                                                   Yt (i) =                         Yt                        (54)
                                                             Pt

where Pt (i) is the price for the product of firm i and Pt is the aggregate index defined
as:
                                       ·Z 1           ¸ 1−ε
                                                         1

                                                  1−ε
                                  Pt =      Pt (i) di                                (55)
                                                           0


   In the Calvo (1983) pricing framework, a subset of firms maximize their profits accord-
ing to an arrival rate (1 − θ). Thus, each firm resets prices every period with probability
(1 − θ). We further assume that the price-setters who do not adjust optimally, index
their prices taking into account previous inflation, enabling inflation to exhibit endoge-
nous persistence. Hence,                            ·      ¸τ
                                                      Pt−1
                                  Pt (i) = Pt−1 (i)                                   (56)
                                                      Pt−2
where τ is the degree of indexation to previous inflation which is between 0 and 1. Using
the law of large numbers, the price index becomes:
                                     "                                 µ           µ          ¶τ ¶1−ε # 1−ε
                                                                                                         1

                                                                                       Pt−1
                          Pt = (1 − θ)P̄t (i)1−ε + θ Pt−1                                                     (57)
                                                                                       Pt−2

where P̄t (i) is the optimal reset price. Log-linearizing this expression yields:

                                                                           1−θ
                                             πt − τ πt−1 =                     p̂t (i)                        (58)
                                                                            θ
                      ³             ´
                          P̄t (i)
where p̂t (i) = log         Pt
                                     . The optimal dynamic price-setting problem becomes:

                                                      "∞                                    #
                                                       X
                                          max Et                   θT −t Mt,T ΠT (i)                          (59)
                                          Pt (i)
                                                        T =t




                                                                       3
where Mt,T is the nominal stochastic discount factor or pricing kernel for contingent
claims and ΠT (i) is the nominal profit of firm i at time T . Mt,T is given by (see also
Appendix A):
                                       ψ T −t Uc (CT ; FT )Pt
                              Mt,T =                                                (60)
                                           Uc (Ct ; Ft )PT
and ΠT (i) is given by:
                          ·          µ           ¶τ                   ¸·            µ           ¶τ ¸−ε
                                         PT −1                             Pt (i)       PT −1
              ΠT (i) = Pt (i)                         − ST (i)PT                                            YT   (61)
                                         Pt−1                               PT          Pt−1
                                                                                    ³        ´ ³         ´
                                                                                        WT       ∂YT (i)
where ST (i) is the real marginal cost, defined as ST (i) =                             PT
                                                                                              / ∂NT . Using equa-
tions (56), (60) and (61), the first order condition associated with the maximization
problem in (59) can be expressed as:
  (∞             "                                       µ           ¶−τ ε # ·             µ ¸)        ¶τ
   X                                                         PT −1               P̄t (i)
                                                                                   ε           PT −1
Et        (θψ)T −t Uc (CT ; FT )YT P̄t (i)−ε PTε                            −          ST (i)   =0
     T =t
                                                             Pt−1                εPT
                                                                                   − 1         Pt−1
                                                                                           (62)
                                                                           P̄t (i)
Log-linearizing (62) around the steady state and solving for p̂t (i) = log( Pt ), we obtain:
                                ∞
                                X                                     ∞
                                                                      X
                                               T −t
          p̂t (i) = (1 − θψ)            (θψ)          Et ŝT (i) +            (θψ)T −t Et [πT − τ πT −1 ]        (63)
                                 T =t                                T =t+1

where ŝT (i) is the percentage deviation from steady state of the log of the real marginal
cost of producing Yt (i). From now on, we will focus on the average real marginal cost
deviation from its steady state value, i.e. the real marginal cost for a good with output
Yt (i) = Yt . As a result, we will drop the indexing of real marginal costs. Subtracting
θψ p̂t+1 (i) from both sides of the last equation and using (58) yields a relation describing
the inflation dynamics:

                                                                        (1 − θ)(1 − θψ)
                      πt − τ πt−1 = ψ(Et πt+1 − τ πt ) +                                ŝt                      (64)
                                                                               θ

Notice the key role of the nominal rigidities linking the real sector of the economy with
inflation. We then obtain the following AS equation:

                                     πt = δ1 Et πt+1 + δ2 πt−1 + $ŝt                                            (65)

               ψ                τ                     (1−θ)(1−θψ)
where δ1 =   1+ψτ
                  ,   δ2 =    1+ψτ
                                     and $ =            θ(1+ψτ )
                                                                  .    Notice that for ψ arbitrarily close to

                                                             4
one, the sum of δ1 and δ2 is approximately one.



C      Natural Rate of Output and Real Marginal Cost

We assume that the production technology of the average firm is specified as:

                                           Yt = ξt Nt                                  (66)

where ξt is the firm-independent technology shock. The labor demand can then be
simplified as:
                                                     Wt
                                         St = ξt−1                                     (67)
                                                     Pt

The optimality condition for the labor supply is given (indirectly) by:

                                      Wt     UN (Nt )
                                         =−                                            (68)
                                      Pt    UC (Ct ; Ft )
                                                                   η
Using the utility function in equation (47) and replacing Ft with Ct−1 Gt , we find:

                                     Wt
                                        = Ntχ Ctσ Ct−1
                                                   −η −1
                                                       Gt                              (69)
                                     Pt

By equating (67) and (69), the real marginal cost is given by:

                                   St = Ntχ Ctσ Ct−1
                                                 −η −1 −1
                                                     Gt ξt                             (70)

Finally, using Equation (66) and the resource constraint, we obtain that

                                   St = Ytχ+σ Yt−1
                                                −η −1 −1−χ
                                                   Gt ξt                               (71)


   The natural rate of output is the level of output, Ytn , that would prevail if prices
were fully flexible and exogenous innovations are in their steady state. In the case of
monopolistic competition, this implies that Ytn is the level of output satisfying:
                                                                 ¡ n ¢−η
                 Stn ≡ St (Yt = Ytn ; Gt = 1, ξt = 1) = (Ytn )χ+σ Yt−1   = f −1        (72)



                                               5
            ε
where f = ε−1   is the price markup. Hence, taking logs, a process for the natural rate of
output results:
                                    ytn = αyn + λyt−1
                                                  n
                                                                                      (73)
               1                  η
where αyn = − χ+σ ln f and λ = χ+σ   . We exogenously augment the natural rate equation
with an innovation, ²yn ,t . One possible interpretation of ²yn ,t would be a shock to the
markup. The natural rate equation can then be expressed as:

                                                n
                                  ytn = αyn + λyt−1 + ²yn ,t                            (74)

Note that the external habit not only generates endogenous persistence of output but it
also endogenously determines the persistence of the natural rate of output. Consequently
the dynamic path of the real marginal cost deviation from its steady state is also governed
by the degree of habit persistence. Specifically, combining (71) and (72), the real marginal
cost is then given by:

               ŝt = (χ + σ)(yt − ytn − λ(yt−1 − yt−1
                                                  n
                                                      )) − gt − (1 + χ) ln ξt .         (75)

We can derive the final AS equation that links inflation and the output gap by plugging
the real marginal cost equation into equation (65):
                                      ¡                             ¢
         πt = δ1 Et πt+1 + δ2 πt−1 + κ (yt − ytn ) − λ(yt−1 − yt−1
                                                               n
                                                                   ) − ζ²IS,t + ²AS,t   (76)

where κ = $(χ + σ), ζ = $(σ + η) and ²AS,t = −$(1 + χ) ln ξt . Note that both the IS
and AS shocks enter now into the AS equation.




                                              6
References

Ang, Andrew, and Monika Piazzesi, 2003, A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term
  Structure Dynamics with Macroeconomic and Latent Variables, Journal of Monetary
  Economics 50, 745–787.

Ang, Andrew, Monika Piazzesi, and Min Wei, 2003, What does the Yield Curve tell us
  about GDP Growth?, Forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics.

Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Steven R. Grenadier, 2004, Stock and Bond Returns
  with Moody Investors, Mimeo, Stanford University.

Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick, and David A. Marshall, 2001, Peso problem explana-
  tions for term structure anomalies, Journal of Monetary Economics 48, 241–270.

Bernanke, Ben, and Jean Boivin, 2003, Monetary Policy in a Data-Rich Environment,
  Journal of Monetary Economics 50.

Bernanke, Ben, Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz, 2005, Measuring Monetary Policy: A Fac-
  tor Augmented Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach, Forthcoming, Quarterly Journal
  of Economics.

Blanchard, Olivier, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 1987, Monopolistic Competition and the
  Effects of Aggregate Demand, American Economic Review 77, 647–666.

Boivin, Jean, and Marc Giannoni, 2003, Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?,
  NBER Working Paper No 9459.

Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Jonas Fisher, 2001, Asset Returns and the
  Business Cycle, American Economic Review 91, 149–166.

Calvo, Guillermo, 1983, Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework, Journal of
  Monetary Economics 12, 383–98.

Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By Force of Habit: A Consumption-
  Based explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior, Journal of Political Economy
  107, 205–251.
Cho, Seonghoon, and Antonio Moreno, 2004, A Small-Sample Analysis of the New-
  Keynesian Macro Model, Mimeo, Korea Development Institute and Universidad de
  Navarra.

Clarida, Richard H., Jordi Galı́, and Mark Gertler, 1999, The Science of Monetary Policy:
  A New Keynesian Perspective, Journal of Economic Literature 37, 1661–707.

Cox, John, Jonathan Ingersoll, and Stephen Ross, 1985, A theory of term structure of
  interest rates, Econometrica 53, 385–408.

Dai, Qiang, and Kenneth Singleton, 2000, Specification Analysis of Affine Term Structure
  Models, Journal of Finance 55, 531–552.

Dai, Qiang, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2002, Expectation Puzzles, Time-varying Risk
  Premia, and Affinene Models of the Term Structure, Journal of Financial Economics
  63, 415–441.

Dewachter, Hans, and Marco Lyrio, 2002, Macroeconomic Factors in the Term Structure
  of Interest Rates, Forthcoming, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.

Diebold, Francis X., Glenn D. Rudebusch, and S. Boragan Aruoba, 2003, The Macroe-
  conomy and the Yield Curve, Working Paper.

Duffie, Darrell, and Rui Kan, 1996, A yield-factor model of interest rates, Mathematical
  Finance 6, 379–406.

Ellingsen, Tore, and Ulf Soderstrom, 2004, Why are long rates sensitive to monetary
  policy?, Mimeo, Stockholm School of Economics and IGIER.

Estrella, Arturo, 2003, Why does the Yield Curve Predict Ouput and Inflation?, Mimeo,
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Estrella, Arturor, and Frederic S. Mishkin, 1998, Predicting U.S. recessions: Financial
  variables as leading indicators, Review of Economics and Statistics 80, 45–61.

Evans, Charles L., and David A. Marshall, 2003, Economic Determinants of the Nominal
  Treasury Yield Curve, Working Paper.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., 2000, Habit Formation in Consumption and Its Implications for
  Monetary-Policy Models, American Economic Review 90, 367–89.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., and Glenn D. Rudebusch, 2004, Estimating the Euler Equation for
  Output, Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 1133–1153.

Galı́, Jordi, and Mark Gertler, 1999, Inflation Dynamics, Journal of Monetary Economics
  44, 195–222.

Gurkaynak, Refet T., Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson, 2003, The excess sensitivity of long-
 term interest rates: evidence and implications for macroeconomic models, Working
 Paper.

Harrison, J. Michael, and David Kreps, 1979, Martingales and arbitrage in multi-period
  securities markets, Journal of Economic Theory 20, 381–408.

Harvey, Campbell R., 1988, The Real Term Structure and Consumption Growth, Journal
  of Financial Economics 22.

Hordahl, Peter, Oreste Tristani, and David Vestin, 2003, A joint econometric model of
  macroeconomic and term structure dynamics, Working Paper, European Central Bank.

Ireland, Peter N., 2001, Sticky-Price Models of the Business Cycle: Specification and
  Stability, Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 3–18.

Klein, Paul, 2000, Using the Generalized Schur Form to Solve a Multivariate Linear
  Rational Expectations Model, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24, 1405–
  1423.

Knez, Peter J., Robert Litterman, and José A. Scheinkman, 1994, Explorations into
  Factors Explaining Money Market Returns, Journal of Finance 49, 1861–1882.

Kozicki, Sharon, and Peter A. Tinsley, 2001, Shifting Endpoints in the Term Structure
  of Interest Rates, Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 613–652.

Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams, 2003, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,
  Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 1063–1070.

Lubik, Thomas A., and Frank Schorfheide, 2004, Testing for indeterminacy: An Appli-
  cation to U.S. Monetary Policy, American Economic Review 94, 190–217.

Lucas, Robert E., 1978, Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1426–
  1446.
Lucas, Robert E., 2003, Macroeconomic Priorities, American Economic Review 93, 1–14.

Mishkin, Frederic S., 1990, The information of the longer maturity term structure about
  future inflation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 55, 815–828.

Newey, Whitney K, and Kenneth D West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Het-
  eroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica 55,
  703–708.

Pearson, Neil D., and Tong-Shen Sun, 1994, Exploiting the Conditional Density Function
  in Estimating the Term Structure: An Application to the Cox, Ingersoll and Ross
  Model, Journal of Finance 49, 1279–1304.

Piazzesi, Monika, and Eric Swanson, 2004, Futures Prices as Risk-adjusted Forecasts of
  Monetary Policy, Mimeo, University of Chicago and Federal Reserve Board.

Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford, 1998, An Optimization-Based Econometric
  Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy: Expanded Version, NBER Working
  Paper No T0233.

Rudebusch, Glenn D., and Tao Wu, 2004, A Macro-Finance Model of the Term Structure,
  Monetary Policy, and the Economy, Working Paper.

Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters, 2003, An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equi-
  librium Model of the Euro Area, Journal of the European Economic Association 1,
  1123–1175.

Stock, James, and Mark W. Watson, 2003, Understanding Changes in International
  Business Cycle Dynamics, Mimeo, Princeton University.

Svensson, Lars E. O., 2004, Estimating and Interpreting Forward Interest Rates: Sweden
  1992-1994, Center for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 1051.

Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
 Policy, Princeton University Press.

Wu, Tao, 2001, Macro Factors and the Affine Term Structure of Interest Rates, Working
 Paper.
 Table 1: The Relationship between the Term Spreads and Macro Variables

                      Panel A: Term Spreads Affecting Macro Variables
                         Variable CPI Inflation GDPD Inflation
                                    GC     CC      GC      CC
                            πt     0.050 0.012 0.358      0.609
                            yt     0.717 0.333 0.725      0.322
                             it    0.170 0.000 0.160      0.000

                    Panel B: Macro Variables Affecting the Term Spreads
                         Variable CPI Inflation GDPD Inflation
                                    GC     CC       GC       CC
                           sp12,t  0.006 0.021 0.007        0.041
                           sp20,t  0.005 0.001 0.006        0.003

This Table shows the results of Granger Causality (GC) and contemporaneous correlation (CC) tests.
The first column of Panel A shows the p-value of GC test statistics that test whether the one and five
year spreads Granger-cause the three macro variables. The second column shows the p-value of CC test
statistics, testing whether the spreads affect the three macro variables contemporaneously. The first
column of Panel B shows the p-value for the GC test statistics of the three macro variables Granger-
causing the spreads. The second column shows the p-value for the CC test statistics testing whether
the three macro variables affect the spreads contemporaneously. The third and fourth columns show
the same results when inflation is constructed by the GDP deflator. The GC test of Panel A (Panel B)
is performed by regressing each macro variable on one lag of each of the variables and testing the null
hypothesis that coefficients on the term spreads (macro variables) are jointly 0. The CC test of Panel
A (Panel B) is performed by regressing each variable on other variables and testing the null hypothesis
that coefficients on the term spreads (macro variables) are jointly zero. The tests in Panel A are χ2 (2)
and the tests in Panel B are χ2 (3) distributed.
                                     Table 2: Persistence

                          Panel A: Autocorrelogram of the Raw data
                     Lag       πt      yt        it     sp12,t  sp20,t
                       1     0.760   0.934     0.922    0.693   0.746
                            (0.086) (0.028) (0.048) (0.086) (0.080)
                       2     0.716   0.849     0.878    0.513   0.603
                            (0.108) (0.050) (0.064) (0.087) (0.089)
                       3     0.712   0.749     0.864    0.492   0.589
                            (0.094) (0.069) (0.081) (0.100) (0.081)
                       5     0.573   0.540     0.728    0.198   0.299
                            (0.140) (0.091) (0.114) (0.127) (0.120)
                       8     0.410   0.296     0.544    0.047   0.083
                            (0.128) (0.102) (0.114) (0.112) (0.118)
                      10     0.379   0.199     0.453   -0.046 -0.049
                            (0.130) (0.109) (0.010) (0.119) (0.117)
                     ρ̂10    0.064   0.505     0.444    0.026   0.053
                      Panel B: Autocorrelogram implied by a VAR (1)
                     Lag       πt      yt        it     sp12,t  sp20,t
                       1     0.702   0.953     0.874    0.395   0.731
                            (0.091) (0.021) (0.056) (0.099) (0.087)
                       2     0.509   0.901     0.767    0.193   0.554
                            (0.129) (0.041) (0.097) (0.097) (0.131)
                       3     0.382   0.847     0.676    0.112   0.426
                            (0.139) (0.060) (0.126) (0.083) (0.150)
                       5     0.231   0.735     0.529    0.048   0.253
                            (0.131) (0.093) (0.163) (0.055) (0.146)
                       8     0.115   0.577     0.370    0.010   0.114
                            (0.108) (0.126) (0.197) (0.032) (0.110)
                      10     0.069   0.482     0.292   -0.001   0.065
                            (0.095) (0.139) (0.212) (0.028) (0.094)

Panel A shows empirical autocorrelograms for all 5 variables, whereas Panel B shows the autocorrel-
ograms implied by an unrestricted first-order VAR. The last line in Panel A reports the first-order
autocorrelation coefficient to the 10-th power. Panel A standard errors are GMM-based and are in
parentheses. Panel B standard errors are constructed using the delta method and are in parentheses.
                                    Table 3: Model Specifications

         Taylor Rule                                                Inflation Target Specification
         Desired Nominal Rate                                       New          Standard
         Constant real rate, Expected Inflation                     CR,EI,N      CR,EI,S
         Time-varying real rate, Expected Inflation                 TVR,EI,N TVR,EI,S
         Constant                                                   CR,CI,N      CR,CI,S

This Table presents the model taxonomy which will be employed throughout the paper. There are 6
possible model combinations according to the Taylor Rule and Inflation Target specifications.




                           Table 4: Autocorrelation Goodness of Fit

     Model            πt (P-val)  yt (P-val)   it (P-val)                   sp12,t (P-val)     sp20,t (P-val)
      MF            18.10(0.000) 4.63(0.031) 3.05(0.081)                    17.36(0.000)       21.15(0.000)
    CR,EI,N          9.66(0.002) 3.13(0.077) 0.27(0.606)                     1.20(0.274)        0.05(0.828)
   TVR,EI,N         12.56(0.000) 3.05(0.081) 0.02(0.888)                     2.40(0.121)        3.96(0.047)
   CR,CI,N           8.39(0.004) 6.67(0.010) 0.01(0.908)                     0.31(0.580)        0.23(0.634)
    CR,EI,S         13.49(0.000) 7.57(0.006) 2.08(0.149)                     7.43(0.006)        8.67(0.003)
   TVR,EI,S         19.14(0.000) 12.67(0.000) 2.42(0.120)                    8.53(0.003)       12.80(0.000)
    CR,CI,S         13.79(0.000) 7.33(0.007) 2.28(0.131)                     7.24(0.007)        8.98(0.003)

Consider θ = (ρ1 ρ4 ρ8 )0 and α = (0.5 0.3 0.2)0 . Our loss function is a quadratic form in α0 (θ̂ −
θmod ) weighted by the inverse of an estimate of the standard error of the statistic. To produce such
an approximate standard error, we assume that each variable follows an AR(1) process and calculate
the higher order ARs using the delta method. For any variable, suppose that xt = ρxt−1 + ²t . Then
√
  T (ρ̂ − ρ0 ) ∼ N (0, (1 − ρ20 )). Note that (ρ̂4 − ρ40 ) ≈ 4ρ30 (ρ̂ − ρ0 ) and (ρ̂8 − ρ80 ) ≈ 8ρ70 (ρ̂ − ρ0 ). Let
                            √                                                                      √
g = (1 4ρ3 8ρ7 )0 . Then T (θ̂ − θ0 ) ∼ N (0, gg 0 (1 − ρ20 )) Define A = gg 0 (1 − ρ20 ). Then T α0 (θ̂ − θ0 ) ∼
N (0, α0 gg 0 α(1−ρ20 )). Note that α0 (θ̂ −θ0 ) and its variance α0 gg 0 α(1−ρ20 )) = α0 Aα are scalars. Therefore,
a natural statistic is T (α0 (θ̂ − θmod ))2 (α0 Aα)−1 . We report this statistic for the 5 variables of interest
for all the models. Even though this is not a formal test statistic, we also produce p-values from a χ2 (1)
distribution.
          Table 5: The Dynamics of Macro Variables and Term Spreads

                   Panel A: Feedback Parameters implied by the Model
               Variable      πt−1     yt−1    it−1    sp12,t−1 sp20,t−1
                   πt       0.550    0.014   0.308      2.545    -1.977
                          ( 0.056) ( 0.027) (0.098) ( 0.390) ( 0.411)
                    yt      0.010    0.913   0.104      0.396    0.073
                          ( 0.004) ( 0.017) (0.039) ( 0.225) ( 0.191)
                    it      0.109    0.053   0.755      1.314    -1.087
                          ( 0.021) ( 0.025) (0.059) ( 0.296) ( 0.282)
                  sp12,t   -0.112    -0.056  0.258     -0.426    1.298
                          ( 0.022) ( 0.026) (0.061) ( 0.300) ( 0.289)
                  sp20,t   -0.109    -0.051  0.236     -1.384    2.199
                          ( 0.021) ( 0.024) (0.058) ( 0.296) ( 0.281)
            Panel B: Feedback Parameters implied by an Unrestricted VAR(1)
               Variable     πt−1      yt−1     it−1    sp12,t−1 sp20,t−1
                   πt       0.492    0.144    0.294     -1.467    1.007
                          ( 0.076) ( 0.052) ( 0.124) ( 0.611) (0.611)
                   yt      -0.058    0.972   -0.031      0.037    0.005
                          ( 0.037) ( 0.028) ( 0.064) ( 0.328) (0.328)
                    it     -0.049    0.077    0.960     -0.267    0.365
                          ( 0.045) ( 0.032) ( 0.074) ( 0.357) (0.359)
                  sp12,t    0.037   -0.045    0.026     -0.093    0.649
                          ( 0.031) ( 0.023) ( 0.052) ( 0.257) (0.265)
                  sp20,t    0.045   -0.057    0.024     -0.853    1.418
                          ( 0.033) ( 0.025) ( 0.056) ( 0.271) (0.278)

Panel A shows the feedback parameters implied by the model. Panel B shows the unconstrained VAR(1)
feedback coefficients. Standard errors were constructed using the bootstrap procedure described in the
text.
             Table 6: Correlations of Model and VAR-based forecasts

                   Model        k        πt    yt     it          sp12,t    sp20,t
                               1-3     0.716 0.937 0.979          0.832     0.884
                     MF        4-7     0.557 0.724 0.911         0.500     0.474
                               8-10    0.486 0.538 0.851          0.038    -0.006
                               1-3     0.836 0.891 0.973          0.914     0.932
                  CR,EI,N      4-7     0.560 0.367 0.908         0.611     0.398
                               8-10    0.420 0.022 0.818         -0.613    -0.668
                               1-3     0.855 0.909 0.969          0.898     0.922
                 TVR,EI,N      4-7     0.503 0.385 0.906         0.535     0.466
                               8-10    0.411 0.202 0.812         -0.404    -0.495
                               1-3     0.813 0.905 0.973          0.877     0.899
                  CR,CI,N      4-7     0.540 -0.014 0.907        0.619     0.433
                               8-10    0.399 -0.446 0.808        -0.491    -0.583
                               1-3     0.839 0.901 0.936          0.844     0.869
                  CR,EI,S      4-7     0.554 0.524 0.896         0.503     0.416
                               8-10    0.428 0.382 0.803         -0.575    -0.599
                               1-3     0.843 0.922 0.959          0.872     0.894
                 TVR,EI,S      4-7     0.525 0.465 0.893         0.479     0.446
                               8-10    0.411 0.387 0.783         -0.448    -0.477
                               1-3     0.829 0.902 0.959          0.851     0.878
                  CR,CI,S      4-7     0.547 0.519 0.894         0.498     0.417
                               8-10    0.424 0.395 0.797         -0.570    -0.591

We calculate Et Zt+k implied by the model and an unconstrained VAR(1) model for
k = 1, 2, 3, ..., 10. After calculating the correlation coefficient of the two series for different
k’s, we calculate the mean correlations for k = 1 − 3, k = 4 − 7 and k = 8 − 10 periods.
                            Table 7: Correlation of Innovations

                 Panel A: Correlation of Innovations impliedby the Model
                     Variable      y          i       sp12      sp20
                        π        0.636     -0.130    0.495    0.424
                               ( 0.109) ( 0.124) ( 0.153)    ( 0.148)
                        y                  -0.399    0.759     0.692
                                          ( 0.109) ( 0.090)  ( 0.094)
                         i                           -0.770   -0.824
                                                    ( 0.068) ( 0.054)
                       sp12                                    0.990
                                                             ( 0.004)
         Panel B: Correlation of Innovations implied by an Unrestricted VAR(1)
                   Variable        y         i       sp12       sp20
                       π         0.024    0.340     -0.207    -0.229
                               ( 0.121) ( 0.128) ( 0.142) ( 0.139)
                       y                   0.236    -0.033    -0.066
                                         ( 0.126) ( 0.120) ( 0.130)
                        i                           -0.680    -0.775
                                                   ( 0.066) ( 0.054)
                      sp12                                     0.974
                                                             ( 0.005)

This Table shows the correlation of the innovations to inflation, the output gap, interest rate, 3 year
term spread and 5 year term spread. Panel A shows the correlations implied by the structural model and
Panel B shows the sample correlation of VAR(1) innovations. Standard errors were constructed using
the bootstrap procedure described in the text.
             Table 8: GMM Estimates of the Structural Parameters

             CR,EI,N        Std       Error                 Cross-Model
   Parameter Estimate GMM             Bootstrap    Average Std Error Min           Max
   δ         0.611    ( 0.010)        ( 0.031)     0.572   ( 0.038)  0.525         0.626
   κ         0.064    ( 0.007)        ( 0.022)     0.075   ( 0.044)  0.041         0.174
   σ         3.156    ( 0.466)        ( 1.632)     3.205   ( 0.322)  2.727         4.952
   η         4.294    ( 0.470)        ( 1.383)     4.780   ( 1.024)  3.469         6.796
   ρ         0.723    ( 0.028)        ( 0.083)     0.799   ( 0.068)  0.705         0.915
   βπ        1.525    ( 0.148)        ( 0.251)     2.381   ( 0.954)  1.525         2.999
   γ         0.001    ( 0.047)        ( 0.020)     0.013   ( 0.020)  0.001         0.057
   λ         0.958    ( 0.006)        ( 0.026)     0.945   ( 0.020)  0.910         0.975
   ω         0.877    ( 0.013)        ( 0.031)     0.924   ( 0.040)  0.810         0.979
   d         0.866    ( 0.014)        ( 0.041)     0.959   ( 0.062)  0.757         0.990
   σAS       1.249    ( 0.053)        ( 0.123)     1.326   ( 0.162)  1.191         1.690
   σIS       0.671    ( 0.033)        ( 0.055)     0.682   ( 0.027)  0.658         0.739
   σM P      2.177    ( 0.119)        ( 0.287)     2.538   ( 1.105)  1.222         4.18
   σy n      1.380    ( 0.115)        ( 0.817)     1.691   ( 0.878)  0.601         2.947
   σπ ∗      0.730    ( 0.059)        ( 0.723)     0.854   ( 0.698)  0.370         2.388
   Implied   CR,EI,N        Std       Error                 Cross-Model
   Parameter Estimate GMM             Bootstrap    Average Std Error Min           Max
   µ         0.424    ( 0.013)        ( 0.026)     0.420   ( 0.013)  0.401         0.445
   φ         0.134    ( 0.017)        ( 0.029)     0.126   ( 0.023)  0.085         0.160
   ϕ1        0.500    ( 0.003)        ( 0.007)     0.395   ( 0.229)  0.492         0.533
   ϕ2        0.492    ( 0.003)        ( 0.005)     0.377   ( 0.219)  0.466         0.497
   ϕ3        0.008    ( 0.002)        ( 0.003)     0.003   ( 0.004)  0.000         0.009
   ϕ̃2                                             0.934   ( 0.006)  0.929         0.941
   ϕ̃3                                             0.048   ( 0.012)  0.034         0.057
   χ̂                                              2.022
   $̂                                              0.025
   τ̂                                              0.703
   θ̂                                              0.818
   ζ̂                                              0.293
   ϑ̂                                              1.685

The second column reports the parameter estimates for model [CR,EI,N]. The third and
fourth columns list the GMM standard errors of the structural parameters and those
obtained through the bootstrap procedure. The fifth to eighth columns show the mean,
standard deviation, minimum and maximum of the 7 models’ estimates. The parameters
with a tilde are those implied by the standard inflation target specification i.e., where
ϕ1 =0. The hatted parameters are those implied by the microfounded model. To facilitate
the interpretation of the interest rate response to expected inflation, βπ denotes the long-
run response of the interest response to expected inflation. For the EI models, βπ = 1+β.
For the remaining models, βπ = β.
Table 9: Term Spreads and Macroeconomic Prediction: Projection Coefficients

                     βπ      ωπ,sp       ωπ,i   ωπ,i−sp     ωy,sp      ωy,i   ωy,i−sp

                     0.5 -0.256 -0.706           -0.450    0.529 -0.123        -0.652
                     1.1 0.369 0.082             -0.287    0.529 0.108         -0.435
                     1.5 0.563 0.300             -0.263    0.475 0.106         -0.369


βπ is the long-run response of the interest rate to expected inflation (in our [CR,EI,N] model it is 1 + β).
ωj,sp is the sum of the equation j reduced-form coefficients on the spreads (j = π, y, i.e. inflation
and output equations, respectively). ωj,i is the equation j coefficient on the interest rate. Finally
ωj,i−sp = ωj,i − ωj,sp ; it represents the overall reduced-form impact of the interest rate on inflation.
              Figure 1: Autocorrelograms of the Raw data, the Model and a VAR(3)

     1

    0.8

    0.6
π
    0.4

    0.2

     0
          1      2        3        4          5          6         7          8         9              10

     1

    0.8

    0.6
y
    0.4

    0.2

     0
          1      2        3        4          5          6         7          8         9              10

     1
                                                                                            97.5
    0.8                                                                                     raw data
                                                                                            2.5
    0.6                                                                                     model
i                                                                                           VAR(3)
    0.4

    0.2

     0
          1      2        3        4          5          6         7          8         9              10
                                                  Lags


This figure compares the empirical autocorrelograms of inflation, the output gap and the interest rate
with those implied by the model and unrestricted VAR(3). The dash-dotted lines represent the 95%
confidence interval constructed by a GMM estimation of the empirical autocorrelogram.
                     Figure 2: Output Gap and Natural Rate of Output

                                             OUTPUT GAP
           15

           10

            5
Percent




            0

          −5

          −10

          −15
                66        71        76         81        86         91        96        01


                                            NATURAL RATE
           20

           10

            0
Percent




          −10

          −20

          −30
                66        71        76         81        86         91        96        01

The top Panel shows the average output gap across the 7 models we estimate (thick line) and the model
[CR,EI,N] output gap (thin line) for our sample period: 1961:1Q-2003:4Q. The bottom Panel shows
the average natural rate across the 7 models we estimate (thick line) and the model [CR,EI,N] natural
rate (thin line). Both panels also graph confidence bands in dashed lines. The confidence bands were
constructed adding and subtracting 2 cross-model standard deviations to the average values.
                             Figure 3: Inflation Target and Inflation

     20

     15

     10
Percent




          5

          0

     −5
              66        71         76        81         86         91        96         01



     20


     15


     10
Percent




          5


          0
              66        71         76        81         86         91        96         01

The top Panel shows the average inflation target across the 7 models we estimate (thick line) and the
model [CR,EI,N] inflation target (thin line) for our sample period: 1961:1Q-2003:4Q. It also graphs
the confidence bands in dashed lines. The confidence bands were constructed adding and subtracting
2 cross-model standard deviations to the average inflation target. The bottom Panel shows the CPI
inflation rate.
                           Figure 4: Impulse Response Functions of Macro Variables

                      ε                     ε                  ε                   ε   n                   ε   *
                      AS                    IS                 MP                  y                        π
              4                    2                   2                  1                      3

              2                    1                   0                                         2
     π
                                                                          0
              0                    0                  −2                                         1

             −2                   −1                  −4                 −1                      0
                  0   20     40         0   20   40        0   20   40         0   20      40        0     20       40
         0.5                       2                   2                  2                      2

              0                    1                   0                  1                      1
y
     −0.5                          0                  −2                  0                      0

             −1                   −1                  −4                 −1                     −1
                  0   20     40         0   20   40        0   20   40         0   20      40        0     20       40
              1                    1                   2                  1                      2

         0.5                      0.5                  0
 i
                                                                          0                      1
              0                    0                  −2

     −0.5                      −0.5                   −4                 −1                      0
                  0   20     40     0       20   40        0   20   40         0   20      40        0     20       40
              1                   1                    1                  4                      1

         n                                                                2
     y
              0                    0                   0                                         0
                                                                          0

             −1                   −1                  −1                 −2                     −1
                  0   20     40         0   20   40        0   20   40         0   20      40        0     20       40
         0.1                      0.5                  0                  1                      5

                                                                         0.5
π*
              0                    0              −0.5                                           0
                                                                          0

     −0.1                      −0.5                   −1              −0.5                      −5
                  0   20     40     0       20   40        0   20   40     0       20      40        0     20       40
                                                                                                         Quarters


This figure shows the impulse response functions (in percentage deviations from steady state) of the
five macro variables to the structural shocks. 95% confidence intervals appear in dashed lines and were
constructed using the bootstrap procedure described in the text.
                Figure 5: Variance Decompositions for the Macro Variables

    0.8

    0.6
π
    0.4

    0.2

     0
          0      5           10          15          20          25         30          35            40

    0.8

    0.6
y
    0.4

    0.2

     0
          0      5           10          15          20          25         30          35            40

    0.8
                                                                                                 AS
                                                                                                 IS
    0.6
                                                                                                 MP
i                                                                                                yn
    0.4
                                                                                                 π*

    0.2

     0
          0      5           10          15          20          25         30          35            40

                                                  Quarters


This Figure shows the variance decomposition at different time horizons for the macro variables in terms
of the five structural macro shocks. The variance decomposition of a variable at quarter h represents
the percentage of the h-step forecast variance explained by each shock. Given our model reduced-form:
zt = Ωz zt−1 + Γz ²t ²t ∼ N (0, D), where inflation, de-trended output and the interest rate are the
first three elements in the vector zt . The h-step ahead mean square error is given by: MSE(h) =
Ph−1 i          0    0 i
   i=0 Ωz Γz DΓz (Ωz ) , where the the P h-step ahead k-th equation MSE (mse(h,k)) is the (k, k) element
                                          h−1                i
in the matrix MSE(h). Let I(h,j) = i=0 Ωiz Γz F Γ0z (Ω0z ) , where F is a matrix with zeros everywhere
except in its (j,j) entry, where it coincides with matrix D. The impact of the j-th shock in the MSE of
a variable k is given by the (k,k) element in I(h,j). The contribution of a shock j to the h-step ahead
                                                        I(h,j)
variance of variable k is then given by VD(j,k,h) =            .
                                                      mse(h,k)
                                     Figure 6: Fit for Yields



      16                                                    16
                                     DATA                                                  DATA
      14                             MODEL                  14                             VAR(3)


      12                                                    12

      10                                                    10
y4




                                                      y4
      8                                                     8

      6                                                     6

      4                                                     4

       2                                                     2
      Q1−61            Q1−80              Q4−03             Q1−61           Q1−80               Q4−03




      16                                                    16
                                     DATA                                                  DATA
      14                             MODEL                  14                             VAR(3)


      12                                                    12
y40




                                                      y40




      10                                                    10

      8                                                     8

      6                                                     6

      4                                                     4

       2                                                     2
      Q1−61            Q1−80              Q4−03             Q1−61           Q1−80               Q4−03




This Figure compares the fit of the 1 and 10 year yields provided by model [CR,EI,N] with that implied
by a VAR(3) for our sample period: 1961:1Q-2003:4Q.
              Figure 7: Impulse Responses of Term Structure Factors to Macro Shocks

                   ε                    ε                   ε               ε   n                    ε   *
                   AS                   IS                  MP              y                         π
       0.4                    0.8                 0.5                 1                   2

                              0.6                  0
       0.2                                                                               1.5
                                                                    0.5
                              0.4              −0.5
  Level
          0                                                                               1
                              0.2                 −1
                                                                      0
     −0.2                                                                                0.5
                               0               −1.5

     −0.4                  −0.2                   −2               −0.5                   0
              0    20    40     0       20   40         0   20   40     0   20      40         0     20      40

       0.4                    0.2                  2                0.8                   1

       0.2                     0                   1                0.6                  0.5

          0                −0.2                    0                0.4                   0
  Slope
     −0.2                  −0.4                   −1                0.2               −0.5

     −0.4                  −0.6                   −2                  0                  −1

     −0.6                  −0.8                   −3               −0.2               −1.5
              0    20    40     0       20   40         0   20   40     0   20      40     0         20      40

       0.4                    0.5                  2                0.8                   0

                                                  1.5               0.6
       0.2
                               0                                                      −0.5
                                                   1                0.4
Curvature
         0
                                                  0.5               0.2
                           −0.5                                                          −1
     −0.2
                                                   0                  0

     −0.4                     −1               −0.5                −0.2               −1.5
              0    20    40         0   20   40     0       20   40     0   20      40     0         20      40
                                                                                                   Quarter



This figure shows the impulse response functions (in percentage deviations from steady state) of the three
term structure factors - level, slope and curvature - to the structural shocks. The slope is computed as
the 5 year spread. The curvature factor is computed as the sum of the interest rate and 5 year rate
minus twice the one year rate. 95% confidence intervals appear in dashed lines and were constructed
using the bootstrap procedure described in the text.
                      Figure 8: Variance Decompositions for the Term Structure Factors

            0.8

            0.6
Level




            0.4

            0.2

             0
                  0        5        10       15        20         25          30          35            40

             1

            0.8

            0.6
Slope




            0.4

            0.2

             0
                  0        5        10       15        20         25          30          35            40

            0.8
                                                                                                   AS
                                                                                                   IS
Curvature




            0.6                                                                                    MP
                                                                                                   yn
            0.4                                                                                    π*

            0.2

             0
                  0        5        10       15        20         25          30          35            40

                                                     Quarters


This Figure shows the variance decomposition of the term structure factors in terms of the five structural
macro shocks. The variance decomposition of a variable at quarter h represents the percentage of the
h-step forecast variance explained by each shock. They were constructed as explained in the note to
Figure 5, with the appropriate transformations of the variable in zt into level, slope and curvature.
             Figure 9: Contemporaneous Responses of Yields to Macro Shocks

                       εAS                                                      εIS
 0.6                                                       1

                                                         0.8
 0.4
                                                         0.6
 0.2
                                                         0.4
  0
                                                         0.2

−0.2                                                       0
       0     10         20        30        40                 0      10        20        30         40
                       εMP                                                      εyn
  2                                                      0.5


  1
                                                           0

  0

                                                        −0.5
 −1


 −2                                                       −1
       0     10        20         30        40                 0      10        20        30         40
                       επ*                                                    Maturity
  2


 1.5


  1


 0.5


  0
       0     10        20         30        40
                     Maturity


This figure shows the contemporaneous responses of yields of different maturities to the five structural
macro shocks. 95% confidence bands appear in dashed lines and were constructed using the bootstrap
procedure described in the text.
