NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE WORLDWIDE ECONOMIC IMPACT
OF THE REVOLUTIONARY AND NAPOLEONIC WARS
Kevin H. O’Rourke
Working Paper 11344
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11344
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005

The work for this paper was done while the author was an IRCHSS Government of Ireland Senior Fellow.
I am grateful to the Irish Research Council for the Humanities and Social Sciences for their generous research
funding. I also gratefully acknowledge research funding under the European Commission'
s Sixth Framework
Programme, Marie Curie Research Training Network contract number MRTN-CT-2004-512439. William
Hynes, Patrick Leahy, and Hampus Willfors provided excellent research assistance. I also wish to thank Liam
Brunt, François Crouzet, Jean-Pierre Dormois, David Eltis, Stanley Engerman, Javier Cuenca Esteban,
Ronald Findlay, Dennis Flynn, Arturo Giraldez, Philip Hoffman, Douglas Irwin, Jan Tore Klovland, Jim
Livesey, Leandro Prados, David Richardson, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Lennart Schön, Alan Taylor and
Jeffrey Williamson for generous help with sources, making available unpublished material, encouragement
and advice. Stanley Engerman and François Crouzet most generously provided extensive written comments
on earlier drafts. Participants at the OFCE economic history seminar and the NBER DAE 2005 Spring
Program Meeting made a number of helpful comments for which I am grateful. Needless to say, the usual
disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Kevin H. O’Rourke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Worldwide Economic Impact of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars
Kevin H. O’Rourke
NBER Working Paper No. 11344
May 2005
JEL No. F1, N7
ABSTRACT
The paper provides a comparative history of the economic impact of the Revolutionary and
Napoleonic Wars. By focussing on the relative price evidence, it is possible to show that the conflict
had major economic effects around the world. Britain'
s control of the seas meant that it was much
less affected than other nations, such as France and the United States. Explicit welfare calculations
are provided for four countries, Britain, France, Sweden and the United States. Welfare losses were
largest in the US, where they were of the order of 5-6% per annum; by contrast, they lay between 34% per annum in France, and between 1.7-1.8% per annum in Britain. On the other hand, the conflict
helped pave the way for the more liberal international economic environment of the long 19th
century.
Kevin H. O’Rourke
Department of Economics
Trinity College
Dublin 2
Ireland
and NBER
kevin.orourke@tcd.ie

Section 1. Introduction
The years between 1793 and 1815 saw an unusually bloody, lengthy and widespread
conflict between Great Britain and France, which widened to include many of the other
leading powers of the day. The period is also notable for its economic warfare, which
involved not only the belligerents, but several (at least initially) neutral countries, notably the
young United States. This paper offers a comparative, quantitative assessment of the
economic impact of the conflict. While data availability dictates that the paper’s focus be on
comparatively well-documented countries, such as Britain, France and the US, the paper will
attempt to range more widely, and bring together evidence concerning the impact of the wars
not just on Europe and North America, but on Latin America, Asia and Africa as well. The
paper has three main conclusions. First, the wars of 1793-1815 had a powerful, worldwide
economic impact. Second, they imposed large welfare costs, both on participating nations and
on neutrals. Third, Britain was less severely damaged by the conflict than its main military
and economic rivals.
Several scholars have already explored this episode, some in considerable detail. Eli
Heckscher’s (1922) great book on Napoleon’s Continental Blockade remains the starting
point for any serious exploration of the subject,1 while François Crouzet’s (1987) exhaustive
study is the definitive work on the impact of the Blockade on Britain. As will be seen, the two
authors differ in their assessment of the Blockade’s effectiveness: Heckscher emphasises the
smuggling and corruption which undermined Napoleon’s attempts to prevent British goods
from entering the Continent, while Crouzet argues that the Blockade did damage British
industry, at least in the periods when it was effectively enforced. However, neither author

1

For a recent insightful review of this work, see Crouzet (2003).
1

attempts to provide an explicit welfare assessment of the episode. A separate literature
explores the effects of the Blockade on the European Continent: Crouzet (1964) provides a
classic (and succinct) overview, while Ellis (1981) focusses on the impact of the Blockade on
one industrialising region, Alsace. Meanwhile, Frankel (1982) and Irwin (2001) have written
on Jefferson’s Embargo, which cut off trade between the United States and Europe for over a
year. This paper follows Frankel in stressing that relative prices provide a good measure of
such a policy’s effectiveness; while it follows Irwin in attempting to explicitly measure the
welfare effects of war-related trade disruption. Most recently, Davis and Engerman
(forthcoming) provide an extremely useful overview of Anglo-French and Anglo-American
trade rivalry during the period, within the context of a broader study of blockades, but without
providing estimates of welfare loss.
The above works all focus on particular trade disputes which occurred within the
context of more than two decades of war. This paper is wider in scope, in that it looks at the
trade and welfare consequences of the war in general, with a particular emphasis on the 180714 period; by and large, it does not attempt to untangle the separate effects of Britain’s
maritime blockade of France, France’s counter-blockade of Britain, the economic and
military disputes between Britain and the United States, and so on. Rather, it looks at the
combined effects of these several shocks to the system, which were all ultimately due to the
war.
The paper is also related to a more technical literature on the impact of war on trade.
This literature, of which Glick and Taylor (2005) is the most recent example, typically uses
the volume of trade as the dependent variable, and employs gravity models to see how wars
affected it. Glick and Taylor go further, by using separately generated (by Frankel and Romer
1999) estimates of the relationship between trade and welfare to calculate the welfare effects
2

of war within the context of a panel of countries between 1870 and 1997. Their results
suggest that the welfare effects of war-related trade disruption have been large: during World
War I, for example, they were equivalent to a permanent flow loss of 2.74% of GDP for
belligerents, and 2.09% of GDP for neutrals. This paper also stresses the impact of war on
neutrals, but differs from Glick and Taylor’s work in that relative prices are the basis for my
welfare calculations, rather than trade volumes.2 It also differs from theirs in that it generates
welfare estimates country by country, rather than using coefficients which are common across
a group of countries. As will be seen, this is an important difference, since not all countries
were the same, and war affected their trade, and welfare, in very different ways.3
The paper begins with a brief summary of the conflict, and the ways in which it
disrupted trade. Section 3 then looks at what is known about the behaviour of trade volumes
during the period, stressing the uncertain nature of some of the evidence. Section 4 shifts the
focus onto the relative prices of importable and exportable goods in several countries and
continents. Section 5 attempts to measure the welfare effects of trade disruption in four
countries: Britain, France, the United States and Sweden. Section 6 concludes with a brief
discussion of some of the longer-run implications of the conflict.

2

This stress on relative prices is largely dictated by considerations of data quality, and
mirrors the strategy adopted by O’Rourke and Williamson (2002a).
3

The paper is also somewhat related to the literature on sanctions, epitomised by
Hufbauer et al. (1990), who find that roughly a third of all sanctions episodes in the 20th
century have been successful. Not surprisingly, success is related to the relative costs imposed
upon the sender and the target of the sanctions (Eaton and Engers 1999), and these relative
costs are one of the principal foci of the present paper.
3

Section 2. The Twenty-Three Years War4
The 18th century saw the growth and maturation of a well-defined global economy
encompassing not just the traditional inter-continental trade between Europe and Asia, but a
more dynamic and economically important Atlantic trade involving Africa and the Americas
as well. The deep-rooted mercantilism of the period made the system vulnerable to
international conflicts, however, as European nations competed for the rents associated (or
thought to be associated) with the control of colonies and trade. Mercantilist wars periodically
impeded international trade; to take just two examples, Euro-Asian commodity price gaps
rose during the first and second Anglo-Dutch Wars (1652-54 and 1665-67) and the Seven
Years War (1756-63) (O’Rourke and Williamson 2002b, Figure 4, p. 33); while prices of
imported goods such as paper and pepper rose substantially in Peru during the War of the
Spanish Succession (1701-13), and the War of Jenkin’s Ear between Spain and Britain (173941) (Brown 1990, pp. 183-5).
But this constant warfare would ultimately have more far-reaching, systemic effects as
well. Christopher Bayly (2004) has recently pointed out that conflicts such as the Seven Years
War, which involved not just Britain and France, but also Austria, Russia, Saxony, Sweden,
Spain, Hanover and Prussia, and in which fighting took place in Europe, North America and
India, placed great fiscal strains on European states; these in turn gave rise to serious internal
political problems. For example, in Britain the House of Commons refused to vote higher
land taxes in 1767, while the increased power of business there made it impossible for
government to default on its debts, as had happened in 1672 under Charles II. Politically, it
seemed much easier to transfer the tax burden to the colonies, for example by collecting

4

This section draws heavily on Findlay and O’Rourke (2003, pp. 32-35).
4

stamp duty (McCusker 1996, pp. 360-1). Thus it was that British attempts to raise taxation in
North America, as well as the stationing of a large royal army there, provided a spark for the
American Revolution. In turn, French fiscal problems, aggravated by France’s support for the
American colonists, led to attempted reforms in France, and helped produce the French
Revolution of 1789.
A series of mercantilist wars were therefore followed by a larger conflagration, into
which an additional ideological dimension had now been injected. In 1792, France declared
war on Austria and Prussia; and on February 1st, 1793, the French National Convention
declared war on Great Britain. The ensuing period of warfare between the two countries,
which lasted almost uninterrupted until 1815 (there was a brief interlude of peace which
lasted from the Peace of Amiens in March 1802 until the renewal of war in May 1803, and
another during 1814-15), had profound and long-lasting effects on international trade
worldwide.
Within a month, the Convention had prohibited the importation of large classes of
British goods, and in October it banned all British manufactured goods; meanwhile, the
British side adopted a policy of blockading the coast of France. As Eli Heckscher’s classic
account emphasizes (Heckscher 1922), each side was motivated by a mercantilist desire to
prevent the other exporting, and thus acquiring precious metals, rather than by a desire to
prevent the enemy from importing food or other goods which might be useful to the war
effort.5 There was also the hope that by preventing exports, the enemy’s economy could be
damaged, causing unemployment and political unrest. This gave the blockades of the 1790s,
as well as the later Continental Blockade, a distinctly 18th century flavour; thus, in 1809 and

5

The exception being that food exports were occasionally banned when domestic food
supplies were scarce.
5

1810, when Britain was suffering from poor harvests, but France had food in abundance,
Napoleon authorized food exports to its enemy. Such a policy stance, based on the hope that
one’s opponent could be brought to its knees by supplying it with food in return for gold,
relied on the assumption that Britain needed trade surpluses to finance its war effort on the
Continent; it ignored the possibility that the war effort could be financed via capital flows
(Neal 1991), and invites counterfactual speculation as to what would have happened had
Napoleon understood correctly that imports are desirable, and attempted to starve out the
British.6
Both the French and the British took measures against neutral shipping which
transported enemy goods, but the bilateral trade dispute took on a multilateral nature in
December 1800, when Russia, Denmark, Sweden and Prussia formed the League of Armed
Neutrality (which succeeded a similar arrangement between the two Scandinavian countries
in 1794), agreeing to provide naval protection for their merchant shipping. This arrangement
came to an end in 1801, but not before the British had announced a blockade on trade with
the League (bar Prussia), and physically attacked Copenhagen. Trade disruption was to
become far more widespread in the aftermath of Napoleon’s military victories over Austria in
1805 and Prussia in 1806. In November 1806, his Berlin Decree declared that the British Isles
were under blockade (somewhat fancifully, since Britain controlled the seas), that all trade in
British goods were prohibited, and that all vessels coming directly from Britain or her
colonies were to be turned away from French ports. More importantly, Napoleon began
applying these restrictions, not just in France, but in vassal states such as Spain, Naples and

6

Rose (1902); Heckscher (1922); Olson (1963); Crouzet (1987, pp. 564-571), Crouzet
(2003). In fact, Napoleon was also motivated by the desire to help French farmers, who were
struggling with the effects of a bumper crop; and by the need for government revenue.
6

Holland. His forces defeated those of Russia in 1807; the ensuing Treaty of Tilsit implied that
not just Russia, but Denmark and Portugal, joined the blockade (the former voluntarily, the
latter as a result of a French invasion), as did Prussia; the result was that virtually the entire
Continent was now in a state of ‘self-blockade’ against the exports of Britain, the
overwhelmingly dominant industrial power of the time.7
Nor did matters end there. In November 1807 the British declared that neutral ships
could be seized if found to be carrying goods from enemy colonies to their mother countries,
even if they first transited via neutral ports; on the other hand neutral ships could still carry
goods from enemy colonies to their own home ports, or from enemy colonies to British ports,
or from their own home ports to British ports, or from British ports to enemy ports. The
practical effect of this was that neutrals would have to put into British ports if they wanted to
ship goods from, say, French colonies (or indeed, from their own country) to France.
Napoleon retaliated by declaring that any neutral ship putting into a British port was fair
prize, and could be seized. Faced with a situation where neutral ships carrying goods to the
Continent were now subject to seizure from either one side or the other, the young U.S.
government closed its ports in December to belligerent shipping and forbade its own ships to
leave these ports. This Embargo Act was repealed in 1809, and replaced with a nonIntercourse Act which only banned trade with Britain and France (and which was clearly
difficult to enforce, once ships had been given leave to sail to Europe). Nonetheless, for
fourteen months the United States found itself in a state of virtual autarky (Irwin 2001).
Russia broke with France in 1810, by 1813 Napoleon was in retreat and the
Continental Blockade was unravelling in several directions, and the Blockade legislation was

7

The only Continental country to hold out was Sweden, which was eventually forced
to join the blockade in 1810.
7

finally repealed following Napoleon’s abdication in 1814, having effectively collapsed in the
summer of 1813. On the other hand, in 1812 continuing friction over trade-related issues led
to the United States declaring war on Britain. There followed British attempts to blockade the
US coastline, attempts which were greatly helped by victory over Napoleon in 1814, which
allowed the Royal Navy to redeploy its forces there. The day after the peace treaty between
France and Britain was signed, Britain ordered that the entire US coastline be blockaded. The
war between Britain and its former colony, and the ensuing damage to trade, was to last for
the rest of the year.
The period was also marked by war and revolution in the Carribean and Latin
America. In 1791, slaves on the French sugar colony of Saint Domingue rose against their
masters, and after resisting British and French invasions, Haiti became an independent
republic in 1804. Naval warfare between Spain and Britain (1796-1802 and 1804-8) seriously
disrupted Latin American trade; this was followed by a series of revolutions in the following
decade, following Napoleon’s invasion and occupation of Iberia in 1808. By the 1820s
independent republics (or, the case of Brazil, an independent Empire) had been established
across the continent.
For over 20 years leading governments had acted so as to severely disrupt
international trade, and under the Continental System that disruption had been widespread
and rather extreme. The question now arises as to what were the economic consequences of
this disruption, in both the short and longer run.

Section 3. War and the volume of trade
Did measures such as the Continental Blockade and Britain’s naval blockade of
enemy ports seriously impede the integration of international commodity markets, or were
8

they so undermined by smuggling, corruption and fiscally-motivated legal exceptions to the
general protectionist rule as to have had no significant effect? There is certainly a strand in
the literature which holds the latter view: for example, Heckscher (1922) emphasises the
normality of smuggling, which was universally acknowledged at the time. He cites no less a
figure than Napoleon, in a letter to King Louis of Holland dated April 3, 1808, as saying that
“If you need to sell your gin, the English need to buy it. Settle the points where the English
smugglers are to come and fetch it, and make them pay in money but never in commodities”
(p. 192). While this seems more an extension of Napoleon’s generally mercantilist policies
than anything else, Heckscher stressed the “hopelessness of enforcing obedience to the
blockade decrees” (pp. 366-7) and concluded that the policy merely served to transfer
foregone customs revenue from the French state to smugglers and corrupt officials (p. 197).
Similarly, the qualitative literature contains many references to smuggling which undercut the
effectiveness of the US Embargo; Jefferson himself concluded that “this embargo law is
certainly the most embarrassing we ever had to execute. I did not expect a crop of so sudden
and rank growth of fraud, and open opposition by force, could have grown up within the
United States” (cited in Davis and Engerman, forthcoming, Chapter 3).
By contrast, François Crouzet (1987), while not denying that corrupt French officials
did undermine the effectiveness of the Continental Blockade, nevertheless maintains that the
blockade was effective from mid-1807 to mid-1808, and again from spring 1810 until the
winter of 1812; while Frankel (1982) has persuasively argued that the Jefferson Embargo
successfully impeded Anglo-American trade during 1808. Only quantitative evidence can
resolve an issue such as this.
Figure 1 shows estimates of the volume of trade between 1780 and 1830 for the two
main belligerents, Britain and France, as well as for two neutrals, Sweden and the United
9

States. The shaded area in the graph refers to the period between 1807, the beginning of the
Continental Blockade and the Jefferson Embargo, and 1814, when wartime disruption
between Britain and the United States was at its peak. On the face of it, the effects on Britain
seem to have been relatively minor. Imports seem to have been reduced between 1811 and
1814 (although this is relative to a peak in 1810), but apart from a dip in 1811 exports seem
to have been close to trend throughout the period. By contrast, French imports were seriously
reduced throughout the war, while her exports were lower during 1808-11 than in 1806 and
1807.8 There is little obvious impact on Swedish trade volumes; but U.S. exports and imports
declined substantially after 1808, and collapsed in 1814, when trade volumes were only
around 10% of their 1820 levels.
An alternative way of measuring the impact of wartime blockades on trade volumes,
given the existence of strong upward trends in some of these time series, is to regress the log
of the series on time, time squared, and a blockade dummy variable taking the value one for
the years 1807-14 and zero otherwise. The percentage impact of the blockade on trade
(relative to a no-blockade counterfactual) is then given by 100*(e*-1) where * is the
coefficient on the blockade dummy variable. Table 1 gives the percentage changes in trade
volumes for these four countries during 1807-14 relative to the no-blockade counterfactual;
entries in bold type correspond to equations in which the coefficient on the blockade dummy
variable was statistically significant. As can be seen, British trade was essentially unaffected
by the blockades; on the other hand, French and American imports were halved during the

8

According to Cuenca Esteban (2004), French imports (in constant 1787-9 prices) fell
from an annual average of £21.5 million in 1787-9 to just £9.2 million during the war (that is,
1797-1812 and 1814-15); while Britain’s imports rose during the same period from £27.1
million to £42.1 million (Table 2.1, pp. 38-9). Exports of French domestic products rose by
some 17%, from £10.6 million to £12.5 million; while British exports rose by 92%, from
£17.8 million to £32.3 million (Table 2.3, pp. 42-3).
10

period, while US exports were reduced by a third. The blockades do not seem to have reduced
Swedish trade volumes at all, according to these measures. The message from the table is that
Britain’s opponents appear to have done worse than Britain herself; on the other hand, the
fact that the French and American declines in trade volumes appear to be greater on the
import side than on the export side is consistent with (if unlikely to be entirely explained by)
the under-reporting of trade due to smuggling (which, one assumes, would have posed a
greater problem for compiling accurate import statistics than for export statistics, in cases
where governments were mainly concerned with reducing their opponents’ exports).
The trade effects of the wars were not limited to Europe and North America.
According to Salvatore and Newland (2003, Figure 2.1, p. 21), Argentinian per capita exports
collapsed by two thirds between 1810 and 1812, before recovering their 1810 level in 1814
and surpassing it thereafter. The Spanish blockade of Buenos Aires was an Argentine-specific
factor in this case, but Latin American trade more broadly was severely disrupted during the
conflict (Bulmer-Thomas 2003, p. 19). Not only that; an inability to export, and later the
struggle for Latin American independence, severely hit the continent’s output of silver, one of
its major export commodities. According to the available data,9 almost a century of continual
expansion was replaced immediately after the onset of the wars by wildly fluctuating output
around an essentially flat trend, which then started declining; according to Dermigny (1964,
p. 1206), Mexican silver output, which had averaged more than 20 million piastres p.a.
between 1792 and 1806, fell to an annual average of 16.4 million between 1807 and 1813,
11.3 million between 1814 and 1820, and just 8.8 million between 1821 and 1827. The result
was that worldwide silver production, which had averaged more than 28 million ounces

9

See the data given at the Latin American Economic History Data Bank,
http://mansell.stucen.gatech.edu/rlg7/latamdata/index.html.
11

between 1781 and 1810, fell to 17.4 million ounces in the following decade, and 14.8 million
during the 1820s (Vilar 1976, p. 331). In turn, this decline in Latin American silver output
had consequences around the world. To take one example, British silver shipments to India
and China declined dramatically, with a much greater proportion of Britain’s payments to
those countries in exchange for their exports taking the form of merchandise than had been
the case during the 18th century (Dermigny 1964, pp. 1209-10).
Figure 2 shows that exports from Africa were also seriously disrupted by the war: it
gives 5-yearly totals of African slave exports from the 1670s until the final end of the trade in
the 1860s. The shaded area represents the period from 1791 to 1815: exports during 1811-15
were less than half of what they had been in the late 1780s. Of course, warfare was not the
only factor disrupting the slave trade: in 1808 the British government abolished the slave
trade between Africa and British colonies, the same year that saw the abolition of the United
States slave trade, and five years after the Danish decision to end her own slave trade in 1803
(Engerman 1981, pp. 4-5). The Dutch abolished their slave trade in 1815, and formally the
French trade was ended the following year (although illegal trade continued for several
decades). And yet wartime disruption to shipping, as well as the slave revolt on Saint
Domingue, must have played a role as well, since exports were already falling in the 1790s,
before abolition; and since once the war had ended, slave exports resumed, before finally
collapsing after 1850 or so.10
The case of South East Asia is perhaps the exception that proves the rule. Bulbeck et
al. (1998, pp. 12-13) document South East Asian trade in four key regional exports, cloves,
pepper, sugar and coffee, and find that the 1780s marked a (positive) turning point for South

10

Indeed, previous 18th century wars had led to the complete cessation of the French
slave trade. I am indebted to Francois Crouzet for this point.
12

East Asian exports, for a region-specific reason: as will be seen below, the wars led to the end
of the colonial trade monopolies, in the long run boosting export supply. Thus, export growth
averaged an impressive 4.6% p.a. during 1780-1829 (p. 15), which was by far superior to the
rates achieved previously. On the other hand, trade during the wars was unstable, owing to the
disruption of shipping and the French occupation of the Netherlands in 1795: export growth
in real terms fell to a mere 0.1% p.a. in the 1810s, before increasing to 11% p.a. in the 1820s.
Javanese sugar barely reached Europe during 1790-1816, while the same was true for the
island’s coffee exports after 1794 (ibid., pp. 118, 147). However, while exports to Europe
declined during the wars, Chinese and, especially, American ships could now buy spices
directly in South East Asia, and ship them to their home markets; with sugar and coffee
production in Saint Domingue disrupted by the slave rebellion there, there was an abundant
demand for the region’s output (ibid.).
Overall, it appears that war had a negative impact on trade volumes, but the evidence
is not as definitive as one would like, given the problems with the available trade statistics,
and the omnipresent possibility that smuggling was in fact quantitatively significant, as
Heckscher claimed. Fortunately, there is another way of measuring trade disintegration, and
that is to look at the price evidence. If blockades had an impact on trade, then the relative
prices of importables should have increased in the affected countries; the relative price of
exportables should have declined; the terms of trade should have worsened; and price gaps
between export and import markets for particular commodities should have increased. Since
there is abundant and high-quality price evidence available for a number of countries during
this period, largely thanks to the efforts of the International Scientific Committee on Price
History of the 1930s and 1940s (see Cole and Crandall 1964) it makes sense to explore this
evidence and see what it reveals.
13

Section 4. Relative price evidence
Figure 3 explores the impact of war on the relative prices of importables in Britain.11
Six goods are chosen, two representing imports from Europe, two from Asia, and two from
the New World. The European commodities chosen are wheat, which as the leading industrial
nation Britain was already importing in the late 18th century, from neighbouring Ireland but
also from Northern Europe; and timber, another crucial import which at the end of the 18th
century still came predominantly from Northern Europe. Pepper and green tea are chosen as
representative imports from Asia; while sugar and raw cotton are chosen as representative
imports from the New World. Together, corn, timber, tea, spices, sugar and raw cotton
accounted for almost two-fifths of total British imports in 1784-6 (Davis 1979, pp. 110-11).
The prices of all six commodities are expressed relative to the price of textiles, which
accounted for 45% of British exports during the same period (ibid., p. 94).
The first graph in Figure 3 concerns the relative price of wheat. According to Thomas
Tooke, it cost between 30 and 50 shillings per quarter to ship wheat from the Baltic to Britain
in 1810, as compared with 4s/6d in 1837, while Glenn Hueckel has estimated that wartime
freight, insurance and licence costs accounted for between 25% and 40% of British wheat
prices in 1812 (Hueckel 1973, p. 369). It would thus be surprising if the relative price of
wheat did not rise during the war, and Figure 3 confirms that indeed it did. The relative price
of wheat was 57% higher during the war years (1793-1815) than in the 13 years previously,
and it was 47% higher than during the succeeding 15 years.12 Comparing the Blockade period

11

In this and subsequent figures, all relative prices are indexed on 1820=100 (unless
otherwise stated).
12

This compares with Hueckel’s estimate that over the period 1790-1815, wartime
disruption raised the relative price of agricultural commodities in Britain by 28% (Hueckel
1973, p. 389).
14

(1807-12, the shaded area in Figure 3), the effect was greater still: relative wheat prices
increased 77% relative to their pre-war average, and 66% relative to their post-war average.
The relative price of lumber seems also to have profoundly affected by war, although
in this case it is admittedly difficult to separate out the effects of trade disruption (which
would have lowered British supplies) from the increased naval demand for lumber which the
war gave rise to, and which would have led to its relative price increasing even if free trade
had been maintained throughout the conflict. As can be seen from the graph, the relative price
of lumber peaked during the Continental Blockade period, suggesting that demand-side
factors were not the only ones at work, and that trade disruption mattered also. Indeed, Gayer
et al. (1953), from whom the timber prices were extracted, were forced to use prices for
Yellow American timber after 1808, whereas they had previously used quotations for Memel
fir, since “(i)n 1808 the virtual closing off of the Baltic forced British importers to shift
rapidly to the American sources of supply. Memel timber in that year was virtually
unavailable, its price was astronomically high” (p. 851). Average wartime relative prices were
61% higher than prices during 1816-20; the relative price of lumber during 1807-12 was
121% higher than during 1816-20.
It seems clear that war impeded Britain’s ability to import goods from Continental
Europe, and raised British relative prices of ‘temperate zone’ agricultural commodities. But
what of Britain’s overseas trade with Asia and the Americas? Here, the picture is somewhat
more nuanced, as would be expected given the fact that Britain was dominant at sea. Take the
relative price of sugar, for example. Figure 3 shows that the relative price of sugar was indeed
much higher during the war than either before (43% higher) or after (66% higher). However,
the relative price of sugar had already been rising prior to 1793 (since 1789, in fact, perhaps
due to the influence of the French Revolution on Haitian sugar supplies). Not surprisingly, the
15

years of the most intense blockade (1807-12) did not have any particular impact on the
relative price of a good imported in the main from the Caribbean and Latin America, rather
than Continental Europe. As for raw cotton, its relative price did increase in 1808 and 1809,
as a result of the US Embargo, as well as in 1814, but Figure 3 makes it clear that these
increases were not out of the ordinary, and have to be set against a trend which was steadily
favourable as far as Britain’s cotton producers were concerned. Relative cotton prices were
indeed lower after the war than during it, but the figure suggests that it would be difficult to
attribute this fact to the cessation of hostilities alone.
On the other hand, there is clearer evidence of war-time increases in the relative prices
of Asian imports. The relative price of tea was 16% higher during than after the wars (and
note also the very substantial spike in 1780-84, coinciding with the Fourth Anglo-Dutch
War). As for the relative price of pepper, it was 53% higher during the peak of the wartime
trade disruption (1807-12) than before the war, and 44% higher than after, reflecting war-time
increases in freight and insurance rates. However, there were also pronounced spikes in this
relative price both before (1784, 1789) and after (1824-5) the war. While the two earlier
spikes can plausibly related to conflict or fears of conflict (the end of the Anglo-Dutch war,
and the French Revolution), it is less clear what was driving the latter one.
To summarize: these annual price data suggest a pronounced wartime effect on British
imports from Europe, and a less pronounced (if still sizable) effect on imports from Asia and
the Caribbean/Latin America. Given that the French were able to influence trade between
Britain and large areas of the Continent, which were under their control, but had no power
whatsoever to influence Britain’s overseas trade, this makes sense. What about other
countries participating in the conflict?
Figure 4 looks at relative prices in France, but only from 1798 onwards (which is
16

when data become available in the standard source for the period, Chabert 1945). This means
that war-time prices can only be compared with post-war prices. As can be seen from the
figure, the key British export to the Continent, textiles, was a lot more expensive relative to
wheat during the war than afterwards: prices during 1798-1815 were 77% higher than during
1816-30. While there was a peak in the relative price during the Continental Blockade period,
it does not stand out from similar, earlier peaks, although relative import prices did fall
sharply and permanently in 1812-13. War, rather than the blockade itself, seems to have had
an important impact on French relative prices in this instance. The situation is different as
regards the other major industrial commodity of the early Industrial Revolution, iron: its
relative price rose substantially during the Continental Blockade (to a level 41% higher than
its postwar average) but was not higher on average during the war as a whole than afterwards.
Iron (as opposed to hardware and other iron products) was not smuggled at all, and it may be
that this explains the greater effect of the Blockade per se on iron prices; but this is
speculation. The Blockade also appears to have had an important effect in making overseas
imports, such as sugar, raw cotton, pepper and coffee, scarcer within France (and indeed this
effect is much more clearly discernible than for the European industrial commodities just
mentioned): the peaks in the prices of these four commodities relative to the major European
exportable (textiles) are very pronounced, with the relative prices during 1807-12 exceeding
average postwar levels by 53%, 124%, 39% and 50% respectively. Another noteworthy
feature of the figure, which reinforces the impression that war and blockades did have an
important effect on relative prices, is the decline in the relative price of importables
coinciding with the Peace of Amiens of 1802-3.
The available price evidence also suggests that the relative prices of overseas
importables rose considerably in the Netherlands during the wars, and especially during the
17

period of the Continental Blockade (Figure 5). Indeed, the impact of war on relative prices in
this maritime nation was more dramatic than in either Britain or France. Relative to textiles
prices, sugar was an astonishing 577% dearer during 1807-12 than it had been before the war,
and 277% dearer than its post-war average. The equivalent figures for raw cotton are 39% and
90%; those for pepper are 167% and 161% respectively. In the case of trade between the
Netherlands and Asia, there exists information on intercontinental price gaps for a number of
commodities (Bulbeck et al. 1998). Clove prices had been 15.7 times higher in Amsterdam
than in South East Asia in the 1760s and the 1770s; the margin declined in the 1800s to 6.5,
presumably due to the ending of the VOC monopoly, of which more later. However, it
increased again to 8.9 in the 1810s, reflecting wartime blockades, before collapsing to 1.9 in
the 1820s, and just 1.2 in the 1830s (ibid., p. 59). Something similar happened in the case of
pepper: Euro-Asian price spreads which had been in the 4-5 range in the mid-1700s rose to 6
in the 1780s, and 9.3 in the 1790s. There then followed the same pattern of declining spreads
in the 1800s (to 3.8), a rise in the 1810s (to 5.0), followed by steady decline once the war had
ended.
Figure 6 shows the impact of the war on relative prices in Germany. As can be seen,
there were spikes in 1810-11 in the prices of European industrial goods (cotton yarn and iron)
relative to rye, although these were not particularly noteworthy in the context of longer run
trends. As with France, the real impact of the war, and in particular of the blockade period,
was to increase the relative prices of non-European imports; and as in the case of the
Netherlands, these increases were dramatic. Relative to the price of cotton yarn, the price of
sugar was 190% higher during 1807-12 than after the war; the relative price of raw cotton was
169% higher; the relative price of coffee was 197% higher; and the relative price of tobacco
was 121% higher.
18

Nor were the effects of war limited to those countries which were actually involved in
it. Sweden had remained outside the Continental System for longer than any other
Continental power, only joining it under compulsion in January 1810. According to
Heckscher, countries such as Sweden, which had “unhampered supply from Great Britain,”
found themselves facing “a kind of hypertrophy of imports” as British supplies were diverted
from their normal outlets: the result was an improvement in the terms of trade, rather than a
deterioration, and a consequent increase in welfare (Heckscher 1922, pp. 264-5). In fact,
Figure 7 shows that this happy outcome did not arise. Bar iron was the dominant Swedish
export towards the end of the 18th century; Sweden imported colonial goods, as well as grain
(especially rye), textiles, and raw materials. The figure shows that prices of textiles and
grains, relative to bar iron, shot up during the period of the Continental Blockade. While
relative import prices rose sharply in 1810, the year Sweden joined the Blockade, they did not
decline during 1808 and 1809, as would have been the case under Heckscher’s hypothesis.
The relative price of textiles was 118% higher during 1807-12 than it was before the wars,
and 70% higher than the post-war average; the figures for rye were 67% and 77%
respectively; and the figures for wheat were 75% and 94% respectively. In the case of all
three commodities, their relative prices collapsed once the war was over.
It seems as though the wars of 1793-1815 had important relative price effects in both
belligerent powers and neutral countries, despite the undoubted existence of smuggling. Nor
was the impact of the wars limited to Europe. According to Jeffrey Frankel (1982), in 1807
the Liverpool price of cotton was 27.5% higher than the Charleston price; but in the final two
months of the embargo the Liverpool price was 293.3% higher than the Charleston price
(Frankel 1982, pp. 307-8). Using prices for a number of key agricultural and industrial
commodities, Frankel found that the British terms of trade deteriorated by between 41.9% and
19

49.7% during the dispute, while the US terms of trade deteriorated by between 31.6% and
32.7% (Frankel 1982, p. 304). Figure 8 confirms that war and embargoes did seriously
hamper trans-Atlantic trade, smuggling notwithstanding: the relative price of goods imported
from Europe, such as textiles and wine, increased significantly in the US during the years of
the Embargo and its aftermath (which culminated in the War of 1812 opposing Britain and
the US). Relative to the price of raw cotton, textiles prices were 51.4% higher during 1807-14
(the shaded area in the graph) than they were on average post-war, while wine prices were
52.4% higher. Indeed, compared with the immediate post-war (1816-20) era the effects seem
even larger: textiles prices were 110.2% higher during 1807-14, and wine prices were 104.1%
higher. A key finding of Figure 8 (consistent with the evidence in Figure 1) is that the most
serious disruption to US trade with Europe occurred in 1814, rather than during the Embargo,
despite the attention that has been lavished on the earlier episode.
The war also severely affected Latin American markets. Figure 9 shows the price of
two key Peruvian imports from Europe, linen and paper, expressed in terms of silver (the key
Peruvian export). The paper prices come from different locations, but all the graphs tell a
similar story: the relative price of imports rose considerably during the wars. Silver paper
prices during 1807-12 (the shaded area in the graph) exceeded their pre-war averages by
between 88.7% and 150% in these three cities (Lima, Arequipa and Potosí), and they
exceeded their 1816-20 levels by between 70.6 and 140%. Silver prices of Rouen linen in
Arequipa during 1807-12 exceeded their pre-war averages by 68.4%, and they exceeded their
1816-20 average by 167%. War also affected relative prices in Argentina: according to
Newland (1998, p. 413) the end of the Napoleonic Wars led to a decline in freight and
insurance costs, and a convergence of local on international prices.
Lovejoy and Richardson (1995) provide data on slave prices deflated by the cost of
20

imported trade goods, both in West Africa, where British slaving had been heavily
concentrated, and further south, in Angola. If their prewar (1788-92) level is taken to equal
100, real West African slave prices stood at 91.6 during 1793-7, 122 during 1798-1802, 132.5
during 1803-7, but only 74.3 during 1808-14, and 40.3 during 1815-20. The prices then
recovered, consistent with the evidence in Figure 2 of a recovering slave trade, to 57.6 in the
early 1820s, and 90.1 in the late 1820s. The timing of the price decline suggests strongly that
the British and US abolition of the slave trade was the most important force driving it, an
impression strengthened by the evidence that Angolan slave prices were stable after 1808
(Table 3, p. 113); on the other hand, the post-war recovery in slave prices suggests an
independent effect for the war as well.
Once again, South East Asia is in some ways the exception that proves the rule.
Elsewhere, it seems to have been true that the relative price of imports rose during the wars,
and that the relative price of exports fell. While I do not have South East Asian prices of
imported goods spanning the pre-war and post-war periods, I do have silver prices for a
variety of exported goods. Table 2 gives average decadal silver prices for three exported
commodities, cloves, pepper and coffee. The data on coffee prices exhibit similar behaviour
to that experienced in other regions of the world, with export prices below their pre-war
levels in the 1800s and to a lesser extent the 1810s, before rising in the 1820s. Cloves and
pepper reveal a different pattern, however. If the mean price for the 1770s is taken to be 100,
clove prices averaged 131.6 during the 1801-1820 period, while pepper prices also rose, to
153.4 during the 1800s, and 134.4 during the 1810s. The fact that relative export prices rose
during this period, rather than falling, of course reflects the ending of the VOC monopsony
mentioned earlier; the difference between this atypical behaviour and the experience of coffee
prices can presumably be explained by the fact that while the international cloves and pepper
21

trade had been largely controlled by European trading monopolies, coffee was also produced
in the Western hemisphere, and its world price was thus not affected by the decline and fall of
the VOC. Even in the South East Asian case, however, war probably had an independent
effect on prices: clove prices were twice as high in the 1820s as they had been in the first two
decades of the century. This suggests that wartime disruption prevented clove prices from
rising even faster in the wake of VOC abolition than they actually did.13
Table 3 summarises the discussion thus far, providing relative price information that
is as far as possible comparable across countries. In particular, it shows the percentage by
which war and blockades raised the price of importables, relative either to exportables, or to
grain prices. This percentage impact was once again calculated by regressing the log of the
relevant relative price on time, time squared, and dummy variables representing wartime
(1798-1815, the start date being determined by the availability of French data) and the
blockade period (taken to be 1807-14, so as to capture the effects of the Anglo-American
war).14
Panel A looks at the relative price of wheat and textiles in Britain and France, and
confirms that agricultural goods became relatively more expensive in Britain during the
conflict, and that textiles became relatively more expensive in France. Figure 10 gives the
two relative prices on one graph, and shows that they moved in a broadly similar fashion
during the conflict, with British import price spikes in 1800-01 and 1814, and French import
price spikes in 1804-5 and 1808-9. According to the regression estimates in Panel A, the

13

Pepper was an exception during the 1820s, however, with its price slipping slightly
rather than rising.
14

The results in the column headed ‘blockade’ reflect the combined effects of both
wars and blockades, and are calculated by adding together the coefficients on both dummy
variables.
22

average war-time impact in the two countries was very similar, while the blockade had
roughly twice as big an impact in Britain as in France, raising relative import prices by
approximately 40 percent and 20 percent in the two countries respectively. The results
suggest that war-time attempts to disrupt trade in Europe worked, and if anything had a bigger
impact on land-scarce and populous Britain than on the European continent, which had a
comparative advantage in agricultural commodities, but was also a producer of textiles.
However, once the focus is switched to imports of non-European commodities, the
picture is dramatically altered. Panel B looks at the relative price of a key European import
from Asia, that is to say pepper, relative to both wheat and textiles, in Britain, France and the
Netherlands. As can be seen, the price of pepper rose far more in France and the Netherlands
than in Britain, no matter which numéraire is used. Its relative price more than doubled on the
Continent during the blockade period, while rising by less than a third relative to textile prices
in Britain. (Indeed, since wheat prices in Britain also rose, the price of pepper relative to
wheat actually fell in Britain, a finding mirrored for sugar and cotton below.)
Panel C looks at the relative prices of European imports from the Americas (sugar and
raw cotton, relative to both wheat and textiles), as well as American imports from Europe
(textiles, wine and paper, relative to cotton and silver). Once again, relative import prices rose
very substantially in France, Holland and Germany during the blockade period, and by a lot
more than in Britain, even when textiles are used as the numéraire rather than wheat. It is
noticeable that while relative sugar prices in France and the Netherlands were higher
throughout the war, reflecting the collapse of Saint Domingue and British efforts to disrupt
trade between the enemy and enemy colonies, relative cotton prices there only rose during the
blockade period, when the neutral American trade with the Continent was also prohibited as a
result of the British Orders in Council. Similarly, it was only during the blockade period,
23

when Napoleon’s policies were extended eastward, that the relative prices of cotton and sugar
rose in Germany. Meanwhile, on the other side of the Atlantic the relative prices of textiles,
wine and paper rose sharply. Comparing Britain and the US, it seems that the cotton/textiles
relative price moved far more against the US than against the UK: Anglo-American economic
and military warfare more than doubled the relative price of textiles in the US, but had only a
small impact on British prices.15
The final two panels are calculated by comparing wartime prices with post-war prices,
there being not enough data to carry out regression analysis. Panel D gives the relative price
of imported goods relative to slaves in Africa; the goods imported into Africa consisted both
of European manufactures, and re-exports of New World goods. In this case, it seems as
though imports were relatively cheaper during the war than afterwards; this is due to the
choice of 1816-20 as the peace-time benchmark (since real slave prices in West Africa fell
after 1808, but continued falling right through the 1810s). Panel E gives the South East Asian
price of silver, relative to cloves, pepper and coffee: the fact that these prices are only
available decadally means that I cannot separate out the blockade years from the rest of the
war, but with the exception of pepper mentioned earlier, the table shows large increases in the
price of silver relative to local export goods when the first two decades of the 19th century are
compared with the 1820s.
There are thus three main conclusions from the table. First, the war raised the relative
price of importables nearly everywhere, often by significant amounts. Second, the increase in
the relative price of importables was particularly pronounced during the blockade years, with

15

The contrast between these results and those of Frankel (1982) are most likely
explained by the different periods studied by the two papers; Frankel concentrates on the
Embargo of 1807-9, while this study encompasses the more important British naval blockade
of the United States in 1814.
24

increases of more than 100%, or even 200%, being common. Third, a comparison of Britain
with France, Holland and Germany suggests that the former’s access to non-European goods
was far less severely restricted during the conflict than that of its rivals. This can presumably
be put down to British domination of the seas, which can also explain the greater impact of
the conflict on import prices in the United States than in Britain, particularly during 1813-4.
It is clearly implausible to claim that the blockades and embargos of the French
Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars were so undermined by smuggling and corruption that
they had no economic impact. Relative prices of importables rose substantially, relative prices
of exportables fell, and by implication countries’ terms of trade deteriorated, implying a
decline in economic welfare. The next section estimates this welfare loss in four countries,
Britain, France, the United States and Sweden.

Section 5. Welfare losses: some simple estimates
For a few countries, there are estimates of average export and import prices during
this period, and hence of their aggregate terms of trade. Figure 11 graphs the price of imports,
relative to the price of exports, for four such countries: the two main belligerents, Britain and
France, as well as the United States and Sweden. The shaded area in the figures refers to the
high-water mark of war-time trade restrictions, 1807-14. The figure indicates substantial
increases in relative import prices during the conflict, consistent with the diplomatic and
naval histories of the period. Sweden’s terms of trade suffered a sharp deterioration in 1810,
when she was forced to join the Continental Blockade; while in France the terms of trade
improved during the Peace of Amiens, before deteriorating dramatically during the period of
the Blockade. The figure also bears out the impression given by the data on individual
commodity prices, namely that Britain was less severely affected by these trade disputes than
25

France, presumably as a result of the Royal Navy’s supremacy at sea: intra-European trade
disruption might have affected both of the main belligerents in a similar manner, and even
raised import prices to a greater extent in Britain than in France (as Panel A of Table 3
suggested); but the impact of the wars on the price of non-European imports was so much
greater on the Continent than in the British Isles that this swamped any other effects. Indeed,
the effect of war on aggregate British relative import prices seems to be smaller than that in
America as well: there were spikes in the relative price of imports in Britain in 1809 and
1814, but these were dwarfed by the enormous increase in the United States in 1814, when
the Royal Navy successfully blockaded much of the US coastline. It looks therefore, as if
Britain was the economic ‘victor’ in these trade disputes, emerging relatively unscathed while
her rivals did not.
In order to take account of the fact that there were long run trends in these series (for
example, rapid technological progress in key export industries such as textiles in Britain
implied a long run tendency during this period for Britain’s terms of trade to deteriorate: see
Imlah 1958, Cuenca Esteban 1997), I once again regressed the log of each country’s terms of
trade on time and time-squared, plus a dummy variable representing the blockade period; and
used the regression coefficients to infer how much lower relative import prices would have
been in the absence of the blockade. According to this procedure, Britain suffered a terms of
trade loss (i.e. higher relative import prices) of 11.9% during 1807-14 , as compared with
terms of trade losses of 8.6% in Sweden, 49.4% in the United States, and an impressive
61.2% in France. In the Swedish case, it makes sense to also look at the impact of the
blockade from 1810 onwards, since it was only then that Sweden was forced to become a part
of it: relative Swedish import prices were 21.0% higher during 1810-14 than during a noblockade counterfactual.
26

In turn, these terms of trade effects reduced the economic welfare of the countries
concerned. Estimates of the welfare loss depend on the economic model used to calculate
them; I use the simplest possible computable general equilibrium (CGE) model that can
generate such estimates. This is a simplification of the CGE model suggested by Anderson
and Neary (1996) to estimate their trade restrictiveness index; and its appeal lies in the fact
that the only information needed to calibrate the model is the trade share.
All production takes place in one sector, which uses a single factor of production (call
it ‘value added’ or VA) to produce two composite outputs, a non-traded good (NT) which is
entirely consumed, and an exportable good (X) which is entirely exported (see Figure 12).
Production takes place according to a constant elasticity of transformation production
function, with elasticity of transformation J. The exportable good is exchanged on
international markets for a composite imported good, M, which is entirely consumed. The
exportable is taken to be the numéraire good, and trade is assumed to be balanced. The key
relative price in the model is then the (exogenous) relative price of the import good, which is
set equal to one in the benchmark equilibrium, but can be changed in order to simulate the
effects of terms of trade shocks. In order to calibrate the model, let the export share (equal to
the import share by assumption) equal t, and assume that the country’s endowment of value
added equals 100 (the number chosen here is of course irrelevant to the results). Then the
production of the non-traded good will equal (1-t)*100; the production of the exportable will
equal t*100; and imports will equal t*100. Consumption of the non-traded and imported
goods will take place in the proportion (1-t) to t respectively.
There are two key elasticities in the model: the elasticity of transformation J between
the non-traded good and the exportable in production, and the elasticity of substitution F in
consumption between the non-traded good and the importable. The results depend in
27

particular on the latter elasticity: the higher is the elasticity of substitution in consumption,
the easier it is for consumers to switch away from imports when wartime blockades raise their
price, and the lower the resultant welfare loss. Welfare losses should also depend on the value
of J, with higher values leading to lower welfare losses; but in practice the results seem
remarkably insensitive to the value of this parameter. I therefore follow Anderson and Neary
in assuming a value of 5 for J throughout.
Table 4 presents a range of welfare estimates for each country, for values of F ranging
from 0.25 to 2 (the latter being an absolute upper bound, since typically CGE models assume
elasticity values less than unity: see Irwin 2001).16 The results suggest that French welfare
losses were roughly twice as high as British losses, lying in the 3-4% range, as opposed to
British losses of 1.7-1.8% per annum. Per annum losses were even lower in Sweden if the
period 1807-14 as a whole is considered, but were closer to 3% during 1810-1814. The table
thus confirms the earlier impression that the blockades hit Britain much less severely than
they did her main Continental rival.
The most striking result of Table 4, however, concerns a country which had initially
been neutral, namely the United States. The results suggests that per annum American
welfare losses were much higher than those incurred in either France of Britain, lying in the
5-6% range. These estimates are remarkably close to Irwin’s estimate of a 5% welfare loss for
the United States during the period of Jefferson’s embargo; the difference is that these are
average estimates calculated for the period 1807-14 as a whole, since, as the terms of trade
figures suggest, wartime curtailment of trade continued to impose a cost on the American
economy well after the repeal of the Embargo Act. Indeed, the terms of trade data suggest that

16

Anderson and Neary’s baseline assumption is that F = 0.7.
28

the American welfare losses actually reached a peak in 1814.
Welfare losses of 5 to 6% per annum over an eight year period were a substantial
burden: the final two rows of Table 4 show that the cumulative welfare loss amounted to 36%
in the United States, equivalent to a permanent flow loss of 1.8%.17 To put these losses in
perspective, as already mentioned Glick and Taylor estimate that the permanent flow losses
associated with the trade disruption of World War I amounted to 2.74% for belligerents, and
2.09% for neutrals. Strikingly, American losses associated with the trade disruption of the
Napoleonic Wars were almost as big as the latter figure; and my estimates do not even take
into account any losses incurred between 1793 and 1806 inclusive. Permanent flow losses
were lower for the other countries considered here, a notable fact given that France and
Britain were the two main belligerents during the conflict (they amounted to 1.12% p.a. in
France, 0.6% in Britain and 0.42-0.65% p.a. in Sweden), but they were still very substantial.
Furthermore, Table 3 suggests that welfare losses are also likely to have been high in the
Netherlands and Latin America.18
Clearly, it is not the case that wartime trade disruption imposes equal penalties on all
belligerents, or indeed on all neutrals; nor would one expect this to be the case. The average
correlations that would have been revealed in a cross-sectional regression, had I had the data
with which to perform it, would have masked important variations across countries. First,

17

The estimates let F equal 0.7, and assume a discount rate of 5%, to make them
comparable with the Glick and Taylor results. The cumulative loss is simply the discounted
value, in 1807, of the annual welfare losses (given in the row headed ‘s=0.7') for each of the
years 1807-14; while the permanent flow loss is the per annum permanent loss which would
produce the same discounted cumulative loss.
18

Indeed, it could be argued that this model will understate the welfare effects of war
and blockades, at least in a country like Britain where unemployment became a problem
during 1808 and 1811-12 (as emphasised by Crouzet 1987).
29

countries suffered different terms of trade shocks; and second, some were more open to trade,
and thus more exposed to trade shocks, than others. The terms of trade shocks were larger in
France than in any other country, but France was also much less open, implying that French
welfare losses, while very considerable, were lower than in the United States. Crucially, terms
of trade shocks were substantially lower in Britain (and Sweden), implying smaller welfare
losses there, in spite of the relatively open nature of both economies. Having control of the
seas, as was the case for Britain in the early 19th century, proved far more useful in terms of
waging economic warfare than did the land-based power of Napoleon (O’Brien 2003).

Section 5. Conclusion
Clearly, the wars of 1793-1815 had important, world-wide, effects on trade and
economic welfare, which were particularly burdensome during the years of the Continental
Blockade and the disputes between Britain and the United States, culminating in the British
blockade of the US in 1814. The very large welfare costs imposed on the young United
States, which had started out as a neutral party to the conflict, are especially noteworthy.
Moreover, the wars’ effects continued to be felt in the trade policies of the main belligerents
long after the conflict had ended. For example, in Britain rents rose substantially towards the
end of the war: not surprisingly, landowners were reluctant to give up these gains. The result
was political lobbying that gave rise to the Corn Law of 1815, which meant in practice that
domestic markets were closed to foreign grain for most of the seven years following 1816.
While this law was gradually relaxed in the succeeding decades, it was only finally repealed
in 1846.
When Europe eventually moved towards freer trade in the late 19th century, this was
largely as a result of Britain’s example; might Britain have liberalized earlier had the
30

Napoleonic Wars not intervened? Such an argument assumes that industrialization (which
would have proceeded more rapidly in the absence of the war)19 would have led to the
emergence of powerful export interests, which would have eventually triumphed as their
political power grew. Would the extension of the franchise favouring urban interests, and thus
the free trade cause, have predated the 1832 Reform Act, had war not occurred? (Surely the
Revolution and succeeding wars did nothing to hasten liberal reforms in Britain.)
Alternatively, might landlords have diversified into non-agricultural interests earlier, and
been coopted by the free trade side as eventually happened (Schonhardt-Bailey 1991)? Did
the Napoleonic Wars delay the advent of free trade in Britain and Europe, by as much as
several decades?
While it is near impossible to provide definitive answers to such questions, a hint that
the Napoleonic Wars did significantly delay the advent of free trade in Britain can be found
with the passage of the Eden Treaty between Britain and France in 1786. This treaty “put an
end to the hundred years’ commercial war” between the two countries, abolishing
prohibitions on imports, and reducing tariffs generally, “usually down to 10 or 15 per cent”
(Heckscher 1922, p. 20). It is true that, even in the absence of war between the two countries,
this treaty might eventually have lapsed; Heckscher (1922, pp. 20-23) reports that the treaty
led to widespread complaints from a variety of French industries, notably the French textile
industry, and one can certainly speculate that this pressure would eventually have born fruit.
On the other hand, the new post-revolutionary French tariff of 1791 contained only moderate
additional protection, despite widespread protectionist pressure. It was only in early 1793,
when tensions between the two countries were mounting, and shortly before war broke out

19

Williamson (1984).
31

between them, that the French denounced the Eden Treaty. And it was the French who
denounced the Treaty, not the British, whose leaders had at this stage already been influenced
by the ideas of Adam Smith and other economic liberals. There is thus a prima facie case that
the French and Napoleonic Wars delayed the adoption of free trade policies in Britain, maybe
even by several decades.20
Meanwhile, on the French side of the English Channel war also had predictable
political economy effects, although here the sectoral patterns of winners and losers were
somewhat more complicated. In particular, whereas in Britain it was the case that agriculture,
broadly speaking, gained from warfare, and that industry lost, in France there were winners
and losers within industry itself (Crouzet 1964). Industries which were linked with the
Atlantic trade, such as sugar-refining, the linen industry, ship building, rope-making, and sailmaking were seriously affected by the Royal Navy’s sea blockade, as well as the slave revolt
on Saint Domingue; on the other hand, those industries which had complained about the Eden
Treaty, and the consequent increase in British competition, presumably benefited. As noted in
Table 3, the blockade raised the price of textiles by some 20% during 1807-12, relative to the
price of wheat, and so one would expect that it was the import-competing cotton textiles
industry that was the most important winner in France. This is the position taken by Crouzet
(1964), according to whom machine spinning was boosted enormously by the restrictions on
cotton yarn imports imposed from 1806. Thus, the output of machine-spun yarn quadrupled
between 1806 to 1810, with a spectacular growth in the number of spindles in northern and
eastern French cities such as Lille and Mulhouse, as well as in regions such as Belgium and

20

A counter-argument might be that British hegemony, and thus war ending with
British victory over the French, might have been required for the widespread trade
liberalisation of the long 19th century: see below.
32

Saxony (where the number of mule spindles rose from 13,000 in 1806 to 256,000 in 1813)
(Crouzet 1964, p. 576). On the other hand, both Heckscher (1922) and Chabert (1949) stress
another effect of the blockades, which was also seen earlier: namely, the dramatic increase in
the price of raw cotton, which rose by more in France (relative to the price of textiles) than in
Britain during the period. Thus, according to Chabert (p. 130) the scarcity of raw materials
made it more and more difficult for the French cotton industry to remain competitive. The
difference in emphasis of these authors is perhaps not so fundamental, however: on the one
hand, Heckscher (pp. 269-282) implicitly accepts that the blockade stimulated the growth of
the industry (and provides as evidence the industry’s collapse in 1814, when the country’s
frontiers were opened after Napoleon’s fall); on the other hand, Crouzet accepts that high raw
cotton prices (especially after 1808) hampered the growth of the French industry, which may
have grown during the blockade years, but less rapidly than its British counterpart. The
question is whether it would have grown at all if the Eden Treaty provisions had continued to
apply; the answer of both authors seems, on balance, to be negative.
More to the point, perhaps, Chabert (1949, pp. 347-9) reports that profits rose more
rapidly during the war in France than any other category of income, and that this was true of
the textile industry despite its high raw materials costs: he reports several cases of cotton
spinners and other industrialists who made large fortunes during the wars. Naturally,
Continental industries which had managed to prosper under these wartime circumstances, but
were uncompetitive internationally, were unlikely to favour peacetime moves towards free
trade; after the war they clamoured for protection, and, as Crouzet points out, they generally
obtained it. In this way, the consequences for post-1815 French trade policy were to prove
quite persistent.
Something very similar happened in the United States, which represents the polar
33

opposite of the British case, since wartime unambiguously favoured American manufacturers.
In 1790, there were just 2,000 cotton spindles in the United States, as opposed to over 2
million in Britain, and by 1809 this number had only grown to 8,000. However, the number
of American spindles then began to soar, reaching 93,000 in 1812 and 333,000 in 1817
(Rosenbloom 2002, Table 1). Thus, the take-off of the American cotton textiles industry
coincided exactly with the virtual elimination of imports from Britain. This makes sense:
Table 3 shows that the price of textiles in the United States, relative to raw cotton, was twice
as high during 1807-12 as it was during 1816-20; this should have boosted the industry’s
profits, in contrast to the situation in Britain and France. Furthermore, the industry went into
decline in 1815 and 1816, once the war had ended. Rosenbloom (2002) recounts how New
England textile manufacturers such as Francis Lowell set out to protect the new industry;
their efforts were soon rewarded, since the 1816 tariff bill established a minimum valuation
for cotton cloth imports, which effectively excluded low-cost Indian fabrics from the
American market. The fact that Indian manufacturers did not use American cotton made it
easier for the bill to pass in the face of the objections of southern Congressmen, representing
US export interests; however, in the years to come northern manufacturers would continue to
press for protection, resulting both in tension between North and South, and in high levels of
manufacturing protection during most of the 19th century. Thus, once again the disintegrating
effects of war were propagated through domestic political processes.
Thus far, this paper has stressed the negative effects of the Twenty-Three Years War
on trade and welfare; and these were indeed considerable. But the conflict had other, longerrun and more systemic effects which ran in the other direction, and it would be wrong to
conclude the paper without mentioning these.
First, one of the most striking long run impacts of the conflict of these years was the
34

virtual collapse of Europe’s New World empires, and the transformation of the Americas into
a land mass divided into independent states. To be sure, these states were now able to pursue
their own commercial policies, and on the whole chose to impose high tariffs on imports
(Coatsworth and Williamson 2004). On the other hand, however, mercantilist efforts to
privilege bilateral trade between New World colonies and their mother countries, at the
expense of multilateral trade, now lapsed. This had an immediate effect, as can be seen, for
example, by the increase in British exports to Latin America during and after the Napoleonic
Wars. In the mid-1780s, Latin America had accounted for just 0.06% of British manufactured
exports; the proportion was 3.3% in 1804-6, 6.3% during 1814-6, and 15% in the mid-1820s
(Davis 1979, p. 88).
Second, traditional mercantilist restrictions on trade between Europe and Asia were
also disintegrating during the period, and again war was at least a proximate cause. In
Holland, the VOC was severely weakened by the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War of 1780-84, losing
half its ships; while it had not been profitable for some time, it now became “a ward of the
state” (de Vries and van der Woude 1997, p. 455). When the French revolutionaries invaded
the Netherlands in 1795, and the Batavian Republic was declared, the VOC’s activities were
taken over by the government, who found, however, that war made trade with Asia next to
impossible. In 1806, the Dutch government permitted free trade with Asia (ibid., p. 456).
Meanwhile, the English East India Company lost its monopoly on the trade with India in
1813, following a very partial relaxation of this monopoly in 1793. According to Webster
(1990), this decision was also a by-product of wartime conditions: in an inflationary
environment in which many imports were in scarce supply, and with consequent fears of
social unrest, it became more difficult to justify trade monopolies caused by British
legislation and which further restricted supplies.
35

The English East India Company would to hang on to its monopoly of the AngloChinese trade until 1833; however, the Napoleonic wars brought to an end the era of great
European trading monopolies. While this did not imply the dawn of a free-trading Golden
Age, the typical trade restriction of the long 19th century would be a tariff, rather than the nontariff barriers which had distinguished the 18th century, and which would distinguish the 20th
century. International trade between 1815 and 1914 would thus be conducted on a more
multilateral basis than had been true before, a tendency that was further strengthened in 1860
when the Cobden-Chevalier Treaty placed the MFN principle at the heart of European
commercial policy.
Third, by the war’s end Britain was firmly established as the world’s dominant power,
and especially as its dominant naval power. The French had lost Haiti, their major Caribbean
possession and source of colonial imports, while by 1830 the Spanish presence in the New
World had been reduced to Cuba and Puerto Rico. The Dutch had lost the South African
Cape Colony and Ceylon to Britain, as well as territories in the West Indies; more
importantly, Amsterdam’s once central role in international trade had been destroyed, as a
result of the combined effects of the British blockade, the French Continental System, and
French Imperial protectionism (de Vries and van der Woude 1997, p. 687). One measure of
British immediate post-war dominance is her share of world shipping, which had been just
17.9% in 1670; it jumped from 25.3% in 1780 to an impressive 42% in 1820 (Maddison
2001, p. 95). And as Patrick O’Brien (1989, p. 383) points out, British military hegemony at
sea was an important precondition for the broadly liberal international economy of the long
19th century.
Finally, the wars of 1793-1815 were such a traumatic event that they produced a
surprisingly durable peace settlement. In Paul Schroeder’s view, the political equilibrium
36

which emerged from the Congress of Vienna rested on “a mutual consensus on norms and
rules, respect for law, and an overall balance among the various actors in terms of rights,
security, status, claims, duties and satisfactions rather than power” (Schroeder 1992, p. 694).
Rather than relying on an unattainable balance of power, the Congress implicitly recognized
British and Russian hegemony in their respective spheres of influence (the wider globe, and
Eastern Europe and much of Asia respectively); but the hegemony was relatively benign, and
the entire system relied on “the restoration of the rule of law, beginning with its foundation,
the security and legitimacy of all thrones” (Schroeder 1992, p. 696). While the Vienna system
ultimately failed, the fact remains that battlefield deaths as a proportion of Europe’s
population were seven times more numerous in the 18th century than they were in the 19th
(Schroeder 1994, p. vii), and the 19th century stands out as an unusually peaceful one in the
context of Europe’s bloody history. Thus European wars were less important during this
canonical globalization period than they have been before or since; and this is surely no
coincidence.
In conclusion, therefore, while the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars seriously
disrupted trade for three decades, and led to huge economic losses and human casualties, they
ultimately played a crucial role in modernising the international economy, and thus helped
pave the way for the astonishing international economic integration which was to follow.

37

References
Anderson, J.E. and J.P. Neary (1996), “A New Approach to Evaluating Trade Policy,”
Review of Economic Studies 63: 107-125.
Bayly, C.A. (2003), The Birth of the Modern World, 1780-1914: Global Connections and
Comparisons (Blackwell).
Beveridge, W.H. (1939), Prices and Wages in England from the Twelfth to the Nineteenth
Century, Vol. I: Price Tables: Mercantile Era (London: Longmans, Green and Co.).
Brown, K.W. (1990), “Price Movements in Eighteenth-Century Peru: Arequipa,” in L.L.
Johnson and E. Tandeter (eds.), Essays on the Price History of Eighteenth-Century Latin
America (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press), 173-200.
Bulbeck, D., A. Reid, L.C. Tan and Y. Wu (1998), Southeast Asian Exports Since the 14th
Century: Cloves, Pepper, Coffee, and Sugar (Leiden, The Netherlands: KITLV Press).
Bulmer-Thomas, V. (2003), The Economic History of Latin America Since Independence, 2nd
edition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Chabert, A. (1945), Essai sur les Mouvements des Prix en France de 1798 à 1820 (Paris:
Librairie des Médicis).
Chabert, A. (1949), Essai sur les Mouvements des Revenus et de l’Activité Economique en
France de 1798 à 1820 (Paris: Librairie des Médicis).
Coatsworth, J.H. and J.G. Williamson (2004), “Always Protectionist? Latin American Tariffs
from Independence to Great Depression,” Journal of Latin American Studies 36: 205-232.
Cole, A.H. (1938), Wholesale Commodity Prices in the United States 1700-1861
(Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press).
Cole, A.H. and R. Crandall (1964), “The International Scientific Committee on Price
History,” Journal of Economic History 24: 381-388.
Crouzet, F. (1964), “Wars, Blockade, and Economic Change in Europe, 1792-1815,” Journal
of Economic History 24: 567-588.
Crouzet, F. (1987), L’Economie Brittanique et Le Blocus Continental, 2nd edition (Paris:
Economica).
Crouzet, F. (2003), “The Continental System After Eighty Years,” paper presented at the Eli
Heckscher Celebratory Symposium, Stockholm School of Economics, May 22-24.
Cuenca Esteban, J. (1997), “The Rising Share of British Industrial Exports in Industrial
Output, 1700-1851,” Journal of Economic History 57: 879-906.
38

Cuenca Esteban, J. (2004), “Comparative Patterns of Colonial Trade: Britain and its Rivals,”
in L. Prados de la Escosura (ed.), Exceptionalism and Industrialisation: Britain and its
European Rivals, 1688-1815 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 35-66.
Davis, L.E. and S.L. Engerman (forthcoming), Blockades in Peace and War: An Economic
History of Naval Blockades Since the Middle of the Eighteenth Century.
Davis, R. (1962), “English Foreign Trade, 1700-1774,” Economic History Review New
Series, 15: 285-303.
Davis, R. (1979), The Industrial Revolution and British Overseas Trade (Leicester University
Press).
Dermigny, L. (1964), La Chine et l’Occident: Le Commerce à Canton au XVIIIe Siècle 17191833, Tome III (Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N.).
Eaton, J. and M. Engers (1999), “Sanctions: Some Simple Analytics,” American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings 89: 409-414.
Ellis, G. (1981), Napoleon’s Continental Blockade: The Case of Alsace (Oxford: Clarendon
Press).
Engerman, S.L. (1981), “Some Implications of the Abolition of the Slave Trade,” in D. Eltis
and J. Walvin (eds.), The Abolition of the Atlantic Slave Trade: Origins and Effects in
Europe, Africa, and the Americas (Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press).
Findlay, R. and K.H. O’Rourke (2003), “Commodity market integration, 1500-2000,” in
M.D. Bordo, A.M. Taylor and J.G. Williamson (eds.), Globalization in Historical Perspective
(University of Chicago Press/NBER 2003), 13-62.
Frankel, J.A. (1982), “The 1808-1809 Embargo against Great Britain,” Journal of Economic
History 42: 291-307.
Frankel, J.A. and D. Romer (1999), “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic
Review 89: 379-399.
Gayer, A.D., W.W. Rostow and A.J. Schwartz (1953), The Growth and Fluctuation of the
British Economy 1790-1850 (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Glick, R. and A.M. Taylor (2005), “Collateral Damage: The Economic Impact of War, 18701997,” mimeo.
Hauser, H. (1936), Recherches et Documents sur l’Histoire des Prix en France de 1500 à
1800 (Paris: Les Presses Modernes).
Heckscher, E.F. (1964), The Continental System: An Economic Interpretation (Gloucester,
MA: Peter Smith). Reprint of 1922 edition.
39

Hueckel, G. (1973), “War and the British Economy, 1793-1815: A General Equilibrium
Analysis,” Explorations in Economic History 10: 365-396.
Hufbauer, G.C., J.J. Schott and K.A. Elliott (1990), Economic Sanctions Reconsidered:
History and Current Policy, 2nd edition (Washington D.C.: Institute for International
Economics).
Imlah, A.H. (1958), Economic Elements in the Pax Britannica (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Harvard University Press).
Irwin, D.A. (2001), “The Welfare Effects of Autarky: Evidence from the Jeffersonian
Embargo,” NBER Working Paper No. 8692 (December). Revised, November 2002.
Jacobs, A. and H. Richter (1935), Die Großhandelspreise in Deutschland von 1792 bis 1934
(Berlin: Hanseatische Verlaganstalt Hamburg).
Jörberg, L. (1972), A History of Prices in Sweden 1732-1914, Volume 1 (Lund: CWK
Gleerup).
Lévy-Leboyer, M. (1970), “L’héritage de Simiand: Prix, Profit et termes d’échange au XIXe
Siècle,” Revue Historique 493: 77-120.
Lévy-Leboyer, M. and F. Bourguignon (1990), The French Economy in the Nineteenth
Century: An Essay in Econometric Analysis (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Lovejoy, P.E. and D. Richardson (1995), “British Abolition and its Impact on Slave Prices
Along the Atlantic Coast of Africa, 1783-1850,” Journal of Economic History 55: 98-119.
Maddison, A. (2001), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective (Paris: OECD).
McCusker, J.J. (1996), “British Mercantilist Policies and the American Colonies,” in S.L.
Engerman and R.E. Gallman (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of the United States,
Volume I: The Colonial Era (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 337-362.
Mitchell, B.R. (1988), British Historical Statistics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Neal, L. (1991), “A Tale of Two Revolutions: International Capital Flows 1789-1819,”
Bulletin of Economic Research 43: 57-92.
Newland, C. (1998), “Exports and Terms of Trade in Argentina, 1811-1870,” Bulletin of
Latin American Research 17: 409-416.
North, D.C. (1966), The Economic Growth of the United States 1790-1860 (New York:
Norton).
O’Brien, P.K. (1989), “The Impact of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, 1793-1815,
on the Long-Run Growth of the British Economy,” Review XII: 335-395.
40

O’Brien, P.K. (2003), “The Hanoverian State and the Defeat of the Continental System,”
paper presented at the Eli Heckscher Celebratory Symposium, Stockholm School of
Economics, May 22-24.
Olson, M. (1963), The Economics of the Wartime Shortage: A History of British Food
Supplies in the Napoleonic War and in World Wars I and II (Durham, N.C.: Duke U.P.).
O'Rourke, K.H. and J. G. Williamson (2002a), “After Columbus: Explaining the Global
Trade Boom 1500-1800,” Journal of Economic History 62: 417-456.
O'Rourke, K.H. and J. G. Williamson (2002b), “When Did Globalization Begin?” European
Review of Economic History 6: 23-50.
Posthumus, N.W. (1946), Inquiry Into the History of Prices in Holland, Vol. I (Leiden: Brill).
Rose, J.H. (1902), “Our Food Supply in the Napoleonic War,” Monthly Review 6: 63-76.
Rosenbloom, J.L. (2002), “Path Dependence and the Origins of Cotton Textile Manufacturing
in New England,” NBER Working Paper No. 9182 (September).
Salvatore, R.D. and C. Newland (2003), “Between Independence and the Golden Age: The
Early Argentine Economy,” in G. della Paolera and A.M. Taylor (eds.), A New Economic
History of Argentina (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 19-45.
Schonhardt-Bailey, C. (1991), “Specific Factors, Capital Markets, Portfolio Diversification,
and Free Trade: Domestic Determinants of the Repeal of the Corn Laws,” World Politics 43:
545-69.
Schön, L. (1984), “Svensk Utrikeshandel 1800-1871,” mimeo, Lund.
Schroeder, P.W. (1992), “Did the Vienna Settlement Rest on a Balance of Power?” American
Historical Review 97: 683-706.
Schroeder, P.W. (1994), The Transformation of European Politics 1763-1848 (Oxford:
Clarendon Press).
Tandeter, E. and N. Wachtel (1990), “Prices and Agricultural Production: Potosí and Charcas
in the Eighteenth Century,” in L.L. Johnson and E. Tandeter (eds.), Essays on the Price
History of Eighteenth-Century Latin America (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico
Press), 201-276.
U.S. Department of Commerce (1975), Historical Statistics of the United States, Bicentennial
Edition: Colonial Times to 1970, Part 1 (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of the Census).
Vamplew, W. (ed.) (1987). Australian Historical Statistics (Broadway, New South Wales:
Fairfax, Syme and Weldon).

41

Vilar, P. (1976), A History of Gold and Money 1450-1920 (London: NLB).
de Vries, J. and A. van der Woude (1997), The First Modern Economy: Success, Failure, and
Perseverance of the Dutch Economy, 1500-1815 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Warren, G.F. and F.A. Pearson (1933), Prices (New York: Wiley).
Webster, A. (1990), “The Political Economy of Trade Liberalization: The East India
Company Charter Act of 1813,” Economic History Review, New Series 43: 404-419.
Williamson, J.G. (1984), “Why was British Growth so Slow During the Industrial
Revolution?,” Journal of Economic History 44: 687-712.

42

Table 1 Impact of blockades on trade volumes, 1807-14
(Percent change in trade relative to no-blockade counterfactual)

Britain
France
Sweden
U.S.

Exports
-4.1
4.3
7.1
-36.3

Imports
2.1
-51.6
22.4
-52.8

Source: see Appendix 1 and text.

43

Table 2. South East Asian silver prices, 1770s-1820s
(1770s = 100)
Cloves Pepper Coffee
1770s
100.0
100.0
100.0
1780s
NA
100.0
100.7
1790s
NA
82.2
100.0
1800s
131.6
153.4
33.8
1810s
131.6
134.4
87.8
1820s
266.5
118.8
143.2
Source: Bulbeck et al. (1998), pp. 59, 84, 168.

44

Table 3. Price impact of Napoleonic Wars
(percentage increase in relative price relative to peace-time counterfactual)
Relative price

Country
War
Blockade
Panel A. Intra-European
Wheat/textiles
Britain
19.03
41.35
Textiles/wheat
France
16.58
19.84
Textiles/wheat
Germany
6.74
5.71
Panel B. Europe-Asia
Pepper/wheat
France
66.53
216.36
Britain
-27.22
-8.21
Holland
1.41
119.46
Pepper/textiles
France
19.10
109.82
Britain
-13.37
29.74
Holland
15.13
167.37
Panel C. Europe-Americas
Sugar/wheat
France
63.31
195.03
Britain
16.31
-2.90
Holland
17.87
165.10
Germany
2.43
143.09
Raw cotton/wheat
France
-6.46
114.28
Britain
-10.96
-26.17
Holland
-9.47
11.45
Germany
-28.70
67.89
Sugar/textiles
France
26.70
125.59
Britain
38.44
37.25
Holland
25.27
214.64
Germany
-4.04
129.95
Raw cotton/textiles
France
-19.76
78.81
Britain
6.43
4.93
Holland
-2.31
31.23
Germany
-33.20
58.82
Textiles/Raw cotton
USA
106.01
182.51
Wine/raw cotton
USA
28.59
137.05
Rouen cloth/silver
Peru (Arequipa)
12.92
91.58
Paper/silver
Peru (Arequipa)
53.19
120.79
Paper/silver
Peru (Lima)
46.87
111.77
Panel D. Africa-Europe/Americas
Imports/slaves
Africa
-48.49a
-32.37b
Panel E. Asia-Europe/Americas
Silver/cloves
South East Asia
102.51c
NA
c
Silver/pepper
South East Asia
-17.44
NA
Silver/coffee
South East Asia
135.53c
NA
Source: see Appendix 1 and text. S.E. Asian prices are taken from Table 2; African prices are
from Lovejoy and Richardson (1995, Table 2, column 6, p.108).
a
1798-1814/1815-20
b
1808-14/1815-20
c
1801-20/1821-30.
45

Table 4. Estimates of welfare loss (percent)
Country
Britain
France
Period
1807-14 1807-14
Terms of trade shock (percent increase in relative import price)
11.9
61.2
Trade share (percent)
15.7
6.6
Welfare Effects (percent decline)
s=0.25
1.8
3.8
s=0.5
1.8
3.5
s=0.7
1.8
3.3
s=1.0
1.7
3.1
s=2.0
1.7
2.6
Cumulative loss (s=0.7, 5% discount rate)
12.0
22.4
Permanent flow loss (s=0.7, 5% discount rate)
0.60
1.12
Source: see text.

46

USA
1807-14
49.4
13.0

Sweden
1807-14
8.6
15.0

Sweden
1810-14
21.0
15.0

5.9
5.6
5.4
5.1
4.4
36.1
1.81

1.3
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.2
8.4
0.42

3.0
2.9
2.9
2.8
2.6
13.1
0.65

British exports

British imports

240

240

200

200

160

160

120

120

80

80

40

40

0
1780

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

0
1780

1790

French exports
240

200

200

160

160

120

120

80

80

40

40

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

0
1780

1790

Swedish exports
240

200

200

160

160

120

120

80

80

40

40

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

0
1780

1790

U.S. exports
240

200

200

160

160

120

120

80

80

40

40

1790

1800

1810

1800

1810

1800

1810

1820

1830

0
1780

1790

1800

1810

Figure 1. Volume of trade, 1780-1830 (1820=100)

Source: see Appendix 1.

1830

1820

1830

1820

1830

1820

1830

U.S. imports

240

0
1780

1820

Swedish imports

240

0
1780

1810

French imports

240

0
1780

1800

500000
400000
300000
200000
100000
0
1640

1680

1720

1760

1800

1840

1880

Figure 2. African slave exports, 1676-1865
Source: data underlying Eltis (2001), kindly provided by author.

Wheat relative to textiles

Timber relative to textiles

240

360
320

200

280
160

240
200

120

160
80
40
1780

120

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

80
1780

Sugar relative to textiles

1810

1820

1830

400
360

180

320

160

280
240

140

200

120

160
120

100

80
1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

40
1780

Tea relative to textiles

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

Pepper relative to textiles

160

180

150

160

140
130

140

120

120

110
100

100

90

80

80
70
1780

1800

Cotton relative to textiles

200

80
1780

1790

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

60
1780

1790

1800

1810

Source: see Appendix 1.

Figure 3. Relative prices in Britain, 1780-1830 (1820=100)

1820

1830

Textiles relative to wheat

Iron relative to wheat

240

240
200

200

160
160
120
120
80
80

40

40

0
1800

1805

1810

1815

1820

1825

1830

1800

Sugar relative to textiles

1805

1810

1815

1820

1825

1830

1825

1830

1825

1830

Cotton relative to textiles

300

280

250

240

200

200

150

160

100

120

50

80

0

40
1800

1805

1810

1815

1820

1825

1830

1800

Pepper relative to textiles

1805

1810

1815

1820

Coffee relative to textiles

200

160

180

140

160

120

140

100

120
80

100

60

80

40

60
40

20
1800

1805

1810

1815

1820

1825

1830

1800

1805

1810

1815

1820

Figure 4. Relative prices in France, 1798-1830 (1820=100)

Source: see Appendix 1.

Sugar relative to textiles
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1780

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

Cotton relative to textiles
240
200
160
120
80
40
1780

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

Pepper relative to textiles
320
280
240
200
160
120
80
40
1780

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

Figure 5. Relative prices in Holland, 1780-1830 (1820=100)
Source: see Appendix 1.

300

160

250

140
120

200

100
150
80
100

60

50

40

0

20
1795

1800

1805

1810

1815

1820

1825

1830

1795

1800

Cotton yarn relative to rye

1805

1810

1815

1820

1825

1830

1825

1830

1825

1830

Iron relative to rye

600

500

500

400

400

300

300
200

200

100

100

0

0
1795

1800

1805

1810

1815

1820

1825

1830

1795

Sugar relative to cotton yarn

1800

1805

1810

1815

1820

Cotton relative to cotton yarn

300

350

250

300
250

200

200
150
150
100

100

50

50

0

0
1795

1800

1805

1810

1815

1820

Coffee relative to cotton yarn

1825

1830

1795

1800

1805

1810

1815

1820

Tobacco relative to cotton yarn

Figure 6. Relative prices in Germany, 1792-1830 (1820=100)
Source: see Appendix 1.

Textiles relative to iron
240
200
160
120
80
40
1780

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

1820

1830

1820

1830

Rye relative to iron
250

200

150

100

50
1780

1790

1800

1810

Wheat relative to iron
320
280
240
200
160
120
80
40
1780

1790

1800

1810

Figure 7. Relative prices in Sweden, 1780-1830 (1820=100)
Source: see Appendix 1.

Textiles relative to cotton
250

200

150

100

50
1780

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

1820

1830

Wine relative to cotton
280
240
200
160
120
80
40
0
1780

1790

1800

1810

Figure 8. Relative prices in the U.S., 1780-1830 (1820=100)
Source: see Appendix 1.

Rouen cloth (Arequipa)

Paper (Arequipa)
120

120
100
100
80

80

60

60

40

40
20
1780

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

20
1780

1790

Paper (Potosí)

1800

1810

1820

1830

1820

1830

Paper (Lima)
200

160
160
120
120
80

80

40
1780

40
1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

1780

1790

1800

1810

Figure 9. Peruvian silver prices 1780-1830 (1812=100)
Source: see Appendix 1.

240
200
160
120
80
40
1780

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

Relative price of textiles in France
Relative price of wheat in Britain

Figure 10. Relative wheat/textile prices in Britain and France, 1780-1830
Source: see Appendix 1.

Britain

France

200

200

160

160

120

120

80

80

1780

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

1780

1790

United States

200

160

160

120

120

80

80
1790

1800

1810

1810

1820

1830

1820

1830

Sweden

200

1780

1800

1820

1830

1780

1790

1800

1810

Figure 11. Price of imports relative to exports, 1780-1830 (1820=100)
Source: see Appendix 1.

NT = (1-t)*100

VA = 100

=5

Production

X = t*100

Trade

NT = (1-t)*100

Income = 100

=?

Consumption

M = t*100
Figure 12. Calibrating the CGE model

M = t*100

Appendix 1. Data sources
1. Trade volumes and terms of trade
Britain. Imports: Imlah (1958), Table 8, pp. 94-98. Exports: 1780-1821, Cuenca Esteban
(1997), Appendix Table 1, p. 901, spliced with Imlah’s data for 1821-30.
France: 1780-1820: data underlying Cuenca Esteban (2004), graciously made available by the
author. The price indices for 1716-86 rest on 11 price series with constant weights (Cuenca
Esteban 2004 , p. 65). 1820-1830: Lévy-Leboyer and Bourguignon (1990), Tables A-III, AIV.
Sweden: Schön (1984).
United States: North (1966), pp. 221, 228-9, 233-4, 240-3.
2. Commodity prices
Britain
Beveridge (1939) (pepper: white pepper, Lord Steward’s Department, p. 431; sugar: refined
sugar, Lord Steward’s Department, p. 431; tea: green tea, Lord Steward’s Department, folding
sheet II; textiles: cloth, Eton College, p. 147).
Mitchell (1988) (raw cotton: 1782-1820, mid-point of range, West Indies, Surinam and
Berbice, p. 759, spliced to average price of upland/middling American, p. 760 (1820-1830);
wheat, p. 756).
Gayer et al. (1953), microfilm supplement (timber).
France
Annuaire Statistique de la France, 1966, p. 406 (1790 and 1820-1830: coffee, iron, raw
cotton, sugar, wheat).
Chabert (1945) (1798-1820: coffee, p. 135; iron, moyenne, p. 200; pepper, p. 140; raw cotton,
pernambouc, p. 161; sugar, p. 129; textiles, general index, p. 195 (to 1809); wheat, p. 79).
Hauser (1936) (sugar, Paris, 1780-91, p. 142; wheat, 1780-98, Château-Gontier, p. 209).
Lévy-Leboyer (1970) (textiles, 1809-30, pp. 108-9).
The Netherlands
1780-1800 (sugar, textiles): Jan Luiten van Zanden (n.d.), “The prices of the most important
consumer goods, and indices of wages and the cost of living in the western part of the
Netherlands, 1450-1800,” data supplied by Jan de Vries, Jan Pieter Smits and Arthur van
Riel, available online at the International Institute of Social History’s Prices and Wages
website, at http://www.iisg.nl/hpw/data.html.

1800-1830 (raw cotton, sugar, textiles, wheat): Arthur van Riel (n.d.), “Prices of consumer
and producer goods, 1800-1913,” available online at the International Institute of Social
History’s Prices and Wages website, at http://www.iisg.nl/hpw/data.html.
Posthumus (1946) (pepper, p. 177; Surinam cotton, 1780-1801, p. 286; wheat, Königsberg, p.
3).

Peru
Brown (1990) (Rouen cloth and paper, Arequipa, Table 7.1, pp. 178-9).
Tandeter and Wachtel (1990) (paper, Potosí, Table 8.1, pp. 205-6).
These data are also available online at Richard Garner’s Latin American Economic History
Data Bank, at http://mansell.stucen.gatech.edu/rlg7/latamdata/index.html, from which the
Lima paper prices were also taken. The original source for the latter is given as Pablo Macera
et al., Los Precios de Peru: Siglo xvi-xix, Fuentes (Lima: Banco Central del Reserva) 1992,
Volume 1, pp. 119-62.
Sweden
Jörberg (1972) (bar iron, pp. 706-7; coarse cloth, pp. 683-4; rye and wheat, pp. 633-4).
United States
Cole (1938) (raw cotton, Philadelphia 1784-1796, Statistical Supplement, pp. 78-110,
Charleston 1796-1830, main volume, p. 154; sugar, Muscovado, Philadelphia 1784-1800, pp.
77-122). Where necessary, shillings were converted into dollars at the rate of 7.5 shillings to
the dollar (main volume, p. 37).
U.S. Department of Commerce (1975) (sugar, 1800-1830, series E125, p. 209; wine, series
E110, p. 205).
Warren and Pearson (1933) (textiles, p. 25).
Germany
Jacobs and Richter (1935), pp. 74 ff. is the source for all the German prices used in the paper.

