                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                VENTURE CAPITAL AS HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

                                      Antonio Gledson de Carvalho
                                         Charles W. Calomiris
                                         João Amaro de Matos

                                          Working Paper 11350
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11350


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 2005




The authors thank Ivan Bull, Charles Kahn, Stanley Golder, and Joshua Lerner for helpful comments, and
are especially grateful to the venture capitalists who participated in their survey. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by Antonio Gledson de Carvalho, Charles W. Calomiris, and João Amaro de Matos. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Venture Capital as Human Resource Management
Antonio Gledson de Carvalho, Charles W. Calomiris, and João Amaro de Matos
NBER Working Paper No. 11350
May 2005
JEL No. G14, G24, J23, J24

                                               ABSTRACT

        Venture capitalists add value to portfolio firms by obtaining and transferring information

about senior managers across firms over time. Information transfer occurs on a significant scale and

takes place both among a single venture capitalist’s portfolio firms and between different venture

capitalists’ firms via a network of venture capitalists, which venture capitalists use to locate and

relocate managers.

        Cross-sectional differences are associated with differences in the intensity with which venture

capitalists network. The observable factors relevant in explaining the intensity with which venture

capitalists network include: 1) the value of the information transmitted through the network, 2) the

riskiness of the activities of portfolio firms, 3) the size of the venture capital fund, 4) the degree of

difficulty in enticing executives to manage portfolio firms, and 5) the reputation of the venture

capitalist for successfully recycling managers. These factors reflect costs and benefits to venture

capitalists of participating in the network.

Antonio Gledson de Carvalho                             João Amaro de Matos
Escola de Adminstração de Empresas                      Faculdade de Economia
de São Paulo                                            Universidade Nova de Lisboa
Fundação Getúlio Vargas                                 amatos@fe.unl.pt
gledson@fgvsp.br

Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
1. Introduction


        The crucial role of small businesses in creating jobs and spurring innovation gives special

importance to the financing of growth companies. The central problem of financing small, growing

businesses is to find a way for outsiders to supply equity profitably to entrepreneurs with limited

track records in the financial system. Small, growing businesses often need to invest quickly, long

ahead of the expected stream of profits, and in a quantity far greater than their capacity to issue

debt. But the risks faced by suppliers of equity can be prohibitive in the face of substantial adverse-

selection problems in identifying worthwhile firms in which to invest, and the need to monitor and

control the use of funds by entrepreneurs, to ensure that outsiders’ funds are employed to the

advantage of stockholders rather than entrepreneurs. The combination of back-loaded profits,

limited debt capacity, large growth opportunities, and adverse-selection and moral-hazard problems

in the equity market make the provision of outside equity as difficult as it is important.


        For the past four decades in the United States, venture capital funds (or, more generally,

private equity funds)1 have been an important solution to this problem. Venture capital has been

very successful in funding some of the most dynamic American enterprises, including Microsoft,

Cisco, Intel, Compaq, Federal Express, Apple Computers, Genentech, and Amazon.com. About

30% of the companies that go public in the US received venture capital resources [Gompers and

Lerner (1997)]. These results become even more impressive when we consider that the amount of

capital raised by institutional venture capitalists in the United States between 1978 and 1997 has




1
  In this article, venture capital and private equity are used as synonyms, but typically venture capital connotes the
financing of new products, while private equity is a broader category including all types of equity investments
(traditional venture capital investments, industry consolidation, leveraged buyouts, etc.).
averaged less than $3 billion per year and never exceeded $7 billion until 1997 (that compared with

an average $8 trillion GDP and nearly $1 trillion in gross domestic fixed investment).


       Most studies of the structure and function of venture capital funds have focused on the

structure of private equity funds (their financial design), and their role in solving information and

control problems for portfolio firms – i.e., the role of private equity funds in allocating control

rights, and in ameliorating adverse selection and moral hazard problems [Admati and Pfleiderer

(1994), Amit, Glosten, and Muller (1990), Chan (1983), Cornelli and Yosha (1997), Hellman

(1998), Marx (1998), Repullo e Suarez (2000)]. In these papers, venture capital is viewed as a

financial contract designed to give investors the necessary control, remunerate them for the high

risk they assume, and solve incentive problems. Sahlman (1990) describes venture capital as an

institution shaped to screen projects and provide monitoring [Gompers (1995) and Lerner (1995)

present empirical analyses]. By being actively involved within the firms they fund, venture

capitalists have access to information and mechanisms that enable them to deal with adverse

selection and moral hazard. As a consequence, venture capitalists can provide financing to young

businesses that otherwise would not receive external resources [Barry (1994)]. These various

studies all view venture capital funding from the perspective of the financial problem solved by

venture capitalists, namely permitting entrepreneurial companies to access external equity funding.


       Does venture capital also bring non-financial benefits? There is anecdotal evidence that

because venture capitalists frequently specialize in a particular technology or stage of development

they can offer strategic, technical, and commercial guidance [Barry (1994), Byers (1997), Bygrave

and Timmons (1992), Sahlman (1990), Sapienza (1992)]. However, to date, little research has been

devoted to quantifying the non-financial benefits of venture capital.
           A notable exception is the paper by Hellmann and Puri (2002), who show that venture

capital influences the internal organization of portfolio firms. In particular, they show that venture-

backed companies are faster to bring in outsiders as CEOs, and that this effect is more noticeable at

the very early stage.2 The authors do not explore the theoretical foundations of why private equity

finance should bring such advantages.


           Our study describes a theoretical framework in which venture capital acts as a human

resources management mechanism, accompanied by corroborating empirical evidence. The

theoretical foundations of our framework are simple: Good management is important to the success

of all firms, but it is essential for the success of young, fast-growing enterprises pursuing risky

investment strategies. Managerial resources often are particularly scarce in young, growing firms;

the most innovative entrepreneurs are not necessarily endowed with talents as managers. And, as

the newly organized firm grows, its human resource needs become greater and more complex.

Thus, it is often the case that realizing the potential of an entrepreneurial firm depends on its

capacity to recruit high-level managers.


           Venture capitalists may have a comparative advantage in recruiting management for

portfolio firms by virtue of their “networking” capabilities and access to private information about

managerial talent based on their previous experiences with managers. The extent of that

comparative advantage may depend on various attributes of the venture capitalist and the portfolio

firms. Different financiers may have different skills and resources for solving the human resource

problems of portfolio firms. And portfolio firms may differ according to the difficulties they face in

identifying and attracting the right managers to the firm.



2
    That is, before the firm has a product on the market or has gone public.
       Very risky firms may find it harder to attract managers who are risk-averse (and who,

therefore, may prefer a safe job in an established firm to a risky job in the portfolio firm). The

ability of the venture capitalist to use his or her network of industry connections to “recycle” good

managers whose firms fail (for exogenous reasons) may permit the venture capitalist to attract

skilled managers more successfully.


       High-risk activities also make the process of screening managers more difficult. The

managers of firms in new industries (where risk is higher) will be less well known to the market

because of the relative absence of publicly traded securities (and, therefore, public information

creation) for that sector. Greater risk also reduces the signal-to-noise ratio with respect to

managerial ability. Thus, venture capitalists’ access to private information about managerial talent

gives them an advantage in recruiting that is increasing in importance with the riskiness of the

industry.


       We hypothesize that venture capital brings non-financial benefits to new projects because it

allows venture capitalists to use their human resource networking capabilities to transfer valuable

information acquired in previous investments and to provide an employment “safety net” for

managers. Both the risk aversion of managers, and the adverse-selection problem in identifying

managerial talent imply that the comparative advantage of venture capitalists as human resource

managers will be an increasing function of the riskiness of the portfolio firm. That hypothesis finds

some support in the studies of Hellmann and Puri (2002) and Hsu (2004). Hellman and Puri find

that the role of venture capital in attracting outsider CEOs is stronger for firms in their early stages

(when the prospects for senior managers is riskier). Hsu (2004) finds that venture capitalists that are

regarded as having superior network resources (including management recruiting contacts) are
more likely to succeed when bidding for portfolio firms, and that venture capitalists that possess

superior network resources are more likely to be engaged in early-stage financing.


       Our empirical examination of cross-sectional differences in the extent that venture

capitalists act as human resource managers permits us to test this hypothesis, and other potential

influences on the comparative advantage of venture capitalists in human resource management,

more directly. Our empirical work is based on a nationwide survey of venture capitalists that

identifies various characteristics of portfolio firms and venture capitalists, using objective and

subjective measures. These characteristics include the riskiness of portfolio firms and the extent of

venture capitalists’ involvement in human resource management, as well as many other attributes

of portfolio firms and venture capitalists that are relevant to the comparative advantage of venture

capitalists in human resource management (e.g., the size of the fund, and the subjective value

attributed to the venture capitalist’s human resource network as a source of information).


       The survey results confirm that human resource networking is an important activity. A

majority of the venture capitalists confirm that their relationships with their colleagues include

acting on their suggestions when hiring managers, and in turn recommending managers to each

other. A substantial proportion of venture capitalists affirm that they adopt the strategy of recycling

managers in their portfolio firms.


       We find that the extent to which venture capitalists act as human resource managers

depends positively on various factors, including: (1) the subjective risk venture capitalists attribute

to their investments and observable attributes of the investments related to riskiness; (2) the value

they attach to the information transmitted through their networks,; (3) the size of their funds (which

should be positively correlated with their networking ability); and (4) the extent to which venture
capitalists believe that the firms that they finance would tend to have difficulty recruiting managers.

Venture capitalists surveyed also provide evidence that their networking activities are motivated by

perceived cost savings in recruiting managers. Venture capitalists report that greater networking

results in an improved ability to attract managers due to the reputation venture capitalists acquire

for recycling (assisting managers with job placement in the future).


       This article is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the operation of human resource

networks within the venture capital industry, and their importance in creating information about

managers ex ante, and the potential for recycling managers ex post. There we consider qualitative

evidence of the importance of networks in transferring valuable information about managers, and

managers themselves, across firms. Section 3 summarizes our model of the decision to network

(which is developed in detail in Carvalho and de Matos 2003). Section 4 describes the survey and

relates some of the survey data to the variables in the theoretical framework. Regression analysis of

the incentives to network, hypothesized in the model, is presented in Section 5. Section 6

concludes.


2. Screening, Insurance, and the Role of Venture Capital Human Resource Networks


       Firms receiving venture capital funding are typically very risky. More importantly, these

firms are characterized by a high degree of asymmetric information. Managers frequently have

more accurate information about the prospects of the firm than they may be willing to reveal. This

information asymmetry makes project governance extremely important. Among the mechanisms

venture capitalists adopt to deal with this problem are close monitoring and staging of the

investment [Sahlman (1990), Gompers (1995), and Lerner (1995)].
         To increase the likelihood of success and improve their information about the quality of

projects, venture capitalists frequently become actively involved in the operation of their portfolio

firms. For example, they sit on the board of directors, hire3 and recruit managers, help establish

business strategies, provide industry knowledge, structure deals with suppliers and customers, and

act as confidants to managers [Sahlman (1990)]. Because many of the firms suitable to receive

venture capital funds are young companies lacking experience in human resources management,

venture capitalists often become involved in selecting, recruiting and properly remunerating key

employees.4


         This involvement of venture capitalists within portfolio firms provides venture capitalists

with expertise in selecting, recruiting, and properly remunerating managers, as well as in timing the

development of the firms as organizations (e.g., deciding when the time is right to add a

professional CEO or CFO). Furthermore, this involvement gives venture capitalists non-public

information about the abilities and qualifications of the managers in the firms they fund.


         Even though venture capitalists fund firms with potential to become publicly traded, more

often than not, their investments end when their portfolio firms are either liquidated, merge, or are

acquired by larger corporations. For example, Venture Economics (1988) reports that 34.5% of

venture capital investments resulted in losses (result based on a sample of 383 companies funded

13 venture capital partnerships between 1969 and 1985). Black and Gilson (1998) presents data

from 1984 to 1996 showing that a significant number of venture capital investments exit through

acquisitions. In these cases, the portfolio firm generally becomes a division of the acquiring


3
  For example, Baker and Gompers (1999) found that only 55% of the CEOs of venture capital-backed firms going
public are founders. Hellmann and Puri (2000) found that 61% of firms funded with venture capital experienced a
turnover.
4
  The adjective “properly” refers to the design of contracts that gives the managers the right incentives, aligning his or
her interests with those of the investors.
corporation and does not need a senior management team. Therefore, in many cases, senior

managers leave their companies when they are sold or liquidated (this is not necessarily so if the

firm goes public). The limited viability of senior managers in firms funded with venture capital

means that many portfolio firm managers often are available for repeat hire by venture capitalists.


         Venture capitalists bring to a project the expertise they develop in selecting, recruiting, and

remunerating managers, and in timing the development of the companies as organizations. The

nature of the involvement of venture capitalists within their portfolio firms provides them with the

necessary means to acquire non-public information about suppliers, customers, and the

management team of the companies they fund, and that information can be reused. For instance,

when they exit an investment, they have the possibility of recycling competent managers by

rehiring them to manage other firms in their portfolio. 5


      Not only does venture capitalists’ involvement improve managerial quality through screening,

the recycling of managers across portfolio firms reduces hiring costs via an “insurance effect.”

Managers in small growing firms are exposed to a high risk of failure. As mentioned before, senior

managers find themselves in a vulnerable situation when the firm does not go public. The fact that

venture capitalists can offer another chance in another portfolio firm reduces the firm-specific risk



5
  An example of this is given by Kleiner and Perkins, in Institutional Investor (June-1996), pp. 95-96: “The keiretsu
conceit aside, the Kleiner partners' role in Silicon Valley may in some ways be closer to that of the Hollywood moguls
of the '30s and '40s, whose success was built on their ability to lock up stars, directors and writers. Kleiner Perkins has
similarly amassed a pool of talent. ‘If you're well regarded as a manager in their stable, you're going to be used over the
years,’ says Frank Ingari, whom Doerr tapped to run networking software company Shiva Corp. in 1993.” “One way
Doerr hardwires his network is by placing Kleiner CEOs on the boards of other corporate members of the keiretsu...The
CEO of video game maker Crystal Dynamics, Randy Komisar, one of a number of Go veterans now running Kleiner
companies, sits on the boards of two Kleiner-associated companies, Total Entertainment Network and MNI nteractive.
CEO John Kernan of Lightspan Partnership sits on the board of fellow educational software company Academic
Systems... “The network has been buttressed by the “CEO-in-residence'” program which brings temporarily out-of-
work top executives into Kleiner and Perkins to review business plans, to do a little strategic thinking and help with
recruiting...”
that managers bear when joining portfolio firms. This insurance effect may explain Hellmann and

Puri’s (2002) finding that venture backed companies are faster to bring in outsiders as CEOs.


     Both the screening and insurance effects depend on the possibility of consecutively

employing managers in distinct portfolio firms. The possibility of the same venture capitalist

redeploying the same manager are somewhat restricted since few venture capital funds are large

enough to match job openings with the availability of managers. However, one factor that broadens

the ability to reuse non-public information about managers is the close relationship among venture

capitalists, which is an outgrowth of the syndication of investments.


     Syndication of investments is commonly used to improve screening, achieve better

monitoring, broader their sources of funds, and diversify their portfolio [Lerner (1994)]. The

possibilities for syndication depend on both the connections a venture capitalist has, and on his or

her reputation among other venture capitalists. Syndication creates strong bonds among venture

capitalists and, therefore, allows reliable information to flow among them. The fact that reliable

information can flow among venture capitalists gives them an unusual role as certifiers of senior

managers' abilities (in the context of small growth firms financing), and allows them to operate an

informal network to locate and relocate skilled managers.


3. The Decision to Network


       Here we summarize the model presented formally in Carvalho and de Matos (2003). The

venture capitalist conducts a cost-benefit analysis to determine whether to use a network of venture

capitalists when hiring managers or use a headhunter to find managerial talent. The degree or

probability of project success increases with the quality of the management. The venture capitalist

establishes a desired profile for the manager. This profile includes verifiable characteristics such as
experience, industry knowledge, etc. It also includes some non-verifiable characteristics. For

instance, very few managers can certify their ability to lead young, fast-growing firms into

becoming large, well-structured organizations. Successful managers in large corporations may lack

that skill. These non-verifiable characteristics define the managers’ type. The model assumes that

beforehand neither venture capitalists nor managers know managers' types.


        The cost of locating a manager depends on the means used. The cost of hiring a search firm

is assumed to be the same for all venture capitalists. To locate managers through the network, the

venture capitalist needs to establish relations with other venture capitalists. The cost of networking

is equivalent to the monetary value of the time that the venture capitalist has to spend establishing

connections. Once the venture capitalist is networked, he or she has access to suggestions coming

from his or her network colleagues. The cost of networking when hiring varies across venture

capitalists depending on the potential for networking that each venture capitalist has, which in turn

can be related to factors like the size of the venture capital fund, the number of partners, how much

the venture capitalist syndicates investments, etc.


        The outcome of the project will become public information and influence the future salary

that the manager expects to obtain in his or her next job. If the firm fails, the manager's future

salary will be lower than in case of success. Managers are risk-averse and venture capitalists are

risk-neutral.


        In addition to using the network for hiring, venture capitalists who network can assist

managers with job placement by suggesting managers to other venture capitalists.6 A possible


6
  Only those who locate managers through the network have the option of actively suggesting managers. This
dependence allows us to incorporate into the model the idea that venture capitalists who suggest managers have an
advantage when recruiting managers because suggesting managers reduces the firm-specific risks to which managers
are exposed (the insurance effect).
future referral works as an option that managers acquire when they are hired. If the project fails,

with a given probability, the assistance can increase the future salary of the manager. In the model,

if the firm succeeds, this assistance is irrelevant to the future salary of the manager. By suggesting

managers venture capitalists incur a specific cost. This cost is equivalent to the monetary value of

the effort and time that the venture capitalist has to spend contacting other venture capitalists to

find a match for the managers. This cost varies inversely with venture capitalists' network

connections.


          In the model, the decision to network involves two aspects: suggesting managers and acting

on suggestions when hiring a manager. The decisions to use the network for hiring and for

suggesting are separate but related. First, the venture capitalist decides whether or not to participate

in the network when hiring managers. If the venture capitalist chooses to use the network for hiring,

then he or she has the option also to provide suggestions to the network. The decision to use the

network for hiring does not imply that the venture capitalist must use the network for suggesting,

but it does make suggesting possible. In turn, the option to suggest managers does affect the

decision to use the network for hiring purposes in the first instance, because those who actively

suggest managers have an advantage when recruiting managers: managers would accept a monetary

salary below their reservation salary because the recommendation increases their expected future

salary.


          In the model, the benefit that venture capitalists create from suggesting managers is

captured by them entirely in the form of lower compensation paid to the managers. When the

venture capitalist suggests managers through a network, the manager's reservation salary is

diminished by a given amount (reflecting the reduction in risk faced by the manager). That amount
represents the gain that the venture capitalist receives by suggesting managers. The venture

capitalist will suggest managers whenever that gain is larger than the costs of suggesting.


        The gain received by the venture capitalist from networking increases with the riskiness of

the portfolio firm. Assistance with job placement has value to managers only if the firms they

manage fail. Thus, the higher the chances of failure, the higher will be the value that managers

attribute to the assistance, and thus, the higher the discount on the reservation salary that they are

willing to accept. Venture capitalists stand to gain more from suggesting managers involved in

risky projects.


        In the model, the benefits from taking suggestions from the network when hiring managers

can be decomposed into three factors.7 A first factor reflects the value to the venture capitalist of

networking’s effect on higher managerial quality. Firms in which differences in managerial quality

have greater consequences for firm performance will benefit more from locating highly skilled

management, and will rely more on networks to do so to the extent that networks improve the

accuracy of the screening process for hiring managers. With respect to this first factor, in the

model, the benefits from improved managerial screening depend positively upon three physical

parameters: (1) the relative profitability of a successful project outcome – i.e., the riskiness of the

project (2) the effect of managerial quality on the probability of a successful outcome, and (3) the

value of networking for identifying skilled managers. In the model, these three parameters appear

in a multiplicative way such that the strength of each effect depends on the size of the other two

parameters.

7
  There is also a fourth factor highlighted in the model, which does not correspond to any observable variables in our
survey, and which is therefore excluded from this discussion. The fourth factor is the possible additional gain to the
venture capitalist from using the network if managers located through the network have a lower probability of being
otherwise employed than those coming through headhunters. For the conclusions in this article, it is not important
whether managers located through the network have a lower probability of being employed than those located through
headhunters.
        The second factor is the insurance effect. This is the benefit captured by the venture

capitalist by being able to offer to recycle managers via the network, which takes the form of a

reduction in the manager’s reservation level for compensation. The value of the insurance effect

depends positively on: (1) the riskiness of the project, and (2) the credibility of the commitment

from the venture capitalist to recycle. Note that the insurance effect, therefore, provides a second

rationale for a positive relationship between risk and the decision by venture capitalists to

participate in networks.


        The third factor reflects cost savings to the venture capitalist from the difference between

the physical cost of networking and the physical cost of headhunting. It is plausible to assume that

using a headhunter has a constant marginal cost that is the same for all venture capitalists. In

contrast, the cost of networking should decline with the size of the venture capital fund. Two

conjectures relate the size of the venture fund to the costs of networking. First, large funds are

managed by many venture capitalists. Therefore, the incidence of suggestions coming from partners

or persons associated with them is more frequent. Secondly, other venture capitalists may have an

interest in developing good relations with venture capitalists managing large funds. This may occur

because of the interest that venture capitalists have in prospective syndications [Lerner (1994)].8

Moreover, well-established venture capitalists are opinion makers in the industry. Therefore, the

flow of reliable suggestions to venture capitalists managing large funds can be more intense.


        In summary, when one combines the effects of these three factors, the model predicts that a

venture capitalist’s reliance on networking when hiring managers is positively related to several

characteristics of the portfolio firm or the venture capitalist: (1) project risk, (2) the effect of

8
  For instance, this can be related to what Lerner calls window-dressing: venture capital funds want to show that they
financed successful enterprises in order to promote fund raising. Because of this, the opportunity to join a successful
enterprise through syndication is extremely valuable.
managerial quality on the probability of a successful outcome, (3) the value of networking for

identifying skilled managers, (4) the credibility of the venture capitalist’s commitment to recycle,

and (5) the size of the venture capitalist. Note that project risk affects the benefits of networking

positively through two distinct affects: the marginal productivity of managerial screening, and the

insurance effect. Also, recall that the insurance effect (which is reflected in characteristics (4) and

(1)) on the propensity to use networks for hiring is only relevant for venture capitalists that use the

network for recycling managers, as well.


       The same five characteristics listed above should predict the use of the network for

recycling (suggesting) managers, as well as for hiring them. In the model, the insurance effect in

the hiring decision is only operative if the venture capitalist chooses to participate in suggesting

managers for recycling via the network. Conversely, in the model, suggesting is only physically

possible if the venture capitalist has already decided to participate in the network for hiring

purposes. This interdependence between the two endogenous networking decisions implies that any

exogenous variable that directly influences the probability of deciding in favor of doing one also

raises the probability of deciding in favor of the other.


4. Survey Data


       Data concerning the existence and use of the hiring network among venture capitalists were

obtained through two surveys of venture capitalists. The first (referred to as “the survey”) was

answered by 160 venture capitalists and contains mostly qualitative information. The second

(referred to as “the follow-up”), contains more quantitative questions, for which we obtained 68

responses. Creating these two new datasets through surveys permitted us to match the exogenous

structure in the model to observable variables.
       The survey was sent to 879 venture capitalists throughout the US, randomly taken from

“Pratt's Guide to Venture Capital Sources (1994),” a publication that lists all the venture capital

sources and their managers. Among the 160 respondents, 70 agreed to a phone interview and a

follow-up survey, but we could reach only 68 of them. The survey and interviews were done in

1995 and 1996. Through the interviews we discovered that four respondents to the original survey

were persons not directly involved in the investment process. These four responses were deleted,

resulting in a final sample of 156 survey responses and 68 follow-up responses. Table 1 describes

the variables derived from the survey and follow-up.


       As a first step in our analysis, we investigate the perceived importance of human resource

management by venture capitalists. In the survey, to assess the importance of recruiting managers,

the respondents were asked to rank the three activities performed by venture capitalists that they

considered most important. They were given a menu including (1) monitoring performance against

goals, (2) helping with management decisions, (3) providing industry knowledge, (4) providing

finance, (5) developing business strategy, and (6) recruiting managers. Respondents were also

given two blank slots to fill in activities that they deemed important that were not included in this

list. A significant proportion (16.7%) listed recruiting managers as the most important activity;

35.5% viewed it as one of the two most important activities, and 54.2% described it as one of the

three most important (Table 2).


       Survey respondents were also asked to quantify various aspects of their human resource

management activities. Table 3 presents data on the number of executives that the venture capitalist

has employed more than once or helped with job placement in the previous 5 years. Table 3 also

provides data on the number of CEOs replaced in the previous 5 years. The mode and median of

the empirical distribution for placement is 2. The mode of the empirical distribution for
replacement is 3, and the median is 4. Table 3 clearly shows that some venture capitalists are far

more active than others, which may reflect either differences in the total number of portfolio firms

across venture capitalists, or differences in the intensity of human resource management. To

provide a clearer indicator of the intensity of human resource management activity, the bottom

panel of Table 3 reports placement and replacement activity relative to the size of the venture

capital fund (measured by the number of DEALS in the past five years).


       Venture capitalists were asked to express their degree of agreement with the following

propositions: (1) “venture capitalists operate informal networks involved in locating and relocating

managers” (proposition NETWORK); (2) “it is common for me to suggest likely managers to

others in the private equity industry” (proposition SUGGEST); (3) “it is common for me to act on

suggestions from others in the private equity industry when hiring a top manager for a firm”

(proposition TAKE SUGGESTIONS); and (4) “once I learn about the good qualifications of a

manager, I try to keep him/her working for companies I fund, i.e., I entice him/her to leave a firm

when I sell or liquidate it and take a position in another company I fund” (proposition

RECYCLING STRATEGY). The follow-up also asked venture capitalists to state the number of

managers that the venture capitalist had hired under recommendation and suggested in the previous

5 years both to/from partners and non-partners. The responses to all of these questions are reported

in Table 4, where Panel A summarizes responses to the four questions listed above, and Panel B

summarizes responses to the follow-up questions about networking.


       Clearly, venture capitalists strongly believe in the existence of a human resource network. A

large majority, 77.9%, agreed that they operate informal networks (proposition NETWORK, Table

4, Panel A); only 6.5% disagreed. Fully 56.2% agreed that it is common for them to suggest likely

managers to others in the private equity industry; only 19.3% disagreed (proposition SUGGEST,
Table 4, Panel A).9 The results in the follow-up (Table 4, Panel B) confirm this last result from the

survey. Only 24.6% had not suggested any manager to partners and 24.6% to non-partners. Finally,

the proportion of venture capitalists that had not recommended any manager amounts to 12.7%,

while those who had recommended more than 4 is 52.7%.


        Most respondents (62.3%) agreed that it is common for them to act on suggestions when

hiring managers (7.1% strongly agreed); only 11% disagreed (proposition TAKE SUGGESTIONS,

Table 4, Panel A).10 The numbers in the follow-up (Table 4, Panel B) are consistent with these

results: only 19% of the respondents had not hired any manager under suggestion (30.5% had not

hired any manager under suggestion of partners and 52.5%, from non-partners). The proportion of

those who hired more than 3 managers under recommendation is 30.2%. A considerable proportion

of venture capitalists (37%) affirm that they adopt a recycling strategy (proposition RECYCLING

STRATEGY, Table 4, Panel A).11


        Summary statistics from our survey and follow-up show that a significant proportion of

venture capitalists suggest managers to each other, act on suggestions when hiring senior managers,

and have a strategy of recycling managers. It is particularly striking that a large proportion of

venture capitalists agree that they operate informal networks involved in locating and relocating

managers.


        Survey responses also provide evidence on the motives of venture capitalists in using

human resource networks. We hypothesize that an important element that may explain the


9
  The answer given to this question by the subsample of those who answered the follow-up is very similar: 10.3% agree
strongly, 52.9% agree, 22.1% are indifferent, and 14.7% disagree.
10
   The answer given to this question by the subsample of those who answered the follow-up is very similar: 10.3%
agree strongly, 52.9% agree, 32.4% are indifferent, 2.9% disagree, and 1.5% strongly disagree.
11
   Through telephonic interviews, several venture capitalists recognized that the small number of deals does not allow
them to implement this strategy, although they would be willing to do it.
motivation that venture capitalists have in networking is the relatively high value that they attribute

to the information that they obtain from each other. More specifically, we hypothesize that venture

capitalists have (or at least think they have) information about managers that search firms do not.


       To address that hypothesis, venture capitalists were asked to express their degree of

agreement with the following propositions: (1) “the success of the firms I fund depends mostly on

their top managers” (proposition MANAGERIAL IMPACT); (2) ”as a venture capitalist I learn

substantially more about the managers of the companies I fund than what can be revealed to

outsiders by their track records” (proposition INSIDE INFORMATION); and (3) “to manage a

firm funded with venture capital requires different skills from those needed to manage a company

funded with other sources of capital” (proposition SPECIAL SKILLS).


       The level of agreement with these propositions is presented in Table 5, Panel A. The

overwhelming majority (93.5%) of respondents agreed that, through their relations with managers,

they learn substantially more about the managers than what can be revealed to outsiders by the

managers' records (proposition INSIDE INFORMATION). An even higher level of agreement

(95.5%) is attained for the proposition MANAGERIAL IMPACT. Finally, 58.7% agree that to

manage for venture capital investors require special skills (proposition SPECIAL SKILLS).

Together, these responses support the hypothesis that information about managerial skills is

important and not readily available.


       Next, in Table 5, Panel B, we examine venture capitalists’ views of the challenges they face

in recruiting managers, and the extent to which the operation of a human resource network can help

to reduce the costs of hiring skilled managers. We asked respondents to express their degree of

agreement with various propositions related to their activities as human resources recruiters. These
propositions are: (1) “it can be difficult to entice a manager to leave a stable position in a well

established company and take a chance in a new firm with risky prospects” (proposition

DIFFICULT HIRE); (2) “if it were not for their confidence in my personal commitments to them,

some of the top managers of the companies I fund might not have accepted the job offer they

received” (proposition PERSONAL COMMITMENTS); and (3) “having a reputation of helping

good managers with job placement, in the event that the companies for which they work are

liquidated, helps entice other managers to work for other companies I fund” (proposition

REPUTATION).


       The data in Table 5, Panel B, indicate that venture capitalists make personal commitments

to managers, and rely on their personal reputations for helping managers to find replacement jobs,

as a means of enticing managers to come to their portfolio firms, which managers may be reluctant

to do because of the riskiness of those portfolio firms. The majority of respondents (54.5% agree

that it can be difficult to entice managers to a risky portfolio firm, while 25% disagree. 68.7% of

respondents emphasize the importance of their personal commitment to managers in getting them

to accept a job, while 9.8% disagree. 44% agree that their reputations for assisting in recycling

managers help entice managers to their portfolio firms, while 15.1% disagree.


5. Explaining Differences in Venture Capitalists’ Reliance on Human Resource Networking


       The summary statistics described thus far demonstrate that venture capitalists tend to agree

that: (1) human resource networking is an important activity, (2) information about managerial

quality is important, (3) venture capitalists obtain unique information about their managers, and (4)

participating in a human resource network is important for attracting skilled managers.

Interestingly, however, the results in Tables 2-5 also show that there is a considerable amount of
variation in the opinions venture capitalists express about the importance of participating in human

resource networks, and the importance of those networks for attracting skilled managers. In Section

3, we described a model (developed in detail in Carvalho and de Matos 2003) that suggests

explanations for that variation in opinion and practice. Specifically, the model suggests that cross-

sectional variation in the perceived importance of networks, or in the desire to participate in them,

should be linked to factors identified in the model. This section explores the extent to which cross-

sectional differences in the use of networks can be explained by observable characteristics of

venture capitalists, as predicted by the model.


       In what follows, we use respondents’ answers to the propositions SUGGEST and TAKE

SUGGESTIONS (both from the survey), the number of managers hired under suggestion from non-

partners (from the follow-up), and the number of managers recommended to non-partners (from the

follow-up) as alternative endogenous variables to measure the extent of the reliance by venture

capitalists on networks. TAKE SUGGESTIONS and the number of managers hired under

suggestion are alternative measures of the propensity to network when hiring. SUGGEST and the

number of managers recommended are alternative measures of the propensity to supply managers

to the network. In the model, these are separate decisions. The model suggests factors that should

explain variation in the reliance on networks for both hiring and suggesting. We measure

explanatory factors using observable variables based on responses to propositions in the survey and

follow-up, and then test to see whether these observable explanatory variables can explain cross-

sectional variation in our measures of reliance on networks.


       At the end of Section 3 above, we described the empirical predictions of the Carvalho-de

Matos (2003) model. According to the model, there should be a positive association between the

propensity to rely on networks, for both hiring and suggesting, and the following characteristics: (1)
project risk, (2) the effect of managerial quality on the probability of a successful outcome, (3) the

value of networking for identifying skilled managers, (4) the credibility of the venture capitalist’s

commitment to recycle, and (5) the size of the venture capitalist.


5.1. Measuring the Determinants of Using Networks


           Project risk: We employ three alternative measures of project risk: RISK (Table 1),

EARLY (Table 1), and DIFFICULT HIRE (Table 5, Panel B). RISK is a subjective measure of risk

by the venture capitalist. It is the response to the question: “In the realm of venture capital, how

would you classify most of your investments (use a scale from 1 for low risk to 5 for high risk)?”


           EARLY is an indicator for whether early-stage venture capital is an important area of the

venture capitalist’s business. Specifically, we asked the venture capitalists to list the three types of

financing with which they are primarily involved. The possible categories included seed, startup,

R&D, first-stage, second-stage, mezzanine, LBO, acquisition financing, control block purchase,

industry consolidation, and a blank slot for other unlisted types.12 The first four of these categories

are considered early-stage venture capital. EARLY is the number of early-stage venture capital

activities that were listed in the venture capitalist’s list of top three activities. For example, for a

venture capitalist that listed R&D, first-stage, and second-stage as his three top categories of

activity, EARLY would have a value of 2. As expected, RISK is strongly correlated with EARLY

(the correlation coefficient is 0.67). As shown in Table 6, responses measured by the variables

RISK and EARLY are reasonably well distributed over the potential range of responses, indicating

substantial heterogeneity in our sample.




12
     This classification of the industry was taken from Venture Economics (1994).
        DIFFICULT HIRE (Table 5, Panel B) is a measure of risk that is especially relevant for

capturing the insurance effect, but it is also useful more broadly as a gauge of the riskiness of the

activities of the venture capitalist.


        Managerial Impact: We capture the effect of managerial quality on the probability of a

successful outcome with the variable MANAGERIAL IMPACT (Table 5, Panel A).


        Network’s Value: The value of networking for identifying skilled managers is captured by

SPECIAL SKILLS (Table 5, Panel A). To the extent that the skills of managers are unusual, it

should be harder to locate skilled managers, and therefore, the potential contribution of networking

should be relatively greater.


        Recycling Credibility: We capture the credibility of the venture capitalist’s commitment to

suggest/recycle with the variable REPUTATION (Table 5, Panel B). This variable measures the

extent to which the venture capitalist believes that having a reputation for credible recycling is

important, which should be closely related to the extent to which the venture capitalist has invested

in such a reputation. Reputation is relevant directly for the value of the suggesting service offered

by the venture capitalist, and indirectly, through the insurance effect, for the value of participating

in the hiring network.


        Size: Size is measured by CAPITAL (Table 1), which is defined as the amount of capital

that the venture capital fund currently has under management.


5.2 Regressions


        Recall that we consider four measures of the decision to network, two that capture the use of

networks for hiring managers, and two that capture the use of networks for suggesting/recycling
managers. Two of these four endogenous variables (one for hiring and one for suggesting) are

measured as ordered variables (that is, they are expressions of the degree of agreement or

disagreement with certain propositions). The other two endogenous variables are integer measures

of the number of managers hired and suggested. We employ ordered probit analysis to explain

variation in the ordered variables, and Poisson regression analysis to explain variation in the integer

variables. In all four sets of regressions, we use the same set of seven explanatory variables,

namely RISK, EARLY, DIFFICULT HIRE, MANAGERIAL IMPACT, SPECIAL SKILLS,

REPUTATION, and CAPITAL. In the Poisson regressions, we also include the number of deals by

the venture capitalist in the past five years (variable DEALS, Table 1) and the number of senior

managers hired by the venture capitalist in the past five years (variable HIRINGS, Table 1) as

scaling control variables.


       Tables 7 and 8 present an empirical analysis of the incentive to hire under suggestions,

using our two alternative measures of the network hiring propensity. Table 7 presents ordered

probit regressions where the dependent variable is the extent of agreement with the proposition

TAKE SUGGESTIONS. Table 8 contains Poisson regressions where the dependent variable is the

number of managers hired under suggestion from non-partners in the previous 5 years.


       The explanatory variables are consistently positive (with the exception of CAPITAL in

Table 8, possibly reflecting the influence in Table 8 of the presence of the closely related variables,

DEALS and HIRINGS), as predicted in the model, and are often statistically significant. We

alternate our three measures of risk in the various specifications in Tables 7 and 8, and as expected,

they tend to detract from one another’s explanatory power.
       The measured effects of SPECIAL SKILLS and MANAGERIAL IMPACT are positive but

not highly statistically significant. In the case of MANAGERIAL IMPACT, this may reflect the

lack of cross-sectional variation in our sample for this variable (see Table 5). Furthermore, although

we allow SPECIAL SKILLS and MANAGERIAL IMPACT to enter separately in many

specifications in Tables 7 and 8, in the Carvalho and de Matos (2003) model, the two variables

should enter interactively; that is, the importance of each should depend on the importance of the

other. Thus, in Tables 7 and 8, we also report results where we substitute a new variable,

INFORMATION VALUE (defined as the product of SPECIAL SKILLS and MANAGERIAL

IMPACT) for SPECIAL SKILLS and MANAGERIAL IMPACT. In Table 7, INFORMATION

VALUE enters significantly.


       The empirical analysis of the decision to suggest managers appears in Tables 9 and 10,

which employs the same explanatory variables as Tables 7 and 8. Table 9 presents ordered probit

regressions where the dependent variable is the degree of agreement with the proposition

SUGGEST. Table 10 contains Poisson regressions where the dependent variable is the number of

managers suggested to non-partners in the previous 5 years.


       The variables EARLY, RISK and REPUTATION appear with positive and statistically

significant coefficients. In the survey sample, the other variables fail to show statistical significance

in accordance with the model. In follow-up sample, DIFFICULT HIRE is positive and statistically

significant. In the follow-up sample, SPECIAL SKILLS and MANAGERIAL IMPACT, or

alternatively their product, INFORMATION VALUE, enter negatively and statistically significant,

contrary to the predictions of the model. This indicates that the more venture capitalists values

unique managerial talent, the less they are willing to suggest managers to the network. In other

words, while INFORMATION VALUE has a positive effect on the desire by venture capitalists to
use the network for the purposes of hiring, it seems to have the opposite effect on their desire to

suggest (rather than try to retain) talented managers. While this result is contrary to the specific

model we describe in Section 3, it is not surprising. The Carvalho-de Matos (2003) model does not

consider the fact that venture capitalists may wish to reuse managers themselves; incorporating that

feature into the model, we conjecture, could explain the incentives of venture capitalists not to

suggest managers when those managers possess unique and important talents (which make venture

capitalists want to keep those managers for themselves).


6. Conclusion


       A significant part of a firm's value depends upon the skills, knowledge and experience of its

senior managers. Along with their investment activities, venture capitalists become actively

involved within their portfolio firms and acquire non-public information about managerial quality.

Venture capitalists have the opportunity to share that information via their participation in a

network for hiring skilled managers.


       In this study, we examine evidence of the perceived importance of that network in the

minds and actions of venture capitalists, and the determinants of their decisions to employ the

network for human resource management. We compare that evidence with the predictions of the

Carvalho-De Matos (2003) model of venture capital networking.


       In theory, reliance on the network benefits venture capitalists by raising their portfolio

firms’ productivity, reducing prospective managers’ risks and compensation, and reducing the costs

of locating senior managers. Through a nationwide survey, we obtained evidence that venture

capitalists operate an informal network involved in locating and relocating managers: 77.9% of the

respondents agreed with the proposition that venture capitalists operate networks for locating and
relocating managers. A majority of the venture capitalists affirm that it is common for them to hire

managers under suggestions from their colleagues (62.3%) and to suggest managers (56.2%).

Furthermore, 37% affirm that they adopt the strategy of recycling managers.


       Interestingly, there is substantial heterogeneity in the intensity with which venture

capitalists participate in human resource networks. Econometric analysis of cross-sectional

variation gives support to the theoretical reasoning that the intensity with which venture capitalists

locate managers through the network is positively influenced by the following factors: (1) the value

of the information transmitted though the network (the importance of managerial skill for the

portfolio firm); (2) the risk of venture capital investments; (3) the size of the venture capital fund;

(4) the degree of difficulty in enticing executives to manage firms funded with venture capital; and

(5) the reputation of the venture capitalist for successfully recycling managers via the network.


       Theoretical and empirical arguments provided in this article support the view that venture

capitalists add value by bringing to their portfolio firms the capacity to attract superior

management. This indicates that human resources management is one of the keys to understanding

the success of the venture capital industry.
                                           References


Admati, A. R., Pfleiderer, P., 1994, Robust Financial Contracting and the Role of Venture
  Capitalists, Journal of Finance (June), 371-402.

Amit, A. R., Glosten, L., Muller, E., 1990, Entrepreneurial Ability, Venture Investments, and Risk
  Sharing, Management Science (October), 1232-1245.

Baker, M., Gompers, P., 1999, An Analysis of Executive Compensation, Ownership, and Control
   of Closely Held Firms, Harvard Business School working paper.

Black, B. S., Gilson, R. J., 1998, Venture Capital and the Structure of Capital Markets: Banks
   Versus Stock Markets, Journal of Financial Economics (March), 243-277.

Barry, C. B., 1994, New Directions in Research on Venture Capital Finance, Financial
   Management (Autumn), 3-15.

Byers, B., 1997, Relationship Between Venture Capitalist and Entrepreneur, in Pratt's Guide to
   Venture Capital Resources, Wellesly Hills, Mass. Venture Economics.

Bygrave, W., Timmons, J., 1992, Venture Capital at the Crossroads, Boston: Harvard Business
   School Press.

Carvalho, Antonio Gledson de, De Matos, Joao Amaro, 2003, Modeling Networking By Venture
   Capitalists. Working Paper, University of Sao Paolo.

Chan, Y., 1983, On the Positive Role of Financial Intermediation in Allocations of Venture Capital
   in a Market with Imperfect Information, Journal of Finance (December), 1543-1561.

Cornelli, F., Yosha, O., 1997, Stage Financing and the Role of Convertible Debt, CERP Discussion
   Paper No. 1735.

Gompers, P. A., 1995, Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture Capital,
  Journal of Finance (December), 1461-1489.

Gompers, P. A., Lerner, J., 1997, Venture Capital and the Creation of Public Companies: Do
  Venture Capitalists Really Bring More Than Money? Journal of Private Equity (Fall), 15-32.

Hellmann, T., 1998, The Allocation of Control Rights en Venture Capital Contracts, Rand Journal
   of Economics (29), 57-76.

Hellmann, T., Puri, M., 2002, Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-up firms:
   Empirical Evidence, Journal of Finance (February), 169-197.

Holmstrom, B., 1982, Moral Hazard in Teams, Bell Journal of Economics (13), 324-340.

Hsu, David H., 2004, What Do Entrepreneurs Pay for Venture Capital Affiliation?, Journal of
   Finance (59), 1805-44.
Lerner, J., 1995, Venture Capital and the Oversight of the Private Firms, Journal of Finance (50),
   301-318.

Lerner, J., 1994, The Syndication of Venture Capital Investments, Financial Management
   (Autumn), 16-27.

Marx, L., 1998, Efficient Venture Capital Financing Combining Debt and Equity, Review of
   Economic Desig (3), 371-387.

Repullo, R., Suarez J., 2000, Venture Capital Finance: a Security Design Approach, CEMFI
   working paper.

Sahlman, W. A., 1990, The Structure and Governance of Venture Capital Organizations, Journal of
   Financial Economics (October), 473-521.

Venture Economics, 1988, Venture Capital Performance: Review of the Financial Performance of
   Venture Capital Partnerships, (Venture Economics, Needham, MA).

Venture Economics, 1994, Pratt's Guide to Venture Capital Sources, (Venture Economics, New
   York, NY).

Williamson, O., 1986, Economic Organization, Firms, Markets and Policy Control, New York
   University Press.
                                         TABLE 1
                                      Main Variables
   VARIABLE                                DESCRIPTION                                   SOURCE

                   Answer to the question: in the last five years, approximately how
   PLACEMENT       many executives have you either employed more than once or            SURVEY
                   helped to be placed after their firms were sold or liquidated?

                   Answer to the question: approximately how many CEOs have
  REPLACEMENT                                                                            SURVEY
                   you replaced in the last five years?

                   Answer to the question: approximately how many deals have you
     DEALS                                                                               SURVEY
                   made in the last five years?

                   Answer to the question: in the last 5 years, approximately how
    HIRINGS                                                                             FOLLOW-UP
                   many managers have you hired?

    AVERAGE
                   Ratio between PLACEMENT and DEALS.                                    SURVEY
   PLACEMENT

    AVERAGE
                   Ratio between REPLACEMENT and DEALS.                                  SURVEY
  REPLACEMENT

   MANAGERS        Answer to the question: in the last 5 years, approximately how
  SUGGESTED TO     many possible top managers have you recommended to venture           FOLLOW-UP
    PARTNERS       capitalists who work for your firm?
  MANAGERS         Answer to the question: in the last 5 years, approximately how
 SUGGESTED TO      many possible top managers have you recommended to venture           FOLLOW-UP
 NON-PARTNERS      capitalists who do not work for your firm?
 MANAGERS HIRED    Answer to the question: among the top managers you hired in
UNDER SUGGESTION   the last 5 years, approximately how many were recommended by         FOLLOW-UP
  OF PARTNERS      venture capitalists who work for your firm?
 MANAGERS HIRED    Answer to the question: approximately how many of the top
UNDER SUGGESTION   managers you hired in the last 5 many were suggested by venture      FOLLOW-UP
 OF NON-PARTNERS   capitalists who do not work for your firm?
                   Venture capitalists were asked to rank the three types of
                   financing in which they are most involved. The received a list
                   containing seed, start up, R&D, first-stage, second-stage,
                   mezzanine, bridge financing, LBO, acquisition financing,
     EARLY         control-block purchase, industry consolidation, and a blank slot      SURVEY
                   for other unlisted types. The first four of these categories are
                   considered early stage venture capital. Variable EARLY is the
                   number of early-stage venture capital activities in the venture
                   capitalist’s list of top three activities.
                   Venture capitalists were asked to answer the question: in the
      RISK         realm of venture capital, how would you classify most of your         SURVEY
                   investments (use a scale from 1 for low risk to 5 for high risk).

                   Amount of capital that the funds of a venture capitalist has under
    CAPITAL                                                                              SURVEY
                   management.
                                                TABLE 2
 Importance Given by Venture Capitalists to the Activity of Recruiting Managers
Venture capitalists were asked to rank the three activities performed by venture capitalists that they
considered most important. They were given a menu including 1) monitoring performance against goals, 2)
helping with management decisions, 3) providing industry knowledge, 4) providing finance, 5) developing
business strategy, 6) recruiting managers, and two blank slots to complete with unlisted activities. Some
answers presented a tie. In case two answers were tied in the first place, the second place was taken as
blank. If three activities were tied in first, then the second and third places were taken as blank, and so on.
                                                                                              Valid
                            Rank                                     Frequency
                                                                                            percentage
                Most important                                             26                    16.7
         One of the two most important                                     55                    35.5
        One of the three most important                                    84                    54.2
       Not among the three most important                                  71                    45.8
                    Missing                                                 1
             Number of answers                                            155
                                                        TABLE 3
               Venture Capitalists’ Involvement with Human Resources Management
PLACEMENT is the number of executives that the venture capitalist has employed more than once or helped with job placement in
the previous five years and REPLACEMENT is describes the number of CEOs replaced in the previous five years. The in the
averages, variables PLACEMENT and REPLACEMENT are divided by the number of deals structured in the previous five years.
When the answer was in the form of an interval, the midpoint was considered. This is why some answers are non-integer numbers.

Number of                         PLACEMENT                                            REPLACEMENT
Managers            Frequency         Percentage        Cumulative        Frequency          Percentage       Cumulative
                                                        percentage                                            percentage
      0                  35               24.8             24.8                  7                4.9              4.9
   1 & 1.5               16               11.4             36.2                 15               10.5             15.4
      2                  36               25.5             61.7                 18               12.6             28.0
   3 & 3.5               27               19.2             80.9                 29               20.3             48.3
      4                   3                2.1             83.0                 20               13.9             62.2
      5                  11                7.8             90.8                 20               13.9             76.1
      6                   2                1.4             92.2                  5                3.5             79.6
      7                   1                0.7             92.9                  2                1.4             81.0
   8 & 8.5                1                0.7             93.6                  6                4.2             85.3
     ≥ 10                 9                6.4            100.0                 21               14.7            100.0
    Total               141                                                    143

Number of                 AVERAGE PLACEMENT                                    AVERAGE REPLACEMENT
Managers                                                Cumulative                                            Cumulative
                    Frequency         Percentage        percentage        Frequency          Percentage       percentage
 0 x 0.1                 59               41.5             41.5                 11                7.9              7.9
0.1 < x 0.2              34               24.0             65.5                 40               28.5             36.4
0.2 < x 0.3              21               14.8             80.3                 17               12.0             48.6
0.3 < x 0.4               7                4.9             85.2                 28               20.0             68.6
0.4 < x 0.5               8                5.6             90.8                 20               14.3             82.9
0.5 < x 0.6               3                2.2             93.0                  9                6.4             89.3
0.6 < x 0.8               4                2.8             95.8                  5                3.6             92.9
   0.8 < x                6                4.2            100.0                 10                7.1            100.0
    Total               142                                                    140
                                                        TABLE 4

                                 Evidence on the Existence of the Network

                                       Panel A: QUALITATIVE DATA
                                                      (in percentage)
                                                               Strongly                      Disagree Strongly Number of
Proposition                     Wording                         agree     Agree   Neutral             disagree answers

               Venture    capitalists  operate    informal
 NETWORK       networks involved in locating and relocating    19.5       58.4      15.6       5.2        1.3      155
               competent managers
                                                                                                                  (100)

               It is common for me to suggest likely
  SUGGEST      managers to others in the private equity          6.5      49.7      24.5      18.7        0.6      155
               business
                                                                                                                  (100)

   TAKE     It is common for me to act on suggestions
            from others in the private equity industry
SUGGESTIONS when hiring a top manager for a firm                 7.1      55.2      26.7       9.7        1.3      154
                                                                                                                  (100)
               Once I learn about the good qualifications of
 RECYCLING     a manager, I try to keep him/her working for
 STRATEGY
               companies I fund, i.e., I entice him/her to       8.4      28.6      27.3      23.7     13.0        156
               leave a firm when I sell or liquidate it and
               take a position in another company I fund                                                          (100)
                                      Panel B: QUANTITATIVE DATA
                                                      (in percentage)
Number of                  Managers Suggested to                                  Managers Suggested by
Managers           Partners        Non-partners            Both            Partners        Non-partners         Both
      0               24.6               24.6               12.7             30.5              52.5              19.0
      1                8.7               15.7                3.6             28.8              21.3              22.4
      2               17.5               17.5                9.1             15.2              18.0              17.2
      3               12.2               12.2               12.7              8.9               3.2              12.1
      4                5.2                1.7                9.1              6.8               1.6              10.3
     ≥5               31.5               28.0               52.7             10.2               3.2              19.0
                       57                 57                 55               59                61                58
   Total             (100)              (100)              (100)            (100)             (100)             (100)
                                                         TABLE 5
                 Challenges in Recruiting Managers and the Value of the Network
                                                       (in percentage)

                 Panel A: VALUE AND UNIQUENESS OF THE INFORMATION
                                                                Strongly                     Disagree Strongly Number of
 Proposition                     Wording                         agree     Agree   Neutral            disagree answers


MANAGERIAL The success of the type of firms I fund
  IMPACT   depends mostly on their top managers                 71.1       24.4      3.2       1.3      0.0      156
                                                                                                                (100)
               As a venture capitalist I learn substantially
   INSIDE   more about the managers of the companies I
INFORMATION fund than what can be revealed to outsiders         49.7       43.8      5.2       1.3      0.0      153
               by their track records                                                                           (100)
               To manage a firm funded with venture
   SPECIAL     capital requires different skills from those
    SKILLS     needed to manage a company funded with           14.8       43.9    18.7      20.0       2.6      155
               other sources of capital                                                                         (100)

    Panel B: VENTURE CAPITALIST’S CHALLENGES IN RECRUITING MANAGERS

               It can be difficult to entice a top manager to
  DIFFICULT    leave a stable position in a well established
     HIRE      company and take a chance in a new firm          12.2       42.3    20.5      21.8       3.2      156
               with risky prospects                                                                             (100)

               If it were not for their confidence in my
  PERSONAL  personal commitment to them, some of the
COMMITMENTS top managers of the companies I fund might          20.3       48.4    21.5        7.8      2.0      153
               not have accepted the job offer they received                                                    (100)
               Having a reputation of helping good
               managers with job placement, in the event
 REPUTATION    that the companies for which they work are         7.2      36.8    40.9      10.5       4.6      152
               liquidated, helps entice other managers to
               work for other firms I fund                                                                      (100)
                                                     TABLE 6
                           Characteristics of Venture Capitalist in the Sample
EARLY takes the value of 0, 1, 2, or 3, which corresponds to the number of early-stage financing listed among the three
main types of financing performed by a venture capitalist. RISK corresponds to a subjective assessment of the riskiness
of the venture capitalist’s investments on a scale from 1 for low risk to 5 for high risk. EXPERIENCE is the number of
years in the venture capital industry. Deals represent the number of deals made in the previous 5 years. These variables
are precisely described in Table 1.

                                     EARLY                                                 RISK
                   Frequency        Percentage       Cumulative        Frequency        Percentage       Cumulative
                                                     percentage                                          percentage
      0                  45             28.8             28.8
      1                  20             12.8             41.6                7               4.5              4.5
   2 & 2.5               41             26.3             67.9               28              18.2             22.7
   3 & 3.5               50             32.1            100.0               37              24.1             46.8
   4 & 4.5                                                                  49              31.8             78.6
      5                                                                     33              21.4            100.0
    Total              156                                                 154

                                    HIRINGS                                              DEALS
                   Frequency        Percentage       Cumulative        Frequency        Percentage       Cumulative
                                                     percentage                                          percentage
   0 x 3                  8             12.9             12,9                5               3.5              3.5
   3<x 6                 23             37.1             50.0               22              15.3             18.8
   6<x 9                  4              6.5             56.5               18              12.5             31.3
  9 < x 12               14             22.5             79.0               39              27.0             58.3
 12 < x 15                7             11.2             90.2               10               7.0             65.3
 16 < x 20                3              4.9             95.1               21              14.6             79.9
 21 < x 25                0                0             95.1               10               6.9             86.8
    25 < x                3              4.9              100               19              13.2            100.0
    Total                62                                                144
                                                                          TABLE 7
                                Empirical Determinants of the Decision to Network: Taking Suggestions
The dependent variable is the agreement to proposition TAKE SUGGESTIONS: it is common for me to act on suggestions from others in the private equity
industry when hiring a top manager for a firm. Independent variables are described in Tables 1 and 5. Variable INFORMATION VALUE is the product of
variables SPECIAL SKILLS and MANAGERIAL IMPACT. Estimates come from ordered probit analysis. In parentheses are the regression coefficients’
z-values.
Variables                Model 1           Model 2          Model 3           Model 4          Model 5        Model 6    Model 7       Model 8
                            0.10              0.13             0.13              0.11
SPECIAL SKILLS
                           (1.12)            (1.48)           (1.56)            (1.18)
MANAGERIAL                  0.24              0.19             0.19              0.25
IMPACT                     (1.59)            (1.30)           (1.30)            (1.63)
INFORMATION                                                                                         0.03*       0.03*      0.03**         0.03*
VALUE                                                                                              (1.88)      (1.95)     (2.10)         (1.84)
                            0.23**            0.10**           0.24**            0.24**             0.22**      0.26**     0.24**         0.23**
REPUTATION
                           (2.23)            (2.54)           (2.41)            (2.29)             (2.13)      (2.47)     (2.35)         (2.19)
DIFFICULT                   0.22**                                               0.25***            0.20**                                0.24**
HIRE                       (2.36)                                               (2.64)             (2.24)                                (2.52)
                                              0.14*                              0.15                           0.14*                     0.14
RISK
                                             (1.73)                             (1.27)                         (1.73)                    (1.24)
                                                               0.12              0.03                                      0.12           0.04
EARLY
                                                              (1.60)            (0.30)                                    (1.60)         (0.33)
                            0.16**            0.11             0.14*             0.16**              0.16**     0.12       0.14*          0.16**
logCAPITAL
                           (2.25)            (1.59)           (1.93)            (2.06)              (2.24)     (1.61)     (1.95)         (2.06)
       N                    144               142              144               142                 144        142        144            142
Pseudo R2                   0.05              0.04             0.04              0.07                0.05       0.04       0.04           0.07
LogLikelihood             -151.85           -150.18          -153.38           -146.52             -152.01    -150.18    -153.25        -146.84
Wald χ2                    18.58             15.61            15.52             22.92               18.26      15.60      15.79          22.27
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance levels of 10, 5, and 1% respectively (2-tailed)
                                                                          TABLE 8
                  Empirical Determinants of the Number of Managers Hired under Suggestion of Non-Partners
The dependent variable is the number of managers hired under suggestion of non-partners in the previous 5 years. Independent variables are described in
Tables 1 and 5. Variable INFORMATION VALUE is the product of variables SPECIAL SKILLS and MANAGERIAL IMPACT. Estimates come from
Poisson regressions. In parentheses are the regression coefficients’ z-values.
Variables                Model 1           Model 2          Model 3           Model 4          Model 5        Model 6      Model 7        Model 8
                            0.25              0.31             0.24              0.25
SPECIAL SKILLS
                           (1.35)            (1.63)           (1.35)            (1.32)
MANAGERIAL                  0.00              -0.02            0.05              0.04
IMPACT                     (0.00)            (0.12)           (0.28)            (0.21)
INFORMATION                                                                                         0.30        0.03         0.03             0.03
VALUE                                                                                              (1.03)      (1.18)       (1.21)          (1.14)
                            0.09              0.21             0.24               0.16              0.11        0.23         0.25             0.17
REPUTATION
                           (0.54)            (1.25)           (1.45)            (0.85)             (0.67)      (1.43)       (1.56)          (0.94)
DIFFICULT                   0.30                                                  0.12              0.31**                                    0.13
HIRE                       (2.21)                                               (0.72)             (2.35)                                   (0.82)
                                              0.05                              -0.34                           0.08                        -0.32
RISK
                                             (0.32)                             (1.45)                         (0.53)                       (1.40)
                                                                0.34***           0.47**                                      0.35***         0.47**
EARLY
                                                              (2.65)            (2.45)                                      (2.76)          (2.48)
                           -0.14            -0.14             -0.17             -0.22*             -0.14       -0.14        -0.17           -0.21*
logCAPITAL
                           (1.28)           (1.21)            (1.51)            (1.66)             (1.28)      (1.19)       (1.51)          (1.64)
                           -0.00            -0.00             -0.00             -0.00              -0.00       -0.00        -0.00           -0.00
DEALS
                           (0.30)           (0.16)            (0.26)            (0.05)             (0.39)      (0.23)       (0.29)          (0.10)
                             0.08***          0.06***           0.06***           0.07***            0.07**      0.06***      0.05***         0.07***
HIRINGS
                           (4.62)           (3.71)            (3.53)            (3.71)             (4.60)      (3.60)       (3.49)          (3.69)
                           -2.50**          -1.96             -2.35*            -1.39              -2.09***    -1.63        -1.81**         -0.95
CONSTANT
                           (1.98)           (1.37)            (1.87)            (0.87)             (2.17)      (1.43)       (1.96)          (0.71)
       N                      56               55                56                55                 56          55           56              55
Pseudo R2                    0.15             0.11              0.16              0.18               0.14        0.10         0.16            0.18
LogLikelihood              -74.09           -76.14            -72.87             -0.70             -74.54      -76.88       -73.25          -70.56
Wald χ2                     26.30            20.20             28.74            31.37               25.39       18.72        27.97           30.64
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance levels of 10, 5, and 1% respectively (2-tailed)
                                                                          TABLE 9
                               Empirical Determinants of the Decision to Network: Suggesting Managers
The dependent variable is the agreement to proposition SUGGESTS: It is common for me to suggest likely managers to others in the private equity business.
Independent variables are described in Tables 1 and 5. Variable INFORMATION VALUE is the product of variables SPECIAL SKILLS and
MANAGERIAL IMPACT. Estimates come from ordered probit analysis. In parentheses are the regression coefficients’ z-values.
Variables                Model 1           Model 2          Model 3           Model 4          Model 5        Model 6      Model 7          Model 8
                            0.00              0.01             0.03              0.00
SPECIAL SKILLS
                           (0.09)            (0.20)           (0.41)            (0.00)
MANAGERIAL                 -0.03             -0.08            -0.06             -0.06
IMPACT                     (0.25)            (0.54)           (0.40)            (0.37)
INFORMATION                                                                                         0.00        0.00          0.00            -0.00
VALUE                                                                                              (0.10)      (0.04)        (0.29)           (0.07)
                            0.49***           0.47***          0.50***           0.46***            0.49***     0.48***       0.50***          0.46***
REPUTATION
                           (4.53)            (4.33)           (4.65)            (4.16)             (4.55)      (4.40)        (4.71)           (4.20)
DIFFICULT                   0.12                                                 0.15               0.12                                       0.15*
HIRE                       (1.31)                                               (1.58)             (1.35)                                     (1.64)
                                              0.22***                            0.25**                         0.22***                        0.25**
RISK
                                             (2.73)                             (2.16)                         (2.72)                         (2.16)
                                                               0.13*            -0.01                                         0.13*           -0.01
EARLY
                                                              (1.81)            (0.13)                                       (1.80)           (0.13)
                           -0.02             -0.01            -0.03              0.01               -0.02      -0.01         -0.02             0.01
logCAPITAL
                           (0.29)            (0.23)           (0.43)            (0.08)              (0.28)     (0.22)        (0.42)           (0.09)
       N                    144               142              144               142                 144        142           144              142
Pseudo R2                   0.07              0.08             0.07              0.09                0.07       0.08          0.07             0.09
LogLikelihood             -159.96           -155.62          -159.17           -154.37             -159.99    -155.79       -159.29          -154.44
Wald χ2                    25.99             29.84            27.56             32.33               25.93      29.50         27.33            32.20
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance levels of 10, 5, and 1% respectively (2-tailed)
                                                            TABLE 10
                            Empirical Determinants of the Number of Managers Suggested to Non-Partners
The dependent variable is the number of managers suggested to non-partners in the previous 5 years. Independent variables are described in Tables 1 and 5.
Variable INFORMATION VALUE is the product of variables SPECIAL SKILLS and MANAGERIAL IMPACT. Estimates come from Poisson
regressions. In parentheses are the regression coefficients’ z-values.
Variables                Model 1           Model 2          Model 3           Model 4          Model 5         Model 6      Model 7          Model 8
                           -0.28***          -0.14*           -0.16*            -0.27***
SPECIAL SKILLS
                           (3.02)            (1.67)           (1.87)            (2.91)
MANAGERIAL                 -0.30***          -0.36***         -0.34***          -0.32***
IMPACT                     (3.73)            (4.32)           (4.05)            (3.73)
INFORMATION                                                                                        -0.07***     -0.06***      -0.06***         -0.08***
VALUE                                                                                              (5.25)       (4.60)        (4.64)           (5.13)
                            0.23**            0.27***          0.30***           0.20*              0.25**       0.30***       0.31***          0.23**
REPUTATION
                           (2.24)            (2.62)           (2.87)            (1.91)             (2.45)       (2.86)        (3.05)           (2.20)
DIFFICULT                   0.40***                                              0.44***            0.41***                                     0.45***
HIRE                       (4.77)                                               (4.81)             (5.08)                                      (5.03)
                                              0.10                               0.25*                           0.12                           0.25*
RISK
                                             (1.26)                             (1.84)                          (1.53)                         (1.86)
                                                               0.10             -0.15                                          0.12*           -0.14
EARLY
                                                              (1.52)            (1.33)                                        (1.90)           (1.29)
                            0.01             -0.02            -0.06              0.11               -0.00       -0.05         -0.09             0.08
logCAPITAL
                           (0.28)            (0.45)           (1.24)            (1.44)              (0.02)      (0.83)        (1.61)           (1.20)
                           -0.01             -0.00            -0.00             -0.01               -0.01       -0.00         -0.00            -0.02
DEALS
                           (1.29)            (0.21)           (0.46)            (1.10)              (1.52)      (0.30)        (0.52)           (1.39)
                            0.03***           0.01             0.01              0.03***             0.03***     0.00          0.01             0.03***
HIRINGS
                           (3.17)            (1.29)           (1.48)            (2.79)              (3.08)      (0.85)        (1.10)           (2.68)
                            1.18*             2.06***          2.38***           0.09                0.05        0.98*         1.37***         -1.06
CONSTANT
                           (1.91)            (2.97)           (4.05)            (0.11)              (0.11)      (1.64)        (2.86)           (1.30)
       N                     50                49               50                49                  50          49            50               49
Pseudo R2                   0.19              0.12             0.13              0.20                0.20        0.12          0.13             0.20
LogLikelihood             -137.43           -147.23          -148.22           -134.74             -136.39     -147.74       -148.14          -133.84
Wald χ2                    68.68             41.97            47.10             66.95               70.77       40.95         47.27            68.75
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance levels of 10, 5, and 1% respectively (2-tailed)
