                    IBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              A MODEL OF EXCHANGE-RATE DETERMINATION
        WITH POLICY REACTION: EVIDENCE FROM MONTHLY DATA




                        William H. Branson




                      Working Paper No. 1135




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                           June 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #1135
                                                  June 1983


              A Model of Exchange—Rate Determination with
              Policy Reaction: Evidence from Monthly Data


                              I. ABSTRACT


     During the 1970s an extensive theoretical literature has developed
analyzing market determination of freely floating exchange rates. At the
same time, there has been extensive and continuous intervention in the
market by central banks. Exchange rates have not been floating freely;
they have been managed, or manipulated, by central banks. However, most
of the description of exchange rate policy, as actually practiced, has been
informal, or "literary," not integrated with the formal theoretical litera-
ture. Recent examples are the surveys in Branson (l98la) and Mussa (1981).
     In this paper I integrate exchange—rate policy into a model of exchange—
rate behavior, and examine the monthly data from the l970s econometrically,
to infer hypotheses about policy behavior. I focus on four major curren-
cies, the U.S. dollar, the Deutschemark, Sterling, and the Japanese yen,
and analyze movements in their effective (weighted) exchange rates as
calculated by the IMF.
     In section II a model of market determination of a floating exchange—rate
is laid out. It is a rational—expectations version of the model in Branson
(1977), and it draws on the model of Kouri (1978). It is the same as the
model in Branson (1983). The model shows how unanticipated movements in
money, the current account, and relative price levels will cause first
a jump in the exchange rate, and then a movement along a "saddle path" to
the new long run equilibrium. Here the role of "news" in moving the exchange
rate, as recently emphasized by Dornbusch (1980) and Frenkel (1981), is clear.
The model emphasizes imperfect substitutability between domestic and foreign
bonds, in order to prepare for the analysis of intervention policy in section III.
     Exchange—rate policy is introduced in section III. We analyze the
options available to the central bank that wants to reduce the jump in the
exchange rate following a real or monetary disturbance——"news" about the
current account, relative prices, or money. This is the policy character-
ized as "leaning against the wind" in Branson (1976). The distinction is
made between monetary policy and sterilized intervention.
     In section IV we turn to the monthly data. The quarterly data were
analyzed in Branson (1983). Systems of vector autoregressions (VARs) are
estimated for each of the countries, and the correlations among their resid-
uals are studied. These represent the "innovations," or "news" in the time
series. A clear pattern emerges in these correlations, in which policy in
the U.S. and Japan drives exchange rates, and policy in Germany and the
U.K. reacts by moving interest rates, and by sterilized intervention. This
is essentially the same result that appeared on the quarterly data in
Branson (1983). Thus the analyses tend to reinforce each other; both data
sets tell basically the same story.
                                       William H. Branson
                                       Department of Economics
                                       Princeton University
                                       Princeton, New Jersey 08544
                                                                            3.




 II. An Asset—Market Model with Rational Expectations


 II.A. Introduction


      The purpose of this section is to lay out a simple asset—market model

 of exchange—rate determination within which, in the next section, monetary

 policy reaction to movements in the exchange rate can be analyzed. The

 literature of the l970s has identified three principal macroeconomic vari-

ables that influence movements in exchange rates. These are money supplies,

relative price levels, and current—account balances. Here I develop a re-

presentative model that explicitly includes all three elements. The model

is an extension of the asset—market model sketched in Branson (1975), and

developed in full in Branson (1977). It is a close relative of Kouri

(1982). In the early versions of this model the focus was on the roles of

relative prices and asset markets, and static expectations were assumed..

Here the model is extended to study the effects of underlying "real" dis-

turbances influencing the current account and to include explicitly policy

intervention in a rational expectations framework.

II.B. Asset—market specification.

     To make the analysis manageable, let us consider one country in a

many—country world. We can aggregate the assets available in this country

into a domestic money stock M, which is a nonearning asset, holdings of

domestically—issued assets B, which are denominated in home currency, and

net holdings of foreign—issued assets F, which are denominated in foreign

exchange.—' B (for bonds) is government debt held by the private sector,


 /Since the analysis here applies to any single country in the international
financial system, I use the terms 'home' and 'foreign' to denote the country
being discussed and the rest of the system, respectively. At the level of
generality of this discussion no damage would be done if the reader substi-
tuted "US for 'home country', 'dollar' for 'home currency' and 'Fed' for
'central bank'.
                                                                             4.



and BC is government debt held by the central bank. Total government debt

B =   B+   B F (for foreign assets) is the net claims on foreigners held

by the domestic private sector and R is central bank foreign reserves.

Total national net claims on foreigners F =   F   + R. The money stock N is

equal to R + BC, with a 100% reserve system. I assume the initial ex-

change rate is indexed to unity, and that the central bank does not permit

capital gains or losses in R to influence M. The current account in the

balance of payments gives the rate of accumulation of F over time. The

rate of accumulation of B is the government deficit. N is controlled by

central bank purchases (or sales) of B or F from (or to) the domestic

private sector.

      The rate of return on F is given by ,   fixed   in the world capital

market, plus the expected rate of increase in the exchange rate, ê. The

rate of return on B is the domestic interest rate r, to be determined in

domestic financial markets. Total private—sector wealth, at any point in

time, is given by W = N + B + eF, so here the exchange rate e, in home

currency per unit of foreign exchange (e.g. $0.50 per DM), translates the

foreign—exchange value of F into home currency.

      The total supplies of B and F to the national economy are given at

each point in time. Each can be accumulated only over time through foreign

or domestic investment.'1 Given the existing stocks of B and F at any


2/Since F is home claims on foreigners less home liabilities to foreigners,
an asset swap which exchanges a claim and a liability with a foreign asset—
holder is a transaction within F, changing claims and liabilities by the
same amount. This transaction would leave F and B unchanged. The reason
for using this particular aggregation will become clear when we study dy—
namic adjustment below. Basically, we want to define net foreign assets
consistently with the balance of payments and national income and product
accounts, which record the capital account balance as the change in U.S.
private holdings of net foreign assets. The assumptions outlined above
make M and B non—traded assets. This implies that the total stocks of N,
B, and F in domestic portfolios are given at any point in time.
                                                                             5.



point in time, the central bank can make discrete changes in M by swapping

either B or F with the domestic private sector; these are open—market op-

erations in government debt or foreign assets.


        The demand for each asset by the private sector depends on wealth,

W =   M   + B + eF, and both rates of return, r and + ê. As wealth rises,

demands for all three assets increase. The demands for B and F depend

positively on their own rates of return and negatively on those of the

other assets. The demand for money depends negatively on both r and

  + ê; as either rises, asset—holders attempt to shift from money into the

asset whose return has gone up.


      These asset—market equilibrium conditions are summarized in equations

(1) —     (6).

(1)       M E R + BC =   m(r,     + ê)•W.

(2) B = b(r,            + ê)•W.


(3)       eF =   f(r,    + ).W.

(4) WM+B+eF.
(5) BC+BP=B.

(6) F+R=F.
Equation (4) is the balance sheet constraint, which ensures that

m + b + f = 1.      The three demand functions give the desired distribution of

the domestic wealth portfolio W into the three assets. Specifying the as-

set demand functions as homogeneous in wealth eliminates the price level

from the asset—market equilibrium conditions. Given the balance sheet
                                                                            6.




constraint (4), and gross substitutability of the three assets, we have

the constraints on partial derivatives of the distribution functions:


            mr + r = br   <   0:     m + b =      f   <   0.


Here a subscript denotes a partial derivative. The three market equili-

brium conditions (l)—(3) contain two independent equations given the bal-

ance sheet constraint (4). In equation (5) the bar over B indicates that

the total supply of government debt is fixed.

II.C. Asset accumulation and the current account.

     Equations (l)—(6) provide the specification of asset markets in the

model. The other main building block of the model is the current—account

equation. The balance—of—payments accounts provide the identity

                 +      x + (F + R)        X + rF.


where X is net exports of goods and non—capital services in terms of for-

eign exchange. Net exports depend on the real exchange rate e/p, private

sector wealth W, (given by equatIon (4) above), and an exogenous shift

factor z which represents real events such as changes in tastes in tech-

nology, oil discoveries, etc., which increase net exports for given values

of e/p and W. Thus we can write

          X = X(eIP, W, z); Xe >     0   X. <   0; X > 0.

The sign of Xe assumes the Marshall—Lerner condition holds; X reflects

wealth   effects on import demand.

     Substitution    of the function for net exports into the balance—of—

payments identity gives us the equation for accumulation of national net
                                                                                             7.




foreign      assets:
      (7)          X(e/p, W, z)        +    p.
It    is important to note that open—market swaps between the                     central bank
and    the   domestic private sector have no direct effect on W or F in (7).

And the effect           of accumulation of national net foreign assets through a

current—account surplus ('                  > 0) on W and F is the same     regardless   of the

distribution        of   F between F          and R. Since     an increase in R, ceteris

paribus, increases the money stock, which is part of W, any                       increase   in F

will raise        W by dP independently of the              split   between F and R. Thus the

central      bank's intervention policy will have no effect on how a current—

account balance moves F and W in (7).

       The effect of an increase in F on                     in (7) is unclear.

                           -



with         <   0 and     >   0.     Below we will       conveniently   assume that SF/F = 0;

it will      quickly become apparent why this is convenient. In                   Branson (1981),
the    case where F/F < 0                  is analyzed.


       Equations (l)-(7) plus the assumption of rational expectations (or,

more precisely, perfect foresight in this non—stochastic model) give us a

complete dynamic          model in F and         ê.   Price dynamics are suppressed, but we

will   discuss     below exogenous price movements as delayed response to mone-

tary shocks.

II.D. Solution of the model.

       Solution of the model proceeds as follows. First, the rational expec-

tations assumption          is      that     is the rate of change of e. Then two        equations
                                                                                              8.




of (l)—(3), with wealth substituted from (4) can be used to solve for r and

ê as functions of M, W,                       The ê and F equations then are two dynamic

equations in e and F that can be solved for the movement in these two

variables.


       Divide equations (1) and (3) by W and differentiate totally, holding

r constant:


(8)          d() = mrdr + m.dê


              W
               Pp
             d(—) =    f r dr   + fdê
                                     e


These can be solved in matrix form as:

                                                                  dF \
(9)
        (dr\                                  r            _mi (d(-_—)\

        dê)         (mrfê
                                frm&) [r mrj                          ,)

The solution for dê is then


(10)         d =
                   mf...                  [_fr(1           + mrd()]
                            frmê


The coefficients of eF/W and M/W are the partial derivatives of the ê

adjustment function,


(11)     e   =        M
                            l    >       0;       <   0.


This is the dynamic equation to be solved along with (7) for ' to obtain

equilibrium e and F'.

       In the e, F space of Figure 1, the ê = 0 locus is a rectangular

hyperbola. This can be seen by observing that in 4, e                      and F'   enter multiplica—

tively (in W as well as the numerator eFr5, so changes in e and F that
 e
                                                   9.




             1'

          4,
                                  =0
                                             F1'

 Figure 1:        Locus where ê = 0



e




                                i=o



                                         F1'

Figure 2: Locus where ' = 0




                                      E =0




                                       F1'

Figure 3: Equilibrium path
              for e, F
                                                                                   10.




hold the product eF constant will hold ê constant. Combinations of e and

F off the locus move e away from it, as the arrows show. For example,

since        >   0 an increase in e or F from a point on the locus makes

ê >    0.

       An increase in M/W, holding eF/W constant, would shift the ê = 0

locus in Figure 1 up. This would be the result of an expansionary open—

market operation in the government debt market with dBc = dM >          0,   and no

change in FC or F. An increase in eF/W, holding M/W constant, will

shift ê = 0 down; this could result from an open—market swap between F and

B. An expansionary open—market operation in the foreign asset market, with

the central bank exchanging M for F with the private sector, would shift

ê = 0 up both by increasing M/W and reducing eF/W. This will provide the

difference between intervention in the bond or foreign—asset markets in

the model.

       For given values of z and p in the        equation (7), the F     0 locus in

e, F space is a horizontal line at the a value where X =          rF.    This is

shown in Figure 2. If e is above this value, the current—account is in

surplus and F > 0.      In section III we will introduce a "leaning against

the wind" exchange—rate policy in which the authorities attempt to reduce

the extent of jumps in the exchange rate, but not to reverse them. Thus

we rule out here the possibility that the monetary authority "over—

intervenes," and assume that the sign of           is the same as the sign of ';

this   is the same as assuming       <   1FI.   This essentially assumes that the

authorities permit the market to guide the system towards its long—run

equilibrium, but perhaps slow the movement. The assumption gives the ar-

rows showing movement in Figure 2; above F =        0, F > 0,   below it is negative.
                                                                                      11.




      An increase in z in (7) will shift the F = 0 locus down.           Given the

assumption that        + r =    0,   the extent of the shift is simply given by the

effect of a change in e on X:



          dz
                      -lX
                      —
               F=O          e

If z rises, increasing X and giving a current account surplus, e must fall

(currency appreciate) enough to restore the original value of X. An in-

crease in P will shift '        = 0 up, with

          —
          de
                      —l
          dp0
      Equilibrium of the system is shown in Figure 3. There is one saddle—

path into the equilibrium shown by the dashed line. For a given value of

F, it is assumed that following a disturbance, the market will pick the

value for e that puts the system on the saddlepath toward equilibrium.

The system would have quite different properties under a policy regime of

"over—intervention" that reversed the pattern of movement in the horizontal

direction.


II.E. Reaction to Exogenous Shocks.

II.E.l Monetary disturbance.

      Consider an (unanticipated) expansionary open—market operation in

government debt. This initially leaves W and F unchanged. There are two

extreme assumptions on price adjustment to consider: no change in P, or

dP/P = dN/M immediately.

      With no change in P as M increases, the            = 0 locus in Figure 4 does

not shift, but ê = 0 shifts up. With F initially given, the exchange
                                   12.
 e




                            t =0


                          ê—0

Figure 4: Open—market operation
           in B, no change in

 C




                            =0


                            —o



Pciar 5:
      -- Deterioration in
          competitiveness


 e




Fiure : Sluc,gish pr::E
          edjustenu
                                                                                            13.




    rate jumps (currency depreciates) from initial equilibrium E0 to E1 on

    the new saddlepath. This establishes ê < 0 as needed for asset—holders

    to hold the existing stock of F given the lower interest rate. The

rise in eIP generates a current—account surplus, and F rises with e f all—

ing toward E2. This is an extreme form of "overshooting."


        Suppose the domestic price level immediately reacts by rising by the

same proportion as the money stock. Then F = 0 also shifts up by that

same proportion. The extent of the upward shift in & = 0 depends on ini-

tial portfolio distribution and the degree of substitutability among F,

M, and B. One borderline case would be M =          eF   and m =
                                                             r
                                                                     fr   .   It   can be

seen in the expression for dê in equation (lO) that in this case a propor-

tional increase in e will maintain ê = 0.           To the extent that M >          eF   or

I   f1 > Imi,   the ê = 0 curve would shift up more than         =   0, requiring
"overshooting" and ê <     0,   *1' >   0 moving to equilibrium. The reverse ini-

tial conditions would yield "undershooting" with ê > 0,           F < 0       in the

movement to equilibrium.

II.E.2. Real disturbance.

        The effect of an unanticipated fall in z (or an increase in P) is

shown in Figure 5. The decrease in competitiveness shifts F = 0 up from

its initial intersection with ê = 0 at E0. The exchange rate jumps

(currency depreciates) from E0 to E1, and then gradually rises to E2 as

F falls. The depreciation of the currency restores current—account bal—

ance (F =    0).   The model "undershoots" in response to real disturbances.
                                                                                    14.



II.E.3. Sluggish price adjustment.

     A limiting case of sluggish price adjustment could be modelled as a

combination of Figures 4 and 5. Expansionary monetary policy would begin

this process illustrated in Figure 4. The delayed price response would

then resemble Figure 5. To the extent that the price response is lagged

and unanticipated, the e, F point would follow a path illustrated in

Figure 6. Quicker price response or anticipation would straighten the

path to E2, which may   be   to the right or left of     E depending   on initial

portfolio distribution and substitutability.

II.F. Conclusions and empirical implications.

     It is convenient to s1-rize here the basic conclusions from the

analysis so far.

     1.   Unanticipated   changes in   money, the price level, or under-
          lying   real conditions should cause a jtp in the exchange
          rate toward the new rational—expectations saddle path.

     2. Thus we should expect to see       correlation   between unantici-
          pated movements    in e and M, X, and P in the data.

          Evidence on quarterly data was presented in Branson (1983);

          monthly data are presented below.


    3..   Mov.iiient of the exchange rate following    a rca].   disturbance
          is likely to be monotonic, while monetary disturbances are
          likely to produce tIo.qershooting.ti Lagged price adjustment
          makes "multiple overshooting" possible. This can be seen
          in a combination   of   Figures 4 and 6.
                                                                                       15.


 III.    "Leaning Against the Wind" as Exchange Rate Policy

III.A. Introduction.


        There is already ample evidence that monetary authorities have gen-

erally tried to slow the movement of exchange rates. This type of inter-

vention has long been characteristic of U.S. domestic monetary policy; in

Branson (1976) I labelled this "leaning against the wind" as exchange

rate policy. Artus (1976) and Branson, Haittunen and Masson (BI'f) (l977'

presented evidence that German monetary policy responded to movements

in the exchange rate in this fashion. B1 (1977) estimated a reaction

function of the form N cthe + ...,              with   < 0   for Germany. As the ex-

change rate rose (DM depreciated), the money supply was reduced (relative

to its trend). Amano (1979) describes Japanese monetary policy as attempt-

ing to stabilize the exchange rate similarly. U.K. exchange rate policy

was discussed briefly in OECD (1977), where a regression of the form

        8e + ...,       with   rm the minimum   lending rate (R) and 8 >   0 is reported.

This suggests that when sterling depreciated (e rose), the R was

ed as a policy reaction. More recently, Mussa (1981) has presented a tho-

rough review of exchange—rate intervention which is consistent with a

"leaning—against—the—wind" model.

        The   purpose   of this section of the paper is to characterize policy in-

tervention in terms of the model of section II, to prepare for interpre-

tation of the empirical results in section IV below. The objective is not

to evaluate policy; it is to describe it. The main difference from the

previous models is the description of intervention as instantaneous and

discrete changes in asset stocks via open—market operations to reduce the

size of discontinuous ji.ps in exchange rates. This type of polIcy be-

havior is     discernabie n       the "innovac.on' corejations     in section   IV below.
                                                                                         16.



       We will begin with the description of monetary policy reaction to

real disturbances via open—market operations in government debt or f or—

eign assets. Then we study sterilized intervention in the foreign asset

market.


111.3. Monetary policy.

       Consider a real disturbance to the current account that shifts

      0 up, (rise in a) to restore equilibrium. This is illustrated in

Figure 7, where in the absence of policy intervention, the exchange rate

would jump from the initial equilibrium E0 to                and then depreciate fur-

ther to E2. If the central bank tightened money by selling bonds to the

public, holding P initially constant, the ê — 0 curve in Figure 7 would

shift down as shown by the dashed ê a            o• This   would shift the saddle

path down to the path running to E2, and reduce the exchange—rate jump to

E1. Thus instantaneous intervention would reduce the initial jump in e.

This would be an unexpected change in M, since the originating shift in

z and X was unexpected. So this type of intervention could reduce the

variability of a over time.

       If the open—market operation were done in the foreign asset market,

a   smaller quantitative intervention would          give the same shift in          0

and in   the saddle path in      Figure   7,   because   eF/W in   equation   (8) would
rise. In addition, since P would rise, the initial jump would be to a
point on the     new saddle   path below E1. Thus        intervention on the    foreign—
asset market     would,   in a sense, be more efficient than open—market opera-
tions in   the   bond market. This is essentially the same result that is ob-
tained   by Branson (1977) and Kenen (1982) under static expectations.
40




0
                                                                                18.




 III.C. Sterilized Intervention.

          There is by now ample evidence that central banks intervene in the

 foreign exchange markets but attempt to prevent the intervention from

changing the path of N. The literature was cited in Whitman (1975); more

recent results are discussed in Obstfeld (1980) (1982). In terms of the

model of section III, this is an open—market exchange of foreign assets

 for bonds by the central bank, with iB —eF initially. The result is

again a downward shift in        =   0,   as in Figure 7, plus an outward shift in

F. Thus the jump in the exchange rate is to a point below E1, since

 increases. This presents the possibility for intervention that does not

move the path of the money supply.



111.1).     Empirical, implications.


      The principal empirical implication of the present model of policy

intervention is that we should observe the intervention in the correlation

of unexpected movements or "innovations" in exchange rates with innova-

tions in money and/or reserves. Monetary intervention would give a nega-

tive correlation between exchange—rate and money innovations. Interven-

tion with interest—rate control would give a positive correlation between

exchange—rate and interest—rate innovations. If the monetary intervention

is done in the foreign—asset market, a positive correlation between

exchange—rate innovations and reserves would result. Sterilized interven-

tion would give the reserve—exchange rate correlation without a money—

exchange rate correlation. Thus we can study the correlation matrix of

innovations in section IV below to infer hypotheses about policy behavior.
                                                                               19.




IV. Empirical Results Using Vector Autoregression

IV.A. Introduction.

     A useful technique for studying the relationships between the inno-

vations in money, the current account balance, relative price levels, interest

 rates, reserves, industrial production, and the exchange rate is vector autore—

gression (VAR). Here each variable of a system is regressed against the lagged

values of all variables (including itself) in the system, to extract any

information existing in the movements of these variables. The residuals

from these "vector autoregressions" are the innovations ——     the unantici—

•pated movements ——   in   the variables. We can study the correlations of

the residuals to see if they are consistent with the hypotheses implied

by the theory of sections II and III. The vector autoregression techni-

que is introduced and justified by Sims (1980). A clear exposition is

presented in Sargent (1979). Interesting and instructive applications

are discussed in Taylor (1980), Ashenfelter and Card (1981), and Fischer

(1981)


     Here I estimate systems of VARs on monthly data for each of the four

countries, the U.S., the U.K., Germany, and Japan. The data are described

in Table 1. Two systems were estimated for each country. Both include the

effective exchange rate e, the current account balance CAB, and the effec-

tive relative price PIP, the interest rate IS, industrial production Y,

reserves R; the difference between the two is that one includes Ml and the

other M3. Industrial production is added to control for business—cycle ef-

fects on the demand for money.
                                                                         20.




                   Table 1: VARIABLE DEFINITIONS AND DATA


I. Variable Name

            e        effective nominal exchange rate, in units of domestic
                     currency per unit of foreign currency as computed by
                     the IMP.

                     relative wholesale prices (ratio of home to competitors
                     indices).

       Ml            narrow money, as defined by the IMP in the International
                     Financial Statistics (IFS),

       M3            broad money, as defined by the IMP (Ml plus quasi—money)
                     in the IFS

       CAB           current account balance.

       IS            short—term interest rate.

       R             reserves.

       Y             industrial production.
                                                                         21.



II.   Countries


          United States
          United Kingdom
          Federal Republic of Germany
          Japan


III. Data

      1. All data are monthly, and cover 1971:1 to 1980:12 unless
          otherwise noted.

      2. Exchange Rates: e is the log of the average effective ex—
          change rate during month t. The units are domestic currency
          per unit of foreign currency. The index is based on a geome-
          trically weighted average of bilateral rates between the home
          and 13 other industrial countries. The weights are the same
          as those used to calculated P/P. Base: 1975 = 100. Source:
          IMF. Note that these are not the MERM rates published in IFS.

      3. Relative Prices: The index is a log of the ratio of home to
          foreign monthly wholesale price indices. P is a composite
          and uses the same weights as e does (see above). Base = 1975.
          Source: IMP. This index is not the same as that published in
          the IFS. Our data is based on indices in local (not a common)
          currency. Series length: 1971:7 to 1980:12

      4. Money Stocks: This is the log of the monthly money stock.
          German and Japanese data are end of the period money stocks
          from IFS, "money" for Ml and "money + quasi—money" for N3.
          UK data are from OECD, MaIn EconomIc Indicators, varIous is-
          sues. Series length: 1971:10—1980:12. U.S. data ar monthly
          averages from Citibank Economic Data Base.

      5. Current Account: This is the dollar value of the flow during
          the month (not measured in logs). German data are from Deutsche
          Bundesbank, Monthly Report, various issues converted to U.S.
          dollars using line rf of IFS. Japanese data are from Bank of
          Japan, Economic Statistics Monthly, various issues. U.S. and
          U.K. monthly data are quarterly data from IFS (described in
          Branson (1983)), interpolated following the monthly trade bal—
          ance from IFS converted to dollars using line rf in the case
          of the U.K. The interpolation was performed using the procedure
          of Chow and Lin (1971).
                                                              22.




6. Short—term interest rate: Data are taken from IFS as
    indicated in the Table on "Money Market and Euro Dollar
    Rates." Source: IFS country pages

7. Reserves: These are the dollar value of reserves mea-
    sured at end of period. Source: IFS. These series
    did not vary significantly from the series adjusted for
    valuation changes provided by the IMP.

8. Industrial Production: This is the log of the monthly
    index of industrial production. Source: IFS.
                                                                         23.




      The lengths of the lags in the VARs were chosen by a series of pre—

liminary univariate autogressions for each variable. The lag length in

the VAR for each variable was set at the maximum number of significant

lags in the univariate autoregression for that variable. The procedure

is described in some detail in Branson (1983). The one exception is

Japan, where the current—account balance has significant lags at one

month and five months. Separate VAR systems were estimated for Japan

using one and five lags on CAB. The results were essentially the same,

so only the one—lag system is reported here. The lag lengths and details

of specification are summarized in Table 2.

      The VARs, then, are a system of regressions of the current value of

each of the variables listed in Table 2 on the indicated lags on all the

variables, with the same set of regressors for each equation. A separate

system is estimated for each country. The residuals from the VARs are

denoted by a ' over the dependent variable.

      After the VAR systems are estimated, we correlate their residuals to

study the relationship among innovations. The correlations are given for

the systems with Ml for the U.S., Germany, and Japan, and both Ml and M3

for the U.K. in Tables 3—7 below. The two sets of correlations are suf-

ficiently similar in the cases of the U.S., Germany; and Japan, that sep-

arate discussions of them are unnecessary. Each table includes the corre-

lation coefficients among the VAR "innovations" and in parentheses the

probability of that correlation occurring under the null hypothesis that

the true correlation is zero. In discussing the correlations, we will fo-

cus on the correlations particularly relevant for analyzing exchange—rate
                                                                        24.




       Table 2: Variables included in Vector Autoregression Systems



Variable                      Length of Lag

                      U.K.         Germany         U.K.         Japan


in e                   2              2             2             2


in P/P                 2              2             2             2


in M                   2              3             1             2


R                      2              1             2             2


IS                     3              2             2             2


CAB                    3              2             2             1


in Y                   2              1             1             1




1. All VARs included ii monthly dummies and an intercept.

2. Regressions estimated in monthly data 1973:7 to 1980:12.

3. Two VAR systems were estimated for each country, one
    with Ml, the other with M3.
                                                                            25.




determination and policy. Detailed discussion of all the results would be

far too tedious.


IV.B. United States

      The correlations of VAR innovations for the U.S. Ml system are shown

in Table 3. Remember that the effective nominal exchange rate is defined

in units of home currency per unit of foreign exchange. So an increase in

e is a depreciation.


      The first row of Table 3 gives the correlations of exchange—rate

innovations with those in the other variables. The positive sign for Ml

and the negative sign for the short—term interest rate IS are consistent

with monetary policy driving the exchange rate. The negative correlation

of e and R, and the positive correlation of CAB and R are both consistent

with "leaning against the wind" intervention in the exchange markets. An

unanticipated increase in the current account surplus or appreciation of

the dollar (a negative )   is   significantly associated with an increase

in U.S. reserves. The reserve and Ml innovations have an insignificant

negative correlation, indicating that exchange—market intervention is

sterilized. The M3 VAR innovations for the U.S. have the same pattern.

      The hypotheses that I would infer from the U.S. data are as follows.

On a monthly time scale money and interest rates move the exchange rate,

with little role for relative prices. Monetary policy is essentially

oriented toward domestic targets; movement in the exchange rate is a side

effect. The U.S. monetary authorities intervene and sterilize, but do not

follow a tight rule. This shows up in the strong correlation between R

and CAB, and in the correlation between R and e.
                                                                            26.




           Table 3 : Correlations of Innovations from U.S. Monthly
                     Vector Autoregression System with Ml




       e         P/P            Ml     R       IS     CAB      Y


      1.00      —.00           .18    —.24    —.48    —.0      .11

                (.99)         (.10)   (.02)   (.00)   (.43)   (.29)



P/P             1.00          —.12     .01     .27    —.19    —.07
                              (.25)   (.93)   (.01)   (.08)   (.49)

 "U

Ml                            1.00    —.17    —.05     .06    —.02
                                      (.11)   (.67)   (.57)   (.85)



 R                                    1.00    —.08     .21     .02

                                              (.48)   (.06)   (.85)

 "U
 IS                                           1.00     .06    —.02
                                                      (.58)   (.85)



CAB                                                   1.00    —.04
                                                              (.74)

"U
Y                                                             1.00




             Note :     CAB    is
                               the monthly interpolation of the quarterly
                        current account using the monthly trade data and
                        the Chow—Lin interpolation procedure.
                                                                           27.


IV.C. Germany

        The innovation correlations of the Ml system for Germany are shown

in Table 4. In the first row we see a very strong positive correlation

between exchange—rate and relative price innovations. This could come

from exchange rates causing prices or vice versa, but through innovations

and   market   expectations rather than a tight PPP relationship. The corre-

lation of exchange—rate innovations with reserves must reflect leaning—

against—the—wind policy in terms of exchange—market intervention. The

lack of correlation between money and reserves or exchange rates indicates

that intervention is sterilized. The negative correlation between money

and industrial production could indicate that monetary policy attempts to

stabilize real output. The German M3 VAR correlations show essentially

the same pattern.


       Thus the German data suggest fairly strongly a situation in which

(a) price and exchange—rate innovations go together, and (b) the authori-

ties react to exchange—rate movements through sterlized intervention. This

is consistent with the earlier results of BHN (1977) and of Herring—Marston

(1977) for the fixed—rate regime.


IV.D. United Kingdom

       The U.K. correlations are shown in Tables 5 and 6 for the Ml and M3

systems, respectively. Comparison of the correlations between exchange—

rate and money innovations suggests that news about M3, but not Ml, moves

the exchange rate. The monthly correlation between innovations in rela-

tive prices and the exchange rate is virtually zero. In both tables we

see correlations between exchange—rate innovations and those in reserves
                                                                       28.



           Table 4     Correlations of Innovations from German Monthly
                       Vector Autorgressjon System with Ml




             e       P/P       Ml      R        IS     CAB       Y


      e     1.00      .22    —.05     —.33     .14      .16    —.01
                     (.04)    (.64)   (.00)   (.21)    (.14)   (.96)

 P/P                 1.00    —.00      .13     .07      .16      .03

                              (.97)   (.23)   (.52)    (.15)   (.78)


                              1.00     .03    —.17      .11    —.24
                                      (.81)   (.12)   (.32)    (.02)

      1\
    R                                 1.00    —.08      .02      .08

                                              (.46)   (.84)    (.48)

    f'J
 ES                                           1.00      .04    —.09
                                                      (.69)    (.41)

 "I
CAB                                                   1.00     —.06
                                                               (.58)


Y                                                              1.00




           Note : CAB are the monthly data from Monthly Report
                  of the Deutsche Bundesbank.
                                                                      29.



             Table 5    : Correlations of Innovations from U.K. Monthly
                          Vector Autoregression System with Ml.




              1\J
                                    r\J             rJ
              e         P/P        Ml       R       IS      CAB       Y


             1.00      —.02       —.08    —.36      .30    —.05     —.07
                       (.83)      (.47)   (.00)    (.00)    (.65)   (.52)


 P/
      l.%J


                       1.00        .03     .18     —.05    —.11      .09
                                  (.80)   (.10)    (.63)   (.31)    (.41)


 Mi                               1.00    —.23     —.25    —.09     —.13
                                          (.03)    (.02)   (.39)    (.24)


  R                                       1.00     —.09    —.27      .27

                                                   (.41)   (.01)    (.01)

  r'J

 IS                                                1.00    —.06     —.14
                                                           (.55)    (.19)


CAB                                                        1.00     —.14
                                                                    (.19)

f'J

Y                                                                   1.00




              Note     CAB is interpolated quarterly data as in U.S. case.
                                                          30.




      Table 6   : Correlations of Innovations from U.K. Monthly
                  Vector Autoregressici System with M3.




                P/P       M3      R        IS     CAB       Y



e      1.00     —.07     .25    —.42      .35    —.05     —.03

                (.52)   (.02)   (.00)    (.00)   (.66)     (.76)



P/P             1.00    —.19      .28    —.17    —.09       .02

                        (.08    (.01)    (.12)    (.42)    (.83)

f'J


M3                      1.00    —.36      .16      .25    —.17
                                 (.Ô0)   (.15)    (.02)    (.11)


R                                1.00    —.25    —.17       .12

                                         (.02)    (.12)    (.27)


IS                                       1.00    —.12     —.02
                                                  (.29)    (.85)


CAB                                               1.00    —.14
                                                           (.20)

r'J


Y                                                          1.00
                                                                            31.



 and short—term interest rates that are a strong indication of leaning—

 against—the—wind intervention and interest rate policy. The negative cor-

 relations between reserve and money innovations suggest that exchange—

 market intervention is over—sterilized; unanticipated increases in re-

 serves go along with decreases in both Ml and M3 on a monthly basis.

 Thus the U.K. data show a strong policy reaction to exchange—rate changes,

 with some independent effect of M3 on the exchange rate.



IV.E. Japan

      The results from the Ml system for Japan are shown in Table 7.

The results from the M3 system are essenta1ly the same. The correlations

of exchange—rate innovations with those in Ml and CAB indicate that both

of those variables drive the exchange rate, consistent with. the theory of

section II. There is also a strong positive correlation between exchange—

rate and relative price innovations.

      The reserve correlations with the exchange rate and CAB strongly sug-

gest "leaning—against—the—wind't intervention, with the central bank ab-

sorbing part of the CAB innovations to reduce movement in the exchange rate.

The lack of correlation of Ml with reserves or the exchange rate indicates

sterilization. The negative correlation of Ml with industrial production

suggests that, as in Germany,   monetary   policy is aimed at stabilizing real

output.


      n interesting story emerges from the Japanese correlations. They

suggest that monetary policy is oriented towards domestic objectives, and

moves the exchange rate, as in section II. The authorities intervene to

neutralize this effect, and they also attempt to sterilize Ml from the

intervention.
                                                                          32.



IV.F. Summary of VAR   Results   on Policy

      An interesting view of how the monetary system and interdependence

have worked in the 1970s emerges from the VAR innovation correlations.

My interpretation, or inferred set of hypotheses, is as follows. The

U.S. sets monetary policy, largely by controlling quantities, with domes-

tic objectives foremost. On a monthly basis the market looks to inno-

vations in money and interest rates to set the U.S. exchange rate. The

U.S. or foreign monetary authorities attempt sterilized intervention oc-

casionally.

      In Japan, monetary policy is also set according to domestic objec-

tives. As in the U.S., this moves the exchange rate, but a stronger at-

tempt is made to neutralize this effect through sterilized intervention

in Japan than in the U.S.

      Movements in the U.S. and Japanese effective rates, caused partly

by fundamentals and partly by policy, are mirrored instantaneously in

the U.K. and German effective rates, and their policy reacts. The reac-

tion appears as "defensive" interest—rate movements sensitive to ex-

change—rate innovations, and largely sterilized intervention in the for-

eign exchange market. Thus a story in which domestically—oriented policy

in the U.S. and Japan is transmitted to the U.K. and Germany is consis-

tent with the VAR innovation results. This is a familiar story in

Europe.
                                                                                33.




                Table 7        Correlations of Innovations from Japan Monthly
                               Vector Autoregression System with Ml.




                e'J                   "I     r.'J              "I       'lj
                e      P/P           Mi       R       Is      CAB        Y


          e   1 .00       11         .21   — .42     .16     —.26      .05

                      (.00)        (.06)    (.00)   (.13)    (.02)   (.64)

    (\J

P/P                   1 .00         .23    —.16      .23     —.27     .05

                                   (.03)   (.15)    (.03)    (.01)   (.63)


 MI                                1.00    —.10      .29     —.11    —.34
                                             35)    (.0 1)   (.31)   (.00)


    R                                      1.00     —.11      .31     .og
                                                    (.33)    (.00)   (.49)
 I',
Is                                                  1 .00    —.11     .06
                                                             (.30)   (.60)

CAB                                                          1 .00   — .09

                                                                     (.43)


Y                                                                    1 .00




               Note   CAB are monthly data from Bank of Japan,
                      Economic Statistics Monthly.
                                     References


 1. Amano, A.,   1979, Flexible exchange rates and macroeconomic management:
      A study of the'Japanese experience in 1973—1978. Kobe University,
      mimeographed.

 2. Ar-tus, J., 1976, Exchange race stability and managed floating: the
     experience of the Federal Republic of Germany, International Monetary
     Fund Staff Papers 23, July, 12—333.

 3. Ashenfelter, 0. and Card, D., 1981, Time—series representations of
     economic variables and alternative models of the labor market,
     University of Bristol, Working Paper.
 4.   Branson, W.H., 1975, Coent on bLv.N. Whitman: Global monecarism and
      the monetary approach to the balance of payments, Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity 6, Number 3, 537—542.
5.    Branson, W.H., 1976, Leaning against the wind as exchange rate policy,
      paper presented at Graduate Institute of International Studies,
      Geneva, revised 1981 for book publication by the Institute.

6.    Bran.son,   W.H., 1977, Asset markets and relative prices in exchange rate
      determination, Sozialwissenschaftliche Annalen    1,   69—89.

 7.   Branson,   W.H, H. Halt:uxien and P. Masson, 1977, Exchange rates in the
      short   rim: the dollar—deutschemark rate, European Economic Review 10
      Decem.ber, 303—324.

 8. Branson, W.H. (1980), Monetary and fiscal policy with adjustable
     exchange rates, in U.S. Congress, Joint Economic Coittee, The
     International Economy: U.S. Role in a World Market, (Government Print-
     ing Off ice, Washington), Dec. 17, 1980, pp. 459—500.

 9. Branson,      W.H. (1981), Macroeconomic determinants of   real exchange
      rates, NBER. Working   Paper No. 801, November.

10.   Branson, W.H., (1983), Exchange rate policy after a decade of 'floating,' in
      J.F.0. Bilson and R.C. Marston (eds), Exchange Rate Theory and Practice
      (University of Chicago Press).

11. Chow, G.C. and A. Lin (1971), Best linear unbiased interpolation, distribution,
     and extrapolation of time series by related series, Review of Economics and
     Statistics 53, 372—75.

12.   Dornbusch, L, 1980, Exchange rate economics: where do we stand?
      Brooki.ngs Papers on Economic Activity II, Number 1, 143—186.
13 Fischer, S., 1981, Re.lat:ive shocks, relative price variability and
     inflation, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 12, Number 2.
 14. Frenkel, J., 1981b, Flexible exchange rates, prices and the role of
      "news": Lessons from the 1970's, Journal of Political Economy 89
      August, 665—705.

 15. Herring, R.J. and R.C. Marston (1977), National Monetary Policies and
      International Financial Markets (North—Holland, Amsterdam).

16. Kenen, P.3. (1982), Effects of intervention and        sterilization
                                                                   in the
     short run and the long run, in R.N. Cooper, P.3. Kenen, J.B. de Macedo,
     J. van Ypersele (eds), The International Monetary System under Flexible
     Exchange Rates: Essays in honor of Robert Triffin, (Ballinger, Cambridge
      MA.,   1982),   pp. 51—68.

17. Kouri, P.J.K., (1978), Balance of payments and the foreign exchange
     market: a dynamic partial equilibrium model, Yale University, Cowles
     Foundation Discussion Paper No. 510.

18. Musea, M. (1981), The Role of Official Intervention, Occasional Paper
     6, New York, Group of 30.

19. Obstfeld, M., 1980, Portfolio balance, monetary policy, and the
     Dollar—Deutschemark exchange rate, Columbia University Economics Dept.,
     Discussion Paper No. 62,. March 1982.

20. Obstfeld, M., 1982, Can we sterilize? Theory and evidence, forthcoming
     American Economic Review, May 1982.

21. OECD Interfutures (1977), Long term aspects of the monetary system,
    .r'dmeo, OECD Paris, September 30, 1977.

22. Sargent, T., 1979, Estimating vector autoregressions using methods
     not based on explicit economic theories, Federal Reserve Bank of
     Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Summer, 8—15.

23. Sims,    C., 1980,    Macroeconomics and reality, Econometrica 48,
      January.,   1—48.

24.   Taylor, J., 1980, Output and price stability: an international
      comparison, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 2, February,
      109—132.

25. Whitman, M.v.N. (1975), Global uiouetarjgm     and the monetary approach
      to the balance of payments,    Brookings Paper on Economic Activity,
      3:1975, pp. 471—536.
