NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STUDYING TEXTS:
A GEMARA OF THE ISRAELI ECONOMY
Michael W. Klein
Working Paper 11352
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11352
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005

To be published in the Israel Economic Review. I thank Assaf Razin for asking me to undertake this project,
and Josh Angrist, Avi Ben-Bassat, Haim Ben-Shahar, Joseph Djivre, Zvi Eckstein, June Flanders, Karnit
Flug, Ruth Klinov, Shaul Lach, Nissan Liviatan, Michael Michaely, Efraim Sadka, Michel Strawczynski,
Nathan Sussman, and Joseph Zeira for helpful advice and stimulating conversation. I also thank Melissa
Tritter for her assistance.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Michael W. Klein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Studying Texts: A Gemara of the Israeli Economy
Michael W. Klein
NBER Working Paper No. 11352
May 2005
JEL No. N0
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews six English-language books on the economy of Israel. Each book was written or
edited by Israelis, and each is from a different decade. The earliest book, Don Patinkin’s The Israel
Economy: The First Decade, was written in the late 1950s, and the most recent volume, The Israeli
Economy, 1985

1998: From Government Intervention to Market Economics (edited by Avi Ben-

Bassat), was published in 2002. While each book considers the Israeli economy at a different stage
of its development, five common themes appear: (i) the relevant comparison group for considering
the Israeli economy, (ii) the challenges of immigration, integration and inequality, (iii) the
appropriate roles of the government and markets, (iv) openness and dependence, and (v) inflation,
crisis, and stabilization. Overall, the chronology of economic views presented in these books
corresponds to an increasing acceptance of the role of markets and an increasing desire for open trade
in goods and assets.
Michael W. Klein
Fletcher School
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
michael.klein@tufts.edu

Studying Texts: A Gemara of the Israeli Economy
Books discussed in this review:
Don Patinkin, The Israel Economy: The First Decade, Jerusalem: Maurice Falk Project
for Economic Research in Israel, c. 1959.
Nadav Halevi and Ruth Klinov-Malul, The Economic Development of Israel,
Praeger Special Studies in International Economics and Development, Published
in cooperation with the Bank of Israel, Frederick A. Praeger, Publishers, NY,
Washington, London, c. 1968.
Michael Michaely, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Israel,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Columbia University Press, NY, c. 1975.
Yoram Ben-Porath, ed., The Israeli Economy: Maturing Through Crises,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, c. 1986
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka, The Economy of Modern Israel: Malaise and Promise,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, c. 1993.
Avi Ben-Bassat, editor, The Israeli Economy, 1985 – 1998: From Government
Intervention to Market Economics, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., c. 2002.

Debate is deeply embedded in the Jewish tradition. Perhaps the best example of
this is the Talmud, one of the great intellectual achievements of Jewish thought. The
Talmud consists of the Mishnah, the oral tradition that was compiled in the 2nd century of
the Common Era, and the Gemara, subsequent commentaries on the Mishhah that were
written over the next few centuries. The Gemara records conversations and arguments
across generations on the proper interpretation of Jewish law.
This essay presents something like a Gemara of economic policies and economic
challenges for the State of Israel. In this essay, I review six books on the Israeli
economy, all of which were either written or edited by Israeli economists. Each of these
six books was published in a different decade, with the earliest one written in the late

1

1950s and the most recent one published in 2002. While each book reflects the main
challenges of the time that it was written, there is, nevertheless, a conversation that takes
place across time. Thus, the goal of this essay is to use these Israeli sources to construct a
type of economic Gemara that, like the Talmud, records intergenerational conversations,
although, in this case, the conversations take place over decades, not centuries, and the
subjects include topics like the role of government and the promises and pitfalls of
international trade and investment.
This essay, like the Talmud, is divided into six sections, each of which concerns a
particular topic. The first section sets each of the six books reviewed here in its historical
context. The economic development of Israel, since its founding in 1948, is marked by
great achievement, but also by periods of great challenges. The books, as products of
their respective eras, focus on the most noteworthy achievements, and the most
compelling problems, of the times in which they were written. Thus, an understanding of
the evolution of the topics discussed in these books must refer to the chronology of
events facing the Israeli economy.
A chronology of the Israeli economy shows its remarkable transformation across
the decades. But, despite this transformation, certain topics are addressed time and again
across these volumes. Sections 2 through 6 of this review develop the conversations,
across books, on five topics;
(i)

the relevant comparison group for considering the Israeli economy

(ii)

the challenges of immigration, integration and inequality

(iii)

the appropriate roles of the government and markets

(iv)

openness and dependence

(v)

inflation, crises and stabilization

2

As will be discussed below, the emphasis placed on each of these themes varies across
the six books, both because of the variation in the events that most commanded attention
at the times the books were written, and because of differences in authors’ interests.
Nevertheless, issues such as the integration of new immigrants, which was a dominant
theme in the first years of Israel’s existence and, accordingly, has a place of prominence
in Patinkin’s 1959 book, reappeared in the 1990s with the influx of olim (immigrants)
from the former Soviet Union. The conversation across decades evident in these books,
on topics like immigration, openness, the role of markets, and stabilization, reveals much
about both changes in the Israeli economy and the evolution of economic thought in
Israel from the early 1950s to the present day.

1. The Books and Their Times
The economy of the State of Israel in its first few years of existence reflected a
range of influences, including the economy of the preceding yeshuv (the period of British
mandate), the collectivist tradition of Zionism, the waves of immigration before and
immediately after the founding of the State, the effects of the war declared on Israel at the
moment of its birth, the impact of aid from the diaspora and from foreign governments,
and the consequences of the displacement of the Arab population of Palestine. This was
a time when the unsettled and rapidly changing economy reflected a general situation of
change and uncertainty.
Once the ongoing fighting in the War of Independence ended in 1949, the
government undertook efforts to develop the economy. These included, during the first
few years of the State’s existence, pervasive price controls and rationing. Government

3

spending at this time was largely financed by a monetary expansion; credit to the central
government increased at a rate of 75 percent per annum between December 1948 and
September 1951 (Patinkin, pp. 112 – 113) and, as a consequence of this, the money
supply grew at an annual rate of 36 percent during this period (Patinkin, p. 108). The
price controls, coupled with the monetary expansion, led to widespread shortages, the
development of a black market, and, ultimately, a crisis that began in the autumn of 1951.
From the perspective of the late 1950s, the crisis of 1951 appeared as a watershed
to Don Patinkin. In his book, The Israel Economy: The First Decade, he wrote that the
1951 crisis led to a greater understanding, among government officials, of the role of the
price mechanism. Accordingly, the “New Economic Plan” introduced in 1952 scrapped
much of the rationing in the economy. The plan’s increased use of the price mechanism,
however, did not represent a full embrace of a free market since, for example, multiple
exchange rates were maintained and there continued to be pervasive import duties.
Nevertheless, Patinkin predicted that the lasting legacy of the 1951 crisis was that no
government would again try to impose comprehensive non-market controls.
The dominant economic event of the first years of Israel’s existence, one that left
a permanent legacy, was the mass migration to the country of Jews from Europe and
Asia.1 It is noteworthy that the first of the five chapters of Patinkin’s The Israel
Economy: The First Decade is entitled “Labor and Immigration.” Immigration in the
1950s occurred in waves, as has been the case throughout the State’s history, with more
than half of the 250,000 immigrants who arrived in Israel in the years 1953 – 1959

1

Although one could easily argue that the dominant event, economic or otherwise, was the continued
existence of the State in the face of the onslaught of its neighbors’ armies.

4

making aliya in either 1956 from Egypt, in the wake of the Sinai crisis, or in 1957 from
Hungary and Poland, after civil unrest in those countries.
These waves of immigration made the task of providing jobs for its citizens a
major challenge facing Israel during this period. Fortunately, after poor economic
performance in 1953 and 1954, the economy began the so-called “Israel Miracle” with
rapid growth in the rest of the 1950s and into the 1960s. As shown in Table 1, real
annual GDP growth between 1954 and 1959 averaged 11.8 percent and per-capita
business-sector product grew an average of 8.4 percent per annum during this period,
even as population increased over 22 percent.

Years

GDP
Growth
Rate
(%)

Table 1: Israel Macroeconomic Data

Business
Unemploy. Inflation Net Overall
Total Public
Sector
Rate
Rate
Public Sector Sector
Product
(percent)
(percent) Debt (% of
Expenditures
per capita
GDP)
(% of GDP)
growth
rate (%)
1954 – 1959 11.8
8.4
6.81
5.41
1960 – 1972 9.2
6.4
4.7
6.92
70.2
39.73
1973 – 1985 3.5
1.0
4.2
117.9
138.8
74.53
1986 – 1991 4.6
3.0
8.1
18.1
128.8
59.0
1992 – 2000 5.3
3.5
8.5
7.9
87.4
53.8
2001 – 2004 1.0
-1.3
10.2
1.8
86.5
53.0
1
Data are from Bank of Israel. = 1954 – 1958, unemployment data from Patinkin (Table 7).
2
= 1962 – 1972. 3 = old System of National Account for 1960 – 1979 data.
Patinkin offers some calculations to address the source of this impressive growth
performance. His conclusion is that “the growth since 1953 has to a significant degree
been the result of the increasing efficiency with which the economy operated.” (p. 79). A
somewhat different opinion, one that gives less weight to efficiency gains and more to
labor and capital accumulation, is presented by Moshe Syrquin in his contribution to the
1986 Ben-Porath book. Syrquin attributes 40 percent of the growth in output to total
5

factor productivity growth over the period 1950 – 1970. But he also notes that “The
relatively low contribution of increases in efficiency to output growth conceals the
magnitude of the achievement of having incorporated into the productive process the vast
increase in inputs while improving their efficiency.” (p. 49)
As Syrquin’s calculations suggest, the “Israel miracle” continued to be the context
for the Israeli economy when Nadav Halevi and Ruth Klinov wrote The Economic
Development of Israel, which was published in 1968.2 As shown in Table 1, the average
rate of GDP growth from 1960 to 1972 remained high, at 9.2 percent per annum. But,
during the mid-1960s when Halevi and Klinov wrote their book, there were signs that
things might have started to go awry. Inflationary pressures in the late 1950s and early
1960s, coupled with balance of payments difficulties, led to a second New Economic
Policy in February 1962. One component of this policy was a devaluation of the Israel
Lira from IL1.8 / US$1 to IL3.0 / US$1. This devaluation was accompanied by an
agreement by the Histadrut, the organization that oversaw a widespread cooperative
movement, to a two-year freeze in real wages (but not nominal wages) which Halevi and
Klinov characterize as a “complete failure.” Inflation pressures continued in the wake of
the devaluation, and, in 1965, the Israeli economy entered its first recession since 1953.3
One might date the end of the Israel economic miracle at the time of the onset of this
recession. Alternatively, since the economy entered a renewed period of growth in the

2

Halevi and Klinov were assigned to teach a course at Hebrew University on the Israeli economy, but
finding a lack of sources useful for the classroom, wrote The Economic Development of Israel.
3

The inflation rate rose from 4.5 percent in 1964 to 7.0 percent in 1965 and 7.8 percent in 1966. The
business sector growth rate per capita fell from 5.7 percent in 1965 to -3.1 percent in 1966 and -2.9 percent
in 1967. Unemployment rose from 3.6 percent in 1965 to 7.4 percent and 10.4 percent in 1966 and 1967,
respectively.

6

wake of its victory in the 1967 Six-Day War, one might date the end of the Israel
economic miracle at the time of the Yom Kippur War in 1973.4
The shift in the macroeconomic environment in the mid-1960s described above
was accompanied by an important change in the microeconomic environment with
respect to trade. The second “New Economic Policy” represented an effort to decrease
the distortions in the markets for exports and imports that arose due to multiple exchange
rates, export premiums and subsidies, and import tariffs and controls. Michael Michaely
describes the distortions in place before 1963, and the goals and accomplishments of the
second New Economic Policy, in his 1975 book Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic
Development: Israel. Michaely’s book is more narrowly focused than the other five
reviewed here since he was contributing to a National Bureau of Economic Research
series that published books on foreign trade regimes and economic development in ten
different countries. Nevertheless, in its description of efforts to foster the role of the
market with respect to international trade, it provides valuable insights into efforts to
liberalize Israeli economy.
The dominant economic challenges facing Israel for more than a dozen years after
the 1973 Yom Kippur war, however, involved macroeconomic instability rather than
microeconomic liberalization. The average annual inflation rate was 40 percent between
1974 and 1977. This was partly a response to the worldwide energy and food price
shocks of this era. But a more specific shock for Israel was the defense build-up after the
Yom Kippur War. Eitan Berglas, in his chapter “Defense and the Economy” in the
Yoram Ben-Porath volume, presents statistics that show that defense expenditures
4

In the five years from 1968 to 1972, the average growth rate of business sector growth per capita was 10.1
percent and the average unemployment rate was 4.1 percent.

7

represented about 10 percent of GNP during the 1962 – 1966 period, 21 percent of GNP
during the 1968 – 1972 period, and about 29 percent of GNP in the 1974 – 1980 period.
This increase is consistent with the overall fiscal situation, as indicated by the statistics in
Table 1 showing that both total public expenditures and public-sector debt between 1973
and 1985 were about twice the levels (as a percent of national income) as in the 1960 to
1972 period.
In an effort to combat inflation, the government undertook contractionary
monetary and fiscal policies beginning in 1974. Partly due to the unpopularity of these
policies, as well as dissatisfaction with the general economic conditions, the 1977
election resulted in the so-called “political upheaval” in which the Likud party outpolled
the Labor party and, for the first time in the history of Israel, Labor was not a part of the
ruling coalition.5 The policies of the Likud government did not stem inflationary
pressures, however, and the rate of inflation continued to rise, reaching 133 percent in
1980.
A series of failed stabilization efforts in the first half of the 1980s contributed to
the growing concern about the fate of the Israeli economy. This concern, as well as a
persistent hope in the face of difficult circumstances, is reflected in the title of the 1986
book edited by Yoram Ben-Porath, The Israeli Economy: Maturing Through Crises. As
an edited volume, this book is more wide-ranging in the topics it covers than the earlier
books reviewed here. Some of the chapters in Ben-Porath’s book, which was completed
in the summer of 1985 just as the successful stabilization process of the economy was

5

Other reasons that 1977 election saw the Labor party failing to head a coalition government for the first
time in Israel’s history include dissatisfaction with the conduct of the Yom Kippur War, a series of
financial scandals, and a shift to the right of the National Religious Party as well as a large segment of the
Sephardi electorate.

8

beginning, described the antecedents to this macroeconomic crisis, and the first,
unsuccessful, attempts to resolve it. 6 Other chapters in this book focused on other, more
long-standing, challenges facing the economy of Israel in the mid-1980s, including
inequality and the redistribution of income, the balance of payments, and the role of
defense in the economy.
The focus of economic policy in the mid-1980s, however, was not on these
chronic, long-standing challenges, but, instead, on the acute macroeconomic crisis facing
Israel at that time. The uneven, but ultimately successful, path to the resolution of this
macroeconomic crisis is chronicled in the 1993 book by Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka,
The Economy of Modern Israel: Malaise and Promise. They pointed out the importance
of the political commitment to stabilization, a commitment that was made more credible
both by the formation of a national unity government in which Labor and Likud shared
power after the 1984 election, and by the severity of the circumstances by the summer of
1985.
After several failed efforts, the successful phase of the stabilization of the Israeli
economy began with the heterodox program introduced in July 1985. The initial success
of the stabilization program included a decrease in inflation, from 445 percent in 1984 to
185 percent in 1985 and 20 percent in 1986. There was also an increase in real economic
activity, with the annual growth in business sector product per capita rising from 0.4
percent in 1984 to 4.3 percent in 1985 and 3.6 percent in 1986. But, in the second-half
of 1987, the economy slid into recession, an event that Razin and Sadka maintained was
“the inevitable outcome of the economic policy of 1986 – 1988.” (p. 49) Ultimately,
6

This distinction between the date of completion of this book and its copyright date is important because
the book’s contents do not reflect the watershed events of the summer of 1985.

9

however, the economy did recover in the late 1980s and early 1990s, a time when there
was a new wave of immigrants from the former Soviet Union. As with previous waves
of immigration, this one both presented challenges for integrating the olim into the
economy and offered opportunities in terms of greater macroeconomic demand and
enriching the economy with skilled citizens.
Another challenge facing Israel at the time Razin and Sadka wrote their book was
the Intifada in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, which began in December 1987.
These two areas had been occupied by Israel since the Six Day War in 1967. As Razin
and Sadka point out, the Intifada began at a time when Israel was already entering a
recession, but they argue that “The Intifada, by itself, could not have pulled the Israeli
economy into a severe slump because the economies of the West Bank and Gaza are very
small relative to the Israeli economy.” (p. 71) They do show, however, that the Intifada
contributed to economic distress in the West Bank and, to a greater extent, in Gaza. At
the time Sadka and Razin completed their book, the first Intifada was “still intense” (p.
96), although its intensity had waned by time the book was published in 1993.7
The use of the word “Modern” by Razin and Sadka in the title of their 1993 book
implicitly refers to the post-1985 period, a time when there was a greater consensus
behind, and movement towards, liberalization and free markets than in earlier periods.
The macroeconomic crisis of the early 1980s helped forge this consensus for economic
reform. Another crisis in this period, the October 1983 Bank Share Crisis, also helped
forge opinion in favor of a greater role of markets and less government intervention.
With almost a decade’s perspective, Razin and Sadka discussed the Bank Share Crisis in
7

The contributions to the Ben-Bassat volume, The Israel Economy, 1985 – 1998, were completed before
the beginning of the second intifada in the autumn of 2000.

10

The Economy of Modern Israel: Malaise and Promise, writing “The mechanisms through
which banks raised their share capital was by far the greatest scandal in Israel’s financial
history.” (pp. 189 – 190). Banks ‘regulated’ the price of their own shares, and this led to
annual returns on bank equities of 30 percent to 40 percent per annum. These kinds of
returns are clearly unsustainable and, since something that can’t go on forever won’t,
there was a crash. This market manipulation also shows the lack of a deep, wellfunctioning capital market in Israel at that time. The banks actions were undertaken,
according to Razin and Sadka “with the full knowledge (though not always with the
explicit consent) of the government, the Knesset, and the Bank of Israel. Occasionally,
the authorities even approved of the process.” (p. 190) In the wake of this crisis, after the
government bailed out the banks by committing to buy their shares, “the need for a major
reform was self-evident!” (p. 191).
The pressure for reform and liberalization that emerged out of the events of the
early 1980s, and which continued through the 1990s, is reflected in the title of the most
recent book reviewed here, The Israeli Economy, 1985 – 1998: From Government
Intervention to Market Economics, edited by Avi Ben-Bassat. Both the title and the
contents of this 2002 volume would lead a reader to date the beginning of the “modern”
phase of the Israeli economy in the mid-1980s, a view consistent with that of Razin and
Sadka. But, as evident from the title of the introductory chapter by Ben-Bassat, “The
Obstacle Course to a Market Economy in Israel,” the general trend towards free markets
and liberalization masks fits and starts in that process.
The volume edited by Ben-Bassat, like the 1986 book edited by Ben-Porath, is
more wide-ranging in its scope than the four other books reviewed here. Both the Ben-

11

Porath and Ben-Bassat volumes include chapters on overall macroeconomic performance,
fiscal policy, monetary policy, and income distribution. But a quick examination of
differences between topics covered in the 17 chapters of the 1986 volume and the 15
chapters of the 2002 volume reveals interesting insights about changes in the Israeli
economy over this period. For example, the earlier book has a chapter entitled
“Indexation in the Labor Market,” a topic of less relevance in the first decade of the 21st
century than in the middle of the 1980s. There is not a separate chapter on defense
spending in the Ben-Bassat volume, unlike the Ben-Porath volume, possibly because, as
pointed out in the chapters by Moshe Justman and by Michel Strawczynski and Joseph
Zeira in the Ben-Bassat volume, domestic purchases of defense goods and services
dropped from 9.1 percent of GDP in 1982 to 3.5 percent by 1995. Justman’s chapter, in
fact, is on the high-tech sector, one not mentioned in the 1986 volume, and he refers to
defense spending to make the point that its reduction in the 1990s “…may have been the
most important contribution of fiscal policy to the development of Israel’s high-tech
industry…” (p. 457) The fact that financial market reform is the subject of the three
chapters that constitute Part III of the Ben-Bassat volume, while not appearing as the
topic of a distinct chapter in the Ben-Porath volume, tells much about the timing of this
form of liberalization. Likewise, the presence of a chapter on the integration of olim
from the former Soviet Union in the Ben-Bassat book (and the presence of a chapter on
the same topic in the earlier book by Razin and Sadka), and the absence of any separate
chapter on immigration in the earlier Ben-Porath book, reflects the timing of this latest
wave of immigration.

12

About one million people emigrated from the former Soviet Union to Israel in the
1990s. A large Russian-speaking presence is evident in Israel these days in the
conversations one hears on the streets, and also because of the Cyrillic characters one
sees on billboards and in markets. But these immigrants are integrating into the Israeli
economy and, like olim before them, both changing the country and being changed by it.
Zvi Eckstein and Yoram Weiss, in their chapter in the Ben-Bassat volume, noted that
immigrants from the former Soviet Union had an exceptionally high level of education
and, as a group, rose up through the occupational ladder after beginning at low-skilled
occupations. They also noted that, in the 1990s, economic growth benefited from the
wave of immigration.8 The statistics in Table 1 show that the growth rate of both GDP
and business sector product per capita were higher in the 1992 – 2000 period than during
the other post-1972 periods listed in that table.
As the new century began, however, the Israeli economy entered a difficult
period. The growth in GDP averaged -0.8 percent in 2001 and 2002, and business sector
product growth per capita was -4.6 percent in each of these two years. Many other
industrial countries also suffered an economic slowdown at this time, and the spillover
effects of a worldwide slump were felt in Israel. But other factors, such as the bust in the
high-tech sector, and the contractionary effects on tourism and investment from the
second intifada, also had an effect. There has been some recovery lately, with 4.3 percent
growth in both GDP and business sector product per capita in 2004. Unemployment has
remained high, however, with the 10.4 percent rate in 2004 marking the third year in a
row that it exceeded 10 percent. The manner in which these challenges are addressed
8

This positive correlation between immigration and economic growth is a long-standing characteristic of
the Israeli economy, and even the earlier yeshuv economy, as noted by Ben-Porath in the introduction to his
1986 volume.

13

will, no doubt, be the subject of the next important book on the Israeli economy which, at
the time of this writing, remains an ambition of its yet unknown author.
This review of the books and their times shows how the five common themes
discussed in the introduction appear across these books, each of which was published in a
different decade. I next shift focus and discuss, in turn, each of these five specific
themes.

2. Compared to Whom?
The perfectly competitive economy presented in textbooks does not appear in the
real world. Therefore, while some may take this ideal as a useful guide for dictating
direction, it does not serve as a helpful benchmark for judging position. A discussion of a
country’s actual economic performance, and gauging the evolution of its economic
structure, require some reference to the performance and structure of other countries’
economies.
The question arises as to which countries Israel should be compared. Every
country has its own peculiar circumstances, but those of Israel are, in important ways,
distinct from that of other countries. Ben-Porath, at the beginning of the introductory
chapter of the book he edited, mentioned some distinctive aspects of the Israeli economy,
including its small size, its lack of natural resources, and its exceptionally highly
educated labor force. In the second chapter of that same book, Syrquin noted that the
antecedents to the modern Israeli economy, unlike that of many other semi-industrial
countries, did not include strong internal institutional barriers arising from entrenched
interest groups (e.g. large landholders in a semifeudal agricultural system). But the key

14

distinctions of the Israeli economy are provided succinctly in Ben-Porath’s statement
towards the beginning of his introduction, “The major distinguishing characteristics of
Israel’s economy … are tied to its existence as a Jewish state in a hostile environment.”
(p. 2).
In its role as the Jewish state, Israel, unique among nations, has the goal of
attracting immigrants and making one nation of them.9 The economic implications of the
effort to attract and retain immigrants include a strong commitment to full employment
and job security, as well as a high level of civilian public consumption and a large
investment in the quality of housing which, as Ben-Porath wrote, reflects “… a tendency
to mobilize an increasing share of resources to the immediate, direct and indirect,
improvement of living standards.” (p. 8)
Along with the responsibility of being the world’s sole Jewish state, Israel’s link
to world Jewry also offers it some financial opportunities similar to that of other countries
with a large diaspora community (e.g. Ireland, Armenia, and the Philippines). In its early
years, financial assistance was also provided through German reparations. And, like
many other countries, Israel receives foreign aid from the United States although, on a
per capita basis, Israel heads the list of recipient countries.
The aid from the United States reflects, at least in part, the other point raised by
Ben-Porath, of Israel’s existence in a hostile environment. Much of the foreign aid given
to Israel is directed towards its defense. But the defense needs of the country run far
ahead of what is covered by aid and, consequently, a relatively large proportion of the
expenditures of the government (as compared to other countries) is devoted to the
9

Of course, this “one nation” also includes a substantial non-Jewish Arab population and Israel, like some
other countries, faces the potential challenge of bifurcation into a dual economy.

15

military.10 Beyond this, ubiquitous security concerns also impose an effective tax on
Israeli businesses and households.
While it is easy to focus on the distinctive aspects of Israel, and the manner in
which those aspects have forged its economy, it is also important to place the country
within a context of other nations in order to gauge its economic performance. But which
nations should serve as a comparison group? Patinkin, writing in the late 1950s, boldly
asserted “Israel is a modern economy.” This statement, which begins the second chapter
of his book, is reflected by the reference group he selected. Patinkin distinguished Israel
from “…Egypt, India, China, and the like…” (p. 43) because, at that time, it did not have
the population and educational challenges facing these countries, and also because of the
level and growth of its national income by the end of its first decade. At the end of the
1950s, the national income of Israel was comparable to that of richer South American
countries like Argentina and Chile, and to poorer European countries, like Ireland,
Austria and Italy. Patinkin’s expectations of a continued advance of Israel’s economic
standing among nations was also likely influenced by its rapid growth at the time he
wrote his book, a growth rate that exceeded that of rich European countries like the
Netherlands, West Germany and France.11
Halevi and Klinov, writing almost a decade after Patinkin, employed a somewhat
less ambitious comparison group for Israel. Placing the economy of Israel, in 1968, in
the context of other countries, they wrote that it is “well above the ‘underdeveloped’
level…[but] still below most of the developed countries of Europe and America.” (p. 93).

10

However, as mentioned in Section 1, the share of defense expenditures has been decreasing over time.

11

As mentioned in Section 1, the growth of Israel during its “miracle” years was exceptional; but European
countries also enjoyed high rates of growth in the 1950s.

16

They also noted that the national income of Israel “has grown unusually fast, but a
number of other countries, particularly those showing rapid post-war recovery, have
matched its per capita rate of growth.” (p. 93) Some sixteen years later, when Ben-Porath
was writing the introductory chapter of the book he edited, he noted that Israel headed the
World Bank list of “Upper Middle Income countries” and that it ranked 30th (out of 118
countries) as an exporter of manufactured goods.
The set of countries that one chooses for a comparison group depends upon the
issue of concern. In the 1980s, the dominant concern for the Israeli economy was
stabilization and, accordingly, Razin and Sadka, in their 1992 book, compared the
performance of the stabilization efforts in Israel to those of other countries with an
experience of efforts to halt high inflation; Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, and Mexico.
A decade later, Stan Fischer and David W. H. Orsmond, who also wrote on inflation in
Israel, compared its experience to the experiences in nine other countries; Argentina,
Brazil, and Croatia, which moved from high to low inflation; Chile, Egypt and Greece,
which went from a period of moderate inflation to low inflation; and Colombia, Hungary
and Mexico, which also had moderate inflation but did not reduce inflation as much as
the previous set of three countries. The fact that Egypt, eschewed by Patinkin for one
type of comparison, is selected by Fischer and Ormand for another type, illustrates the
point that context determines the relevant set of comparison countries.
A third dimension along which Israel is compared to other countries, along with
level of income and experience with macroeconomic instability, is the role of government
in the economy. Patinkin, voicing concern with the solvency of the economy, argued that
the Israeli government should generate a surplus, or at least stop running a deficit, which,

17

he noted, “…are characteristics of European countries.” (p. 105). Of course, one could
argue that the economic structure of Israel at the end of the 1950s was quite distinct from
that of European countries. This comparison with industrial countries in the context of
government spending continued with Halevi and Klinov, when they noted that the Israeli
government’s level of consumption, at 15 to 20 percent of overall consumption, was
comparable to levels in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Sweden. By the time
Ben-Bassat’s book was published, the metric for measuring the role of the government
was broadened beyond government consumption to a broader index of regulation and
liberalization. Ben-Bassat, in the introductory chapter of his book, cites Israel’s standing
in the Economic Freedom Index and notes that its position in that index indicates that, at
the end of the 1990s, Israel was less liberalized than South American and semi-industrial
countries.
Thus, overall, there has been a shifting set of countries to which Israel was
compared in these books. One reason for the differences across time in the reference set
is because of a change in the focus of concern. Another reason is that early aspirations
gave way to a more circumspect analysis. It is also probably the case that the comparison
group used by a particular author says something about that person’s own visions, hopes
and concerns as well as Israel’s economic standing in the community of nations.

18

3. Immigration, Integration and Inequality
“All happy families are alike; each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.”
“Call me Ishmael.” “It was the best of times, it was the worst of times…” “I am an
American, Chicago born.”12
Sometimes the beginning of a book reveals much of its essence. The first words
of the first major book on the Israeli economy, Patinkin’s The Israeli Economy: The First
Decade (1959), are “Ingathering of the exiles.” He went on to write, in the first
paragraph of the book, “The ultimate criterion by which the Israel economy must be
judged is its success in … integrating these new immigrants into its productive labor
force.” The new immigrants to which Patinkin referred were those from Egypt, in the
wake of the 1956 Sinai campaign, and, those who came a year later, primarily from
Hungary and Poland.
Patinkin’s opening words reflect a uniform view across these books concerning
the centrality of immigration for Israel. For example, Ben-Porath, at the beginning of the
introductory chapter of the book he edited, wrote “Israel is a country established for and
run by immigrants from diverse countries and backgrounds. Its raison d’être is to gather,
retain and forge these immigrants into one nation.” (p. 2) In the midst of the large-scale
immigration from the former Soviet Union, when there was still a great amount of
uncertainty as to its effects, Razin and Sadka were hopeful as to its consequences for the
nation. They close their book with the statement, in the last paragraph of the epilogue,
“After many years, Israel is again blessed with a massive wave of aliya, the gathering of
the exiled, the very soul of existence of Israel.” (p. 225)
12

These are the opening words of Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy, Moby Dick by Herman Melville, A Tale
of Two Cities by Charles Dickens, and The Adventures of Augie March by Saul Bellow, respectively.

19

Immigration to Israel has occurred in waves, and the degree to which any
particular book focuses on immigration partially depends upon the time in which it was
written. The absence of a separate chapter on immigration in the Ben-Porath volume
may reflect the opinion voiced by Jacob Metzer in that book that “… the major sources of
potential large-scale immigration seem to have run dry.” (p. 100) Like virtually everyone
else at that time, Metzer did not anticipate the collapse of the Soviet Union and the
implications of this event for the population of Israel. But, by the time Razin and Sadka
published their book, in which one of its five parts is devoted to the issue of immigration,
the aliya from the former Soviet Union was well underway. By the beginning of the 21st
century, Zvi Eckstein and Yoram Weiss were able to look back at the immigration
experience of the 1990s and analyze the extent to which immigrants integrated into the
economy in their chapter in the Ben-Bassat volume.
Table 2 presents data on the population of Israel, its net immigration, and the
proportion of population growth due to immigration, for seven periods from the time of
the founding of the state until the first years of the 21st century. This table shows that
Patinkin wrote at the end of a decade when net immigration contributed to two-thirds of
the country’s population growth. The role of immigration remained strong for the next
two decades, but its contribution to population growth decreased to 6 percent in the mid1980s when Metzer wrote of the depletion of potential sources of immigration. A few
years on, immigration was again ascendant and responsible for more than half of the
population growth of the country in the first half of the 1990s. Immigrants had increased
the population of Israel by about one-fifth by the end of that decade. After this huge

20

inflow, the beginning of the 21st century saw a decrease in immigration, both in absolute
terms and in terms of its contribution to the growth of the population of the country.

Period

Table 2: Israeli Population and Immigration

Population,
Net Immigration
Immigration /
Beginning of Period
(Total Pop. Growth)
1948 – 1960
805.6
869.4
0.65
1961 – 1971
2,150.4
339.8
0.381
1972 – 1982
3,115.63
183.5
0.202
1983 – 1989
4,033.73
31.1
0.06
1990 – 1995
4,559.6
593.5
0.56
3
1996 – 2000
5,612.3
296.2
0.39
2001 – 2003
6,369.3
72.3
0.19
1
Excluding the addition of the Arab population from East Jerusalem in 1967.
2
Excluding the addition of the Arab population from the Golan Sub-District in 1982.
3
Discontinuity due to Census results: see website.
Source: Statistical Abstract of Israel, 2004, Central Bureau of Statistics,
www1.cbs.gov.il
The vitality of the Israeli economy, and indeed the mission of the State itself, is
achieved by the integration of immigrants into the society and the economy. Therefore,
the topic of the economic integration of immigrants appears across the books reviewed
here. For example, Patinkin, following his statement on the ingathering of exiles,
continued in that same first paragraph “The ultimate criterion by which the Israel
economy must be judged is its success in … integrating these new immigrants into its
productive labor force.”(p. 1) He was particularly concerned that the 7 percent
unemployment rate at the time he was writing would be an impediment to the absorption
of the new immigrants. But, despite these concerns, he wrote “Nevertheless, the
integration of most of the increased population into its productive labor force has been
one of the significant accomplishments of the Israel economy in the first decade of its
existence.” (p. 42)
21

But almost a decade after Patinkin wrote of significant accomplishment in this
area, Halevi and Klinov observed “Far from having been solved, the problem of
integration is perhaps the main challenge facing Israel in the future.” (p. 5). One source of
concern was unemployment, which rose from an average of 3.6 percent between 1961
and 1965 to 7.4 percent in 1966 and 10.4 percent in 1967. Halevi and Klinov viewed
attaining a low unemployment rate “an economic achievement of prime importance.” (p.
67) They also noted that the adequacy of housing was an important issue for attracting
and retaining immigrants, a point that was also mentioned by Ben-Porath in the
introduction to his 1985 book.
A different type of concern about the integration of Soviet immigrants was voiced
by Razin and Sadka. While acknowledging the high endowment of human capital of
these olim, they worried that “Because their training and work experience come from the
Soviet Union, it may take time to train and fit them into the relatively modern, Westernstyle techniques and rigors of the market economy of Israel.” (p. 109) To some extent,
Eckstein and Weiss allay these fears in their contribution to the Ben-Bassat volume since
they found “…immigrants adapt gradually to the Israeli labor market … This process is
reflected in the initially low wages of immigrants, about half the wages of comparable
natives, followed by a sharp increase in wages with time spent in Israel.” (pp. 353 – 354)
The steep wage profile of Soviet immigrants may eventually eliminate wage
differentials between them and natives. But the issue of inequality, especially with
respect to country of origin, is one that has been present since the founding of the State.
Patinkin anticipated this early on, noting that the unemployment rate in the 1950s was
higher among immigrants from Asia and Africa than among those from Europe and the

22

Americas. Halevi and Klinov also voiced concern with increasing inequality between
North African and European immigrants, even though they noted that the income
distribution in Israel was “more equal than other [countries]” and “is as close to equality
as that of any other nation for which data are available.” (p. 117). To these authors,
however, the relative standing of Israel among nations was less important to them than
the ideal of more complete equality.
A decade after Halevi and Klinov published their book, one might have been
buoyed by the diminished level of inequality in Israel. The Gini coefficient (for income
inclusive of transfers) decreased from 0.358 in 1968 to 0.337 in 1979. But, as noted by
Yehuda Geva and Jack Habib, in their chapter in the Ben-Porath volume, inequality had
begun to rise in the second half of the 1970s; the lowest value of the Gini coefficient,
0.314, was in 1975. (p. 213) This trend towards increased inequality continued more or
less unabated for the rest of the century, as mentioned by Momi Dahan in his chapter in
the Ben-Bassat volume. Transfers and taxes somewhat ameliorated this; the Gini
coefficient inclusive of transfers rose from 0.339 in 1980 to 0.362 in 2002, while the
coefficient excluding transfers rose from 0.434 to 0.532 over this period. Like Klinov
and Halevi almost forty years before, Dahan considered the context for this change and
noted that “Israel’s level of net income inequality is not exceptional given its level of
economic development.” and that Israel is “…not unique in evidencing an upturn in
earnings inequality.” (p. 495) Nevertheless, the current rise in inequality is troubling and
attracting increasing attention; for example, the Bank of Israel included a chapter entitled
“Welfare,” which focuses on poverty, for the first time in its 2004 Annual Report.

23

4. The Role of Markets and the Government in the Economy
There is a view that the absorption of immigrants from the former Soviet Union
went more smoothly than would have been the case had Israel not undertaken a
commitment to greater economic liberalization, beginning in the late 1980s. In the
chapter in the 2002 Ben-Bassat volume on import liberalization, one facet of this move
towards the market, Yoram Gabai and Rafael Rob wrote “Because Israel invoked its
import liberalization at a time of mass immigration from the former Soviet Union, its
economy absorbed the extra increment of labor in industries that were making efficiency
efforts. The liberalization and immigration processes converged, and unemployment
rates declined from 12 percent to 6 percent and the additional labor integrated into all
industries.” (p. 305)
The liberalization process referred to by Gabai and Rob had its earliest
antecedents in the 1952 New Economic Policy program. Some insights as to the state of
the economy before this program are provided by Halevi and Klinov, as well as by
Michaely. Michaely noted that, during the 1920 – 1947 yeshuv period, the Jewish sector
of Palestine began to develop a “state in the making.” The Jewish Agency, recognized as
political representative of Jews in Palestine, channeled aid from diaspora, establishing
agricultural settlements and promoting certain industries. Halevi and Klinov argued that
this experience during the yeshuv period set the stage for the subsequent period after the
Mandate, writing “Unlike the Government of Palestine, the Jewish national institutions
adopted an attitude towards public responsibility for economic development that was
foreign to most of the non-Communist world until the 1950s. … With the advent of the
State of Israel, the stage was set for a meeting of two strands of policy for economic

24

development: the acceptance of economic development as a primary goal of government
economic policy in all its forms and the continuation of the national institutions’
activities in channeling the contributions of world Jewry towards the development of
Israel.” (p. 39).
These “national institutions” referred to by Halevi and Klinov include uniquely
Israeli non-government actors that influenced economic outcomes in a way that was not
necessarily consistent with the market, such as the Histadrut (which was established in
1921), the Jewish Agency, and the Jewish National Fund. Michaely pointed out that, at
the time he was writing in the early 1970s, the basic statistics on the Israeli economy
overstated the role of the market since, while only one-fifth of the economy was
explicitly governmental, another fifth was within the dominion of the Histadrut. He
distinguished, however, between Israeli-style government management and more
dirigiste government-planning. Nevertheless, he stated “Ever since the establishment of
the state, economic policy has been conducted in a strong spirit of governmental
interventionism.” (p. 5) He also noted that the existence of profits in an industry would
give rise to the suspicion that the national cause was being subverted by that sector,
especially since there was the view that “economic laws do not hold in Israel.” (p. 5) In
the time since Michaely wrote these words, however, the influence of groups like the
Histadrut and the Jewish agency have diminished.13
The first moves away from government intervention in the economy, as
mentioned in Section 1, came in the wake of the 1951 crisis. This crisis marked a turning
point for the Israeli economy by de-legitimizing comprehensive non-market controls as a
13

The power once commanded by the Histadrut is reflected by the remark of Professor Abba Lerner, who
said “The workers have a Histadrut and Histadrut has a government.” (quoted by Halevi and Klinov)

25

policy tool. But there is a vast gulf between an absence of comprehensive non-market
controls and a fully liberalized economy. The discussion in Section 1 describes how the
process of liberalization continued, albeit somewhat unevenly, across the decades. In this
section, I discuss the evolution of thought, across these books, in two particular areas; the
general role of government, and the role of government in the important arena of
investment. The topic of the role of the government in the economy, however, is
inexorably linked to the topics discussed in the next two sections as well, openness and
macroeconomic management. Therefore, the discussion on the role of government in this
section is taken up again in Sections 5 and 6.

4.1 The Overall Role of Government in the Israeli Economy
The appropriate role of government in the Israeli economy is not an explicit focus
of Patinkin in his book The Israel Economy: The First Decade. In the second chapter of
his book, “The Growth of National Product and Income,” he did note that, by
international standards, government played a big role in the Israeli economy in the 1950s.
Patinkin attributed this to the importance of defense spending, as well as to issues of
measurement. He also briefly mentioned the pattern of ownership, raising the point of
the role of the Histadrut. But, overall, there is only a small amount of discussion in this
book on the appropriate role of government in investment or in export promotion, and
that discussion does not point strongly towards a view that government evidenced too
big, or too small, a role in the economy.
One can interpret the institution of the second New Economic Policy in the early
1960s, however, as evidence of a strengthening view that the role of government in the

26

economy should be scaled back.14 Halevi and Klinov gave voice to this view in the
introductory chapter of their 1968 book. They argued that policy administration and
planning had been of poor quality, and the most severe problems in the economy were
found in places that had the greatest government intervention. They conceded that
government controls were warranted in some instances, but also mention that mistakes
were made. They also distinguished between direct intervention by the government in
response to events like waves of immigration or reversals in capital flows, and other,
more ideologically-driven roles. In this latter category, they documented and anticipated
difficulties in persistent government involvement. For example, discussing efforts to
promote agriculture, they write “settlement activity gradually abated and then came to a
virtual stop as economic problems countered the ideological desire to increase the relative
importance of agriculture.” (p. 105)
Concerns that the hand of government remained too prevalent in the economy
continued to be voiced almost two decades after Halevi and Klinov wrote these words, by
Ben-Porath in the introductory chapter to his book, and by Gur Ofer in his chapter on the
provision of public services in that book. Ofer wrote “It is generally agreed in Israel that
the public sector is too big …” but he also mentioned that “On the other hand, it must be
generally accepted that the social value and the value for the individual of most medical
and educational services provided by the public sector is higher than the value of many
goods and services consumed as private consumption.” (p. 208) Ben-Porath
characterized the Israeli economy of the mid-1980s as one with a high level of civilian
public consumption, government control of the capital markets, pervasive subsidies, and
14

This was especially true in the role of government in export promotion and import control, a focus of
Michaely in his book, and a point that discussed in the next section.

27

policies that tended to disconnect economic incentives facing individuals from economic
reality. He also argued that excessive economic activity took place in organizations
motivated by complex objective functions (including responding to vested interests), with
cost-accomodating budgets uncontrolled by market pressures. Ben-Porath concluded the
introductory chapter to his book warning
“The country as a whole must achieve self-reliance and change its
economic and social structure, bringing about a convergence of standards
of living, effort and productivity. This task involves reassessing the role
of the public sector and abandoning many of the modes of behavior that
characterize both a private sector that has grown under the protective
canopy of government and an entire economy that has grown under the
protective shield of another country…. the longer the delay, the higher the
price paid. Whether the political system will muster the strength to effect
a change before some major catastrophe occurs, and whether it can design
an equitable way to do so, remains to be seen.” (pp. 22 – 23)
The urgency in Ben-Porath’s words no doubt reflected the growing crisis at the
time he penned them in 1984. One of the legacies of this crisis, as was the case with the
crisis in 1951, was a re-evaluation of the role of the government in the economy. Once
the acute macroeconomic problem of runaway inflation was vanquished, attention turned
to microeconomic issues including that of the appropriate role of the government. This
point is made by Razin and Sadka, who wrote in the early 1990s “The stabilization
program drastically changed the focus of attention of policymakers, economists, members
of the business community, and the public at large from the problem of how to cope with
high and rising inflation back to the real issues of market structure, international
competitiveness, savings and investments, productivity, and growth.” (p. 3)
Razin and Sadka argued, however, that the role of the market was more pervasive
in the economy of Israel than commonly thought. For example, in the introductory
chapter of their book, they write “Over its brief history, …several myths were built

28

around [the Israeli economy including that it] is an Eastern Bloc – type socialist
economy, the ‘last bastion’ of Stalin – type planned economy.” (p. 5 – 6) In particular,
Razin and Sadka made the point that the tax burden in Israel was not especially onerous,
writing in the introduction “Israel’s corporate tax rate…is among the lowest rates among
industrial countries.” (p. 5 – 6, emphasis in original) and, in their chapter “Tax
Structure,” they wrote “The total tax burden in Israel, when measured by total tax
revenue as a percentage of GDP, is significantly higher than in the United States, Canada
and Japan, but about ‘average’ or slightly higher than in the Western European
countries.” (pp. 136 – 137) Nonetheless, they conceded “…the indirect tax burden in
Israel is very high, in fact, much higher than in [Belgium, Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Sweden, US, UK, Japan, and is due to] the many excise taxes that are levied at
extremely high rates.” (p. 137 – 138) Furthermore, they also wrote that “A persistent
problem of the Israeli economy is the excessive level of government ownership of
commercial companies. Despite the declared policy of privatization, very little progress
has been made.” (p. 7)
The title of the most recent book reviewed here, the 2002 volume edited by Avi
Ben-Bassat The Israeli Economy, 1985 – 1998: From Government Intervention to Market
Economics, is consistent with the points made by Razin and Sadka on both the time the
most recent round of structural change in the Israeli economy commenced and its
direction. Strawczynski and Zeira, in their chapter on fiscal policy in this book, wrote
“Prior to 1985, the relative size of the public sector was the highest in the world.” (p. 65)
but they noted that, in the 1990s, the size of the public sector became comparable to that
of many European countries. They also noted that “one of the most dramatic processes

29

since 1985 has been a gradual privatization, both of public companies and public services
and activities.” (p. 66) In the introduction to this book, Ben-Bassat wrote “The economy
is structured much differently today than it was on the eve of the stabilization program.
Government involvement in the various markets has decreased perceptibly, and economic
competitiveness has risen.” (p. 54)
The decrease in government involvement is evident in many sectors of the
economy. I next turn to one in particular, the capital markets, and discuss how views on
government involvement in this market, and in directing investment, have evolved over
time, as evidenced by the discussion in the books reviewed here.

4.2 The Government and the Israeli Capital Market
In its early years, the national government and the Jewish Agency had a big role
in directing investment in Israel towards areas thought important for the country’s
development. Reflecting on this, Patinkin asked the rhetorical question “Could the role
of private investment been greater, or was it directly or indirectly restricted by
government activity?” (p. 91) His conclusion was that the government caused little
crowding out of private investment because, in his view, the financing it obtained in the
1950s would have been unavailable to the private sector. He did not focus on the
question, however, of the allocation of investment and whether government investment
was well directed.
The 1960s saw the beginnings of a shift away from the prevalence of non-market
investment decisions. Halevi and Klinov made this point at the beginning of their 1968
book when they wrote “The degree of intervention [in the capital market] and its form are

30

therefore in flux.” (p. 4), although, towards the end of the book, they stated “…it is
difficult to see any clear trend indicating a reduction in public initiatives or control of
investment activity.” (p. 210) The issue of the allocation of investment is mentioned
several times by Halevi and Klinov, and their views on this are reflected in the sentences
“There is no clear connection between the rate of return and trends in investment. This
probably reflects the prominent role of government in directing investment by
undertaking it directly, as well as by financing private enterprises at preferred terms.” (p.
132) The policy conclusion drawn from this view, if not already evident, is captured by
the statement at the conclusion of their chapter on public finance “… we have no doubt
that much resource misallocation could have been avoided if the effects on allocation had
been fully taken into account when the various government growth incentives were
considered and implemented.” (p. 223)
The appropriate allocation of investment continued to be a concern in the decades
following the publication of Halevi and Klinov’s book. In the mid-1980s, Joram
Mayshar concluded his chapter “Investment Patterns” in the volume edited by BenPorath with the words “… one may note the ever more pressing need to allocate
investment resources efficiently in a period of reduced growth and increased pressure on
resources. So far, the Israeli economy does not seem to have met this challenge
successfully.” (p. 118)
As mentioned above, the crises of the 1980s were a turning point for the Israeli
economy in many ways, including the role played by the government in the capital
market and in allocating investment. Razin and Sadka, writing in the early 1990s,
acknowledged that “For years, the government’s hand and foot were very much visible in

31

the capital market.” (p. 186) but went on to argue that “Much freer financial markets
have started to play their natural role as a meeting place between savers and investors.”
(p. 186)
Joseph Djivre and Daniel Tsiddon, in their chapter on the conduct of monetary
policy in the Ben-Bassat volume, provided a date when financial markets began to play
their natural role; April 1987, when the government began to phase out capital market
restrictions that maintained its role as a monopsonist. They argued that this liberalization
led to the development of the private capital markets in Israel. They also argued that the
liberalization of international capital flows into Israel, was “…a necessary step for
enforcing the competition pricing of the cost of capital in Israel, thereby achieving an
efficient allocation of resources in the domestic capital market.” (p. 102) In fact, Djivre
and Tsiddon “… identify the liberalization process as the major competition-enhancing
factor in financial markets.” (p. 123) The importance of capital account liberalization for
enhancing the productive allocation of investment is also discussed in a later chapter in
the Ben-Bassat volume. The authors of that chapter, Gottlieb and Blejer, wrote “With the
benefit of hindsight, we conclude that in spite of temporary setbacks the strategy of
gradual but adamant pursuit of liberalization-cum-stabilization has been a successful
approach.” (p. 273)

4.3 Looking Forward: The Durability of Reform in Israel
Will the “gradual but adamant pursuit of liberalization” continue in Israel? What
will a future reader of a book reviewing the first few decades of the 21st century conclude
about the evolution of the roles of the government and the market in the Israeli economy?

32

There are reasons to think that, at least over a reasonable time horizon, the
movement towards a greater role for the market will prove durable. This is especially
true if, both in the halls of government of Israel and, more broadly, worldwide, the
current tendency to favor markets over planning continues. Ben-Bassat, in the first
chapter of his book, wrote that the structural reform of the 1990s was “the result of a
profound change in the economic thinking of policymakers and has also been influenced
by regional and global geopolitical processes.” (p. 1) He characterized the broad public
consensus in Israel at the end of the century as one that sees economic vitality originating
with the private sector.
Another reason for the durability of these reforms is that they have, to some degree,
been locked in through legislation. Strawczynski and Zeira cite two important acts, 1985
Law of No Printing that prohibited the Bank of Israel from lending money to the
government to finance its deficit, and the 1991 Budget Reduction Law, that set a future
path for diminishing deficits, as important policy tools for realizing the goals of reducing
the size of the government. They argued that “…the reduction of subsidies to the
business sector was not motivated by fiscal prudence only, but can also be viewed as part
of an ongoing process of liberalization, in which the government reduces its active role in
production and allocation.” (p. 79)
But views can change, and laws can be repealed. Ultimately, the durability of
reform depends upon its success. Of course, the success of reform, especially over a long
horizon, remains uncertain. Nevertheless, Ben-Bassat, while acknowledging the slow
pace of reform, and its still incomplete nature, wrote of his confidence in its durability
because of the potential it unleashes. In the final section of the introductory chapter to

33

his volume, entitled “Summary and Lessons,” he wrote “After the stabilization program
was implemented, a new economic approach took shape, was applied in most years since
then, and has achieved a success worth imitating. There have been deviations from the
path, for which a heavy price was paid, but these are exceptions that prove the rule.” (p.
52)

5. Israel in the World Economy
Golda Meir once remarked “Let me tell you something that we Israelis have
against Moses. He took us 40 years through the desert in order to bring us to the one spot
in the Middle East that has no oil!” She might have added that this spot also had
insufficient fresh water, malarial swamps and very little in the way of any natural
resources.
Michaely reported that, in the first few years of the existence of the State of Israel,
this lack of resources, combined with sparse industrial skills, led to a government policy
that leaned toward autarkic development. This quickly proved untenable, however, and
the government altered its view. The extent to which trade was embraced early on in the
State’s existence led Razin and Sadka to write, in 1993, “Israel has never been an
economic enclave, isolated by trade barriers from the rest of the world. Its volume of
trade has always been remarkably high.” (p. 175) They continued “Over the forty-five
years since its birth, Israel has gradually, although with many ups and downs, undergone
a process of liberalization both on the trade side and on the capital side.” (p. 175)
Updating this view, Gabai and Rob concluded their chapter on import liberalization in the
2002 Ben-Bassat volume with a paragraph that includes the sentence “During those years

34

[1989 – 1995], Israel completed the process of opening its economy and became one of
the most open economies in the world, in which its comparative advantage industries
would blossom.” (p. 306).
But the “many ups and downs” in the trade liberalization process were not
incidental. Razin and Sadka also wrote of the “government’s heavy involvement in
Israel’s external economic relations” (p. 175), although they maintained this “was not
intended as much to constrain the volume of trade as to control its composition”. In this
section, I first discuss the evolution of thought about the overall volume of trade. The
swings in views on this point are more pronounced than those on any other topic
discussed in this review. I then turn to a discussion of the evolution of thought on efforts
to control the composition of trade, as well as its volume, through the use of prices and
exchange rates.

5.1 The Import Surplus
Not withstanding the claim by Razin and Sadka concerning the Israeli
government’s focus on the composition of trade rather than its overall volume, the net
trade position of the country, somewhat euphemistically termed its “import surplus,” was,
according to Ben-Porath in 1985, “a central economic issue since Israel was established”
(p. 8) Indeed, the import surplus was a major preoccupation and concern of Patinkin in
his 1959 book. Modern international macroeconomic theory shows that funding
investment through foreign borrowing can be optimal for an economy with good growth
prospects. This was not the view of Patinkin, however, as demonstrated by his statement
“The stress on domestic dissaving is the result of our underlying assumption that the

35

continued development of the Israel economy in the future is vitally dependent on the
emergence of private savings.” (p. 100) This point is reiterated in the concluding chapter
of his book, where Patinkin wrote “It is taken as axiomatic that a decline in this degree of
dependence is one of the goals of the economy: indeed, a necessary goal, in view of the
anticipated decline over the next few years of those sources which have so far financed
the import surplus.” (p. 126) Patinkin acknowledged that the goal of economic
independence may conflict with other goals like integrating immigrants, providing for the
national defense, and promoting development and a rising standard of living. But,
despite this, Patinkin viewed the continuing dependence on foreign financing in the
1950s, especially with the prospect of the end of German reparation payments in the
1960s, as “…the major failure of Israel economic policy in its first decade.” (p. 132)
In response to this perceived failure, Patinkin called upon the government to act.
He thought that there was scope for a positive policy response to what he viewed as the
major challenge for the Israeli economy, writing “…the size of the import surplus can be
significantly affected by the policy decisions of the economic authorities…”. (p. 127)
This policy would induce producers “…to direct their efforts toward new commodities,
new productive techniques, and new markets.” (p. 137) He also felt that there would be
dire consequences if his advice were not heeded. A reader of Patinkin’s book in 1959
would have finished this work, by the most prominent Israeli academic economist of the
day, sobered by the warning in the concluding chapter of the book “Unless definite
policies are adopted to change the relative structure of the economy’s production in favor
of import-substitution and exports, the economy will once again be in danger of failing to

36

exploit its growing GNP for the purpose of significantly increasing its degree of
economic independence.” (p. 139 – 140)
A decade on, this same reader might have wondered why Patinkin’s worst
concerns had not been realized. An answer was provided by Halevi and Klinov. Halevi
and Klinov were, of course, aware of Patinkin’s warnings, noting “The existence of zero
or even negative savings in the Israeli economy has frequently been viewed with alarm.”
(p. 97) But they pointed out that much of the foreign financing was concessional, with
unilateral transfers representing 70 percent of the import surplus. They also were
optimistic about the ability of the Israeli economy to attract foreign funds. These funds
would be beneficial, rather than a source of concern, since “…the import surplus served
the important goal of providing savings to economy.” and “ … whether saving is positive
or negative is important only to the extent that it determines investment and thus the rate
of economic growth.” (p. 97) The most direct answer provided by Halevi and Klinov on
the source of the import surplus, one that also reflects the difference between their
concern about this issue and that of Patinkin a decade earlier, is given in their statement
“Thus, the simplest answer to the question why Israel failed to generate much domestic
saving is that it was not necessary!” (p. 97)
Concern with the import surplus, however, persisted over the next few decades.
Berglas, in his contribution to the 1985 Ben-Porath book, wrote “So far, it can be said
that the government has still not found an economic policy that would reconcile a large
defense expenditure, price stability, and a manageable import surplus.” (p. 191) Both
Klinov and Halevi, in their separate contributions to this volume, also revisited this issue
that they discussed almost two decades earlier. Halevi wrote “Although the import

37

surplus has not increased in relative importance, it has grown tremendously in absolute
dollar terms, especially since 1972.” (p. 243 – 244) Of course, Klinov and Halevi could
not have forecast this growth in their 1968 book. Given an opportunity to reflect on the
large increases in foreign debt since the early 1970s, Halevi concluded his chapter with
“Israel’s failure to prevent increases in the import surplus in recent years and the
concomitant growth of foreign indebtedness and increased reliance on short-term
obligations have brought it to a precarious position.” (p. 263) while Klinov began her
contribution to that book with “Although unilateral transfers finance 60 to 75 percent of
the import surplus, the cumulative debt resulting from the residual, loan-financed part
has become increasingly burdensome, and the prospect of a future decline in unilateral
transfers is a further source of worry.” (p. 119)
But once again, the passage of time saw a change in the view of the implications
of the import surplus. The term “import surplus” does not appear in the 1992 book by
Razin and Sadka. Their one reference to foreign financing in that book is in the context
of the wave of immigration from the former Soviet Union, when they wrote that the
“aliya produced massive investments, both in residential structures and in nonresidential
capital….It is noteworthy that in general the massive investments in physical capital were
financed by capital imports, as the olim themselves fled their former homes almost
penniless.” (p. 105)
Likewise, the term “import surplus” is absent from the 2002 book edited by BenBassat. This most likely reflects the relative contraction of Israel’s external debt in the
1990s, as well as the fact, noted by Justman in his contribution to that book, that the
increase in investment by the business sector in the 1990s “…was made possible by far-

38

reaching changes in Israel’s capital markets, which enabled it to take part in the
worldwide trend toward globalization of financial markets and opened up new channels
for foreign investment.” (p. 451) Evidence of the liberalization of Israel’s traded goods
and international capital market in the 1990s is provided in that same volume in the
chapter by Gottlieb and Blejer. They noted that an acceleration of liberalization efforts in
1998 led to an increase in Israel’s ranking in an IMF index of the freedom of movement
of goods and assets across borders from the 60th percentile in 1996 to the 75th percentile
in 1998. (pp. 269 – 271)
The policy response to the concerns about the import surplus was often an effort
to alter the relative price of traded goods in order to promote Israeli exports and to shield
Israel’s industries from international competition. As these concerns waxed and waned,
so did the role of the government in its efforts to alter the relative price of traded goods.
But, as will be seen in the next section, the authors of the books reviewed here, even
when concerned about the import surplus, were generally not in favor of a strong
government presence in managing relative prices.

5.2 Exchange Rates and Prices
Belief in the benefits of free trade is one of the hallmarks of a mainstream
economist. Thus, it is not surprising that the authors of the books reviewed here tend to
be concerned with distortions associated with import protection or export promotion. It is
also not surprising, in light of both anxiety about the import surplus and the views in
policy making circles in Israel on the role of government in development, that Israeli
economic policy has given these writers much to be concerned about.

39

The exchange rate has always had an important role in Israeli economic policy.
The centrality of the concern about the import surplus in Israel from the time of the
founding of the state until the mid-1980s focused attention on the exchange rate, as well
as other policy variables that affected the availability and the relative price of imports and
exports. Subsequently, efforts to combat high inflation, beginning with the “HameshHamesh” (5 – 5) plan of 1982, and continuing with the more successful stabilization
plans in the mid-1980s, used the exchange rate a nominal anchor. As discussed by Razin
and Sadka, “Initially, as the country adopted severe restrictions on international capital
flows, the exchange rate served mainly to regulate aggregate real demands and supplies
(and, consequently, external imbalances). Gradually, as the economy became more open
to international capital flows, the exchange rate policy became interrelated with monetary
and inflation policies.” (p. 9) In this section, I focus on the role the exchange rate and
other policy instruments played in altering the relative prices of traded goods. The role of
the exchange rate as a nominal anchor in macroeconomic stabilization plans is addressed
in Section 6.
The quote by Razin and Sadka illustrates both the uses of the exchange rate as a
policy instrument and the environment (regarding capital mobility) in which that
instrument was deployed. It is important to note that the change in the environment from
capital account restrictions to greater liberalization was not particular to Israel. Perhaps
more than any other topic in this review, a discussion of the change in thinking about
exchange rate policy must take into account the worldwide context of that policy rather
than just events in Israel. For example, when Halevi and Klinov wrote in 1968
“…virtually all policy makers and many local economists do not yet consider …[flexible

40

exchange rates] appropriate for Israel.” (p. 224), one should recall that, at that time, this
opinion was widely shared by economists and policy makers in other countries as well.
Nevertheless, exchange rate policy in Israel did not just mimic exchange rate
policy in other countries, but responded to specific national issues. For example, we have
seen that the focus of concern of Patinkin was the import surplus and, consequently, he
called for “definite policies … to change the relative structure of the economy’s
production in favor of import-substitution and exports…”. (p. 140) While
acknowledging that “The market mechanism could probably be used here to greater
advantage than it has been heretofore.” he continued “But even with its aid, the shifting
of resources takes time…Furthermore – if the past is any indication – this process will
not take place of itself.” (p. 139 – 140).
The way in which the government did not wait for “the process to take place of
itself” is documented by Michaely (1975). Michaely detailed the ways in which the
government attempted to influence the pattern of production in the economy and affect
the composition and volume of imports and exports through the use of restrictions on
imports, policies to promote exports, subsidies, tariffs, and the use of multiple exchange
rates.15
Michaely painted a picture of a Byzantine system of restrictions, subsidies, and
tariffs in the 1950s and the early 1960s. This system was, through its efforts at
micromanagement, effectively an industrial policy. Its components included multiple

15

As mentioned, Michaely’s book is more narrowly focused on foreign trade than the other books reviewed
here. This is reflected in the titles of its seven chapters; “The Israeli Economy: An Overview,”
“Comprehensive Controls and Partial Liberalization: the 1950s,” “Liberalization of Protective Restrictions:
the 1960s,” “Protection Through the Price Mechanism,” “The Process of Devaluation,” “The Exchange
Rate System and the Growth of the Economy,” and “Concluding Note: Increasing Reliance on Price
Mechanism.”

41

exchange rates (from 1952 to 1954), premiums for certain types of output (until 1962),
the Pamaz plan under which exporters could use their proceeds to purchase intermediate
inputs (in effect from 1953 to 1959), and beginning in 1959, Branch funds to foster
exports. The consequence of these policies was a wide dispersion in rates of effective
protection. As an example of the effect of these policies, Michaely noted that the 67
percent devaluation in 1962 resulted in an effective increase in the price of exports by
only 13 percent.
A focus of Michaely’s book is the distortions introduced by this patchwork of
controls and intervention in the economy. He reported that, by the early 1960s, most
policymakers were convinced that quantitative restrictions had led to a costly
misallocation of resources (e.g. Michaely offered the example of subsidies that led to
feeding chickens with bread). A concern about this, as well as a concern about the
implications of the cessation of German reparation payments for the import surplus, led
to the introduction of the Second New Economic Policy in 1962. The goal of this policy
was to rationalize the system of controls on traded goods and to move from quantity
restrictions to more transparent price controls.
But the distributional costs of the Second New Economic Policy made its
implementation difficult. Michaely wrote “Once an economy has been subjected to
exchange controls and import prohibitions for a long period, its whole industrial structure
has been determined accordingly, and it is very difficult to introduce changes that open
the economy to import competition, if that competition lowers effective protection.” (p.
80) Furthermore, the implementation of this policy made apparent a controversy
between those who favored the use of the price mechanism to determine the long-run

42

exchange rate, and to let the allocations respond to this (economists at Hebrew
University, the Bank of Israel, and the Ministry of Finance), and those who wanted to use
discriminatory policies to foster development (members of the Ministry of Commerce
and Industry).
The Second New Economic Policy was implemented by a public commission
with representatives of the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
Histadrut and the Manufacturers’ Association. The commission operated from 1962 to
1966 and decided whether and how to shift from quantity restrictions to price
intervention on a case-by-case basis. The distinction between the avowed goals of this
policy, and its actual effects, were discussed by Halevi and Klinov in their 1968 book:
“It might be supposed that this controversy was resolved [in favor of the price
mechanism] with the New Economic Policy in 1962 when the principle of multiple
exchange rates was rejected in official statements. But the implementation of the New
Economic Policy, and subsequent developments, suggest that a fundamental controversy
still remains, with little, if any, weakening of the Commerce and Industry approach.” (p.
248) Seven years later, a similar view was provided by Michaely when he wrote that the
commission demonstrated a bias against liberalization with its goal of “efficiency, not
elimination,” and often the amount of protection afforded an industry depended upon its
promised intentions rather than its actual performance.
The process of liberalization that began in 1962 with the Second New Economic
Policy remained incomplete at the time Michaely published his book thirteen years later.
The first stage of this process, of a switch from quantitative restrictions to tariff
protection, was largely completed by 1969. But, by the time Michaely completed his

43

book in the mid-1970s, he still looked forward to the abolition of tariff protection, which
he expected to occur by 1975 or 1976 (see p. 79). In fact, the wait for the abolition of
protection would be much longer still. Gabia and Rob, in their chapter of the 2002 BenBassat volume, wrote that “the 1980s were typified by vagueness in regard to trade
policy…Overall, the main effects of the policy were two – exacerbation of economic
distortions and vast empowerment of the professional and political bureaucracy to prefer
domestic manufacturers and importers and to enrich close and less-close associates by
providing favored parties with import licenses at no charge…” (p. 289). They stated that
it was only in the 1990s that “…pro-openness forces won the day…” (p. 290), and the
quote from them that began this section, in which they call Israel “…one of the most
open economies in the world…” (p. 306), represents a situation that only emerged after a
very protracted process.
The discussion in this section has shown that the liberalization process that
culminated in the openness of the Israeli economy might have foundered but for the
crises and challenges that spurred it on. More generally, as mentioned in previous
sections, the response to crises and acute challenges often led to fundamental shifts in
policy. Perhaps the major economic crisis that Israel faced was the protracted battle with
inflation in the 1970s and 1980s. In the next section, I consider the discussion of this
episode in the books reviewed here.

44

6. Inflation and Crisis
It is often remarked upon that, during its short existence, the State of Israel has
been severely challenged by its engagement in numerous wars and military conflicts.
Less often cited, but also important, is the fact that the State has also had more than its
share of economic crises since its founding. These crises have helped forge the country’s
economic system, as suggested in the subtitle of the book edited by Ben-Porath, Maturing
Through Crises. The crisis that may have had the largest effect on the economy of Israel,
at least since the early 1950s, was the inflation crisis of the 1970s and 1980s. As
mentioned in Section 1, the resolution of this crisis is viewed as the beginning of the
“modern” Israeli economy. In this section I review the discussion of this crisis in the
three most recent books and, in the two books written before its onset, the view of
inflation.
Inflation was of some concern in Israel before the late 1970s. Soon after the
founding of the State, rapid monetary growth led to incipient inflation, and an effort to
suppress it through price controls and rationing. These efforts ultimately failed in 1951,
and the government abandoned its comprehensive price controls. Patinkin wrote that this
episode gave members of the Israeli government a much greater appreciation and
understanding of the role of the price mechanism. But Patinkin viewed the 5.4% average
rate of annual inflation in the 1954 to 1958 period with a certain amount of equanimity.
He wrote that Israel, “… like many other economies in which inflation has become part
of everyday life and considerations – has shown much greater stability in this process
than might have been thought possible at one time.” (p. 115).16
16

While 5.4% inflation might seem low in light of subsequent experience in Israel, the appropriate context
is cross-sectional; for example, during this period, the average CPI inflation in the US was about 1%.

45

Halevi and Klinov devoted the last chapter of their book to the topic of inflation.
In a private conversation, Klinov indicated that she and Halevi “had to include” this
chapter because, by the time of the book’s publication, inflation had started to become a
topic of concern. The view expressed in the chapter on inflation in their book is
consistent with a prevailing view at that time concerning the Philips curve, as evidenced
by the passage “The benefits of inflation may be that it helps reduce unemployment,
enhances growth, and is an administratively cheap way of taxation. Its adverse effects
are mainly apt to occur in the fields of saving and investment, balance of payments
position, and income distribution.” (p. 279)
This somewhat benign view of inflation, not uncommon in many countries in the
1960s, was swept away in the 1970s with the rapid increase in prices worldwide. A much
less sanguine view of inflation took hold in Israel as prices rapidly rose and inflation
became more virulent. The volume edited by Ben-Porath appeared after several failed
attempts at stabilization, and just before the ultimately successful policy was undertaken.
In the first paragraph of the introduction to that volume, Ben-Porath wrote that during the
1970s “…Israel has become synonymous with running inflation and balance-of-payments
crises.” (p. 1)
A variety of views on the causes of the run-up in inflation are advanced in the
Ben-Porath volume. In one chapter of that book, Michael Bruno argued that “The
opening up of the economy to short-term external capital flows (and the unnecessarily
large devaluation that signaled its start) without any accompanying fiscal or liberalization
measures, locked the economy into a new inflation-cum-low-growth pattern…” (p. 301)
In a later chapter that Bruno co-authored with Stanley Fischer, the theme of weak

46

institutions is continued with the statement “Our view is that institutional adaptations and
accommodating monetary and fiscal policies have left the stabilizing forces in the
economy very weak…” (p. 347) Bruno and Fischer considered the expansionary fiscal
policies in 1978, as well as those under Finance Minister Yoram Aridor in 1981 and
1982, and in the pre-election period in 1984, as central sources for the explosion in the
inflation rate (see pp. 361 – 367). In another chapter in that volume, Nissan Liviatan and
Sylvia Piterman instead blamed the balance of payments crises in 1974, 1979, and 1983
as the driving forces behind the run-up in inflation, writing “The transformation of the
price-level shock into a new level of inflation is caused by an interaction of lags in the
adjustment process and by a general feeling that the BOP problem is being given priority
over stabilization of the inflation level.” (p. 321) In the introduction to the volume, BenPorath argues that “All of the various explanations of the acceleration of inflation and the
growing balance-of-payments deficit reflect the conflict, indeed the schizophrenia,
affecting the government as it wavered between its obligation to deal with pressing
economic problems and what it perceived as the constraints imposed by the public and
the political process.” (p. 18)
Ben-Porath’s point, on the importance of a political commitment to stabilization,
is supported by the post-mortem of 1985 heterodox plan by Razin and Sadka in their
1994 book. Razin and Sadka wrote that, in 1985, “The active and authoritative role
played by Shimon Peres was a remarkable contrast to the passive, unenthusiastic role
played by Prime Minister Menachem Begin in 1983…” (p. 30n) and emphasized efforts
to build support for the plan among various constituencies including “the pillars of the
political economic system: the government, the Histadrut, and the Private Employers

47

Association.” (p. 23) They also noted that public support for this program, that emerged
“as soon as it was implemented, clearly played a role in its success.” (p. 30). The
importance of this support, and the political backing of the program, is stressed by Razin
and Sadka because they believe that a cause of the crisis was “…a weak government,
which lacked resolve and had at best a poor understanding and awareness of the real
seriousness of these problems.” (p. 26)
Razin and Sadka also discussed the recession that occurred in the wake of the
stabilization plan, beginning in the second half of 1987. They see this recession as “the
inevitable outcome of the economic policy of 1986 – 1988.” (p. 49) More specifically,
they viewed the fixed exchange rate component of the policy as tying the hands of the
central bank in a way that caused distortions in the real exchange rate and in interest
rates, writing that “In the spring of 1988, well before the general elections held in
November, it became evident that the stubborn policy of freezing the exchange rate, in
effect since January of 1987, inflicted a heavy toll on the economy.” (p. 99)
The use of the exchange rate as a nominal anchor, and the subsequent
appreciation of the real exchange rate, is a common feature of stabilization programs, as
pointed out by Fischer and Orsmond in their contribution to the 2002 Ben-Bassat volume.
Looking at nine other countries’ experiences, they wrote “Virtually every country that
tried to disinflate initially relied on the exchange rate as the nominal anchor.” (p. 173) In
all but two of these countries, once the stabilization plan was enacted, “…the real
exchange rate appreciated, typically by around 30 – 50 percent, which soon called into
question the sustainability of the current account position.” (p. 177) Evaluating the
experience of Israel, Fischer and Orsmond concluded that “Although the far-ranging and

48

bold initial stabilization program led to a sharp reduction in inflation from very high
levels in 1985, the effort to continue the disinflation effort – meaning, in practice,
persistence with tight fiscal and monetary policies – waned thereafter.” (p. 179) Thus,
Fischer and Orsmond might take issue with the contention of Razin and Sadka
concerning the “stubborn policy of freezing the exchange rate” since, across countries
that attempted stabilization, a real exchange rate appreciation was common.
Furthermore, Fischer and Orsmond wrote that “Reinflationary pressures were evident
after mid-1986. In large part, these were caused by the nominal and real wage increases
conceded in the early phases of the program and their accommodation by monetary
policy…”. (p. 160)
Another post-mortem on the stabilization of the mid-1980s in the Ben-Bassat
volume is provided by Djivre and Tsiddon. Like Razin and Sadka, they also mentioned
the role of politics in the stabilization plan, although they focused on the 1985 Law of No
Printing, writing that “Up until the 1985 stabilization program, monetary policy had been
subordinated to the budget deficit financing requirements.” (p. 85). Djivre and Tsiddon
also considered the role of stabilization in contributing to the development of the
financial markets in Israel. Financial markets remained underdeveloped in the first half
of the 1980s both because of high inflation and because financial repression served the
goal of lowering the government’s cost of funds. But after 1987, with inflation largely
tamed and a reduced public sector budget deficit weakening the government’s motivation
to repress financial markets, liberalization allowed greater competition in financial
markets. Thus, the development of financial markets in the late 1980s and early 1990s

49

represents a case where reforms that were part of a response to an acute crisis led to
structural changes that fostered development of the Israeli economy.

7. Conclusion: The Seventh Book
Perhaps the only (and certainly the oldest) long-term economic forecast that
proved accurate was “Immediately ahead are seven years of great abundance in all the
land of Egypt. After them will come seven years of famine…” (Exodus, 41: 29 – 30).
While acknowledging the very real difficulties in peering more than a few quarters into
the future, what will the next major book on the Israeli economy, the one that is published
after 2010, have to say about developments during the present decade?
If the arc of the discussion in the six books reviewed here is any guide, the Israeli
economy will likely maintain its level of liberalization, and perhaps even become more
open to the world economy and more oriented towards markets. The shadow of the crisis
of the mid-1980s still seems to hang over thinking about the proper structure and conduct
of the economy. The reforms set in place since that crisis do not show evidence of being
reversed. And, as pointed out by Ben-Bassat, a continued success of the liberalization
program will help to maintain its policy goals.
But economic policy may be altered in response to the fate of an influential group,
rather than the performance of the economy as a whole. If efforts to move Israel towards
a more free-market economy are not accompanied by policies that mitigate the costs to
those disadvantaged by these reforms, the policies may be challenged. Of course, those
who are disadvantaged by reforms can include the wealthy as well as the poor, and in
most countries political clout is correlated with economic success. Therefore, the success

50

and maintenance of reforms is linked to issues of economic equality. The political
process, along with economic outcomes, will ultimately determine how durable reforms
prove to be.
But the most important political calculus for the Israeli economy involves the
conflicts between Israel and her neighboring countries, as well as between Israel and the
Palestinians. It is unfortunate that the one continuing theme, across all of the volumes
reviewed here, is that Israel has remained a country characterized by a constant struggle
for its existence against forces aligned against it. The real difficulty in forecasting the
economy of Israel over the next decade arises because of the impossibility in forecasting
the international political environment in which that economy will either thrive or
struggle. The most beneficial change in the environment for the Israeli economy, and,
more broadly, for Israeli society in general, would be a stable, lasting, and meaningful
peace.

51

