                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         INTERNATIONAL BORROWING
                AND MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE IN ARGENTINA

                                      Kathryn M.E. Dominguez
                                           Linda L. Tesar

                                        Working Paper 11353
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11353


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2005




Prepared for the NBER conference on International Capital Flows, December 17-18, 2004 in Santa Barbara,
California. Forthcoming in an NBER book to be published by the University of Chicago Press. We thank
Ron Alquist for excellent research assistance. We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Nicolas
Magud, Juan Carlos Hallak, Alan Taylor, Martin Feldstein, Barry Eichengreen, Charlie Calomiris, and
Sebastian Edwards. The views expressed in this document are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Kathryn M.E. Dominguez and Linda L. Tesar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
International Borrowing and Macroeconomic Performance in Argentina
Kathryn M.E. Dominguez and Linda L. Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 11353
May 2005
JEL No. O54, F3, F21, F42

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper provides an overview of the major economic events in Argentina from the adoption of

the convertibility plan in 1991 to the collapse of the exchange rate regime in 2001. We focus on the

relationship between the credibility of the currency board and capital flows, and the inescapable link

between fiscal and monetary policy. Argentina inadvertently entered into a vicious circle with

financial markets     one in which it felt compelled to raise the exit costs from the currency board

in order to maintain the regime’s credibility. As exit costs mounted, financial markets became

increasingly concerned about the dire implications of a devaluation, which in turn, compelled the

government to raise exit costs further. In the late 1990s, when Argentina went into recession, it

required some sort of stimulus     either a loosening of monetary policy (i.e. a devaluation) or fiscal

stimulus. But either way spelled disaster. The added pressure of capital outflow, first by international

investors and then the withdrawal of deposits from the Argentine banking system, eventually tipped

the scales.

Kathryn M.E. Dominguez
University of Michigan School of Public Policy
440 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
kathrynd@umich.edu

Linda L. Tesar
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
ltesar@umich.edu
1. Introduction

In the early 1990s Argentina was the darling of international capital markets and viewed
by many as a model of reform for emerging markets. Early in his Presidency, Carlos
Menem embarked on a bold set of economic policies, including the adoption of a
currency board which pegged the peso to the dollar, a sweeping privatization program for
state-owned enterprises, an overhaul of the banking system, and privatization of the
public pension system. The business press marveled over the rapid turnaround in the
Argentine economy. Although there were some concerns about the appropriateness and
sustainability of the dollar anchor and whether the fiscal reforms were more rhetoric than
reality, the policies appeared to have conquered inflation and set the country on a course
of steady economic growth.

By the end of the 1990s, however, Argentina’s situation had dramatically changed. The
country had weathered the financial crises in Mexico and Asia, and despite the volatility
of capital flows, Argentina’s currency board remained intact and forecasts of future
growth were relatively positive. The Russian default in August 1998, however, caused
international investors to pull out of all emerging markets, seemingly with little regard for
country-specific economic conditions. More bad luck followed in January 1999 when
Brazil, Argentina’s major trading partner, devalued its currency, further weakening the
competitiveness of Argentine exports. Economic growth stalled and unemployment
remained high. Despite the lowering of world interest rates, which helped reduce the cost
of external borrowing, the economy was teetering on the brink of default. In 2001, the
economy spiraled downward and depositors scrambled to pull their savings out of the
banking system. In a desperate attempt to stave off disaster, the government imposed
sweeping capital controls. By 2002, Argentina was in complete political and economic
collapse. The currency board was abandoned, the exchange rate devalued, and eight years
of growth in GDP were lost.

Argentina’s situation cannot, however, be solely attributed to a run of “bad luck.” Policy
decisions taken during the 1990s - and just as importantly policy indecision – made the
country vulnerable to the kinds of shocks that affected all emerging markets. The
inability to bring fiscal policy under control, the incomplete reforms of the banking
sector, and rigidities in the economy, ultimately left the country with no good solutions.
What the currency board required -- constraints on fiscal policy and complete abdication
of monetary policy -- proved to be beyond the political capacity of the Argentine
government.

Much has been written about what happened to Argentina, why the crisis happened when
it did, and what might have been done to prevent it. Although views differ about the
relative importance of the various factors leading up to the collapse, there is general
consensus that peso-dollar convertibility was a two-edged sword – it effectively bought
the country credibility and eradicated inflation, but at too high a price. Argentina’s
experience reveals two major problems with currency boards. The first is reflected in the
relationship between the credibility of the currency board and capital flows. Argentina
inadvertently entered into a vicious circle with financial markets – one in which it felt


                                             1
compelled to raise the exit costs from the currency board in order to maintain the
regime’s credibility. The Argentine government raised exit costs by issuing its own debt
in dollars, and by facilitating dollarization in the private sector (for example, by adopting
prudential norms in the banking system that biased deposits and loans toward dollars
rather than pesos). As exit costs mounted, of course, financial markets became
increasingly concerned about the dire implications of a devaluation, which in turn,
compelled the government to raise exit costs further.

A second, related issue has to do with the inescapable link between fiscal and monetary
policy. In retrospect, it now seems clear that the lack of coordination between the fiscal
policy of the central government and the provinces played a critical role in bringing about
the failure of the currency board. By 1999, the economy was in a deep recession with low
growth and high unemployment that required some sort of stimulus –either a loosening of
monetary policy (i.e. a devaluation) or fiscal stimulus. But either way spelled disaster. A
devaluation would clearly undermine the currency board. And a rise in government debt
would raise suspicions that it would eventually be monetized, further undermining the
value of the peso. Ultimately, fears of a devaluation resulted in more dollarization and
more of a strain on the banking sector. The added pressure of capital outflow, first by
international investors and then the withdrawal of deposits from the Argentine banking
system, eventually tipped the scales.

The purpose of this paper is to provide an overview of the major economic events in
Argentina from the adoption of the convertibility plan in 1991 to the collapse of the
exchange rate regime in 2001. Section 2 reviews the key components of the
Convertibility Plan and the responses of financial markets and the macroeconomy to the
economic and financial reforms embodied in the Plan. Section 3 describes the set of
external shocks that buffeted the economy between 1991 and 1999. Section 4 reviews the
set of policy decisions and reforms that took place over that period. Section 5 examines
the collapse in 2001. An Epilogue follows and a chronology of economic and political
events in Argentina from 1989 through 2004 is provided in the Appendix.

2. The Convertibility Plan

On July 9, 1989 Carlos Menem assumed the Argentine presidency in the first peaceful
transfer of power from one democratically elected leader to another since 1928.1 He
assumed the office six months ahead of schedule, however, due to the social and
economic crisis that engulfed the country. The Austral Plan, adopted in May 1985, had
replaced the peso with a new currency, and prices, wages and utility rates had been
frozen in an attempt to stabilize inflation. Figure 1 shows monthly inflation and annual
real GDP, two key barometers of the health of the Argentine economy over the 1980-
2004 period. The Austral Plan had temporarily slowed inflation but did little to spur
economic growth. During the period 1981 – 1989, average real GDP growth was negative
at –0.7 percent and real income in 1989 had slid to 90 percent of its 1980 level.2 In the
1
  For a historical perspective see, della Paolera and Taylor (2001,2002, 2003), Romero and Brennan (2002),
Randall (1978) and Taylor (1998).
2
  Growth in real GDP based on data from International Financial Statistics, IMF.


                                                    2
spring of 1989, inflation spiraled out of control and the Alfonsin government violently
repressed mobs of angry rioters and looters.

After 18 months in office, the Menem government, under the guidance of Domingo
Cavallo as Minister of the Economy, implemented far-reaching economic reforms. The
capstone of the reform package was the Convertibility Plan, which was designed to
eliminate Argentina’s chronic inflation and restore credibility to the Argentine peso.3 The
Plan pegged the peso at a one-to-one parity with the US dollar and required that two-
thirds of the monetary base be backed by international reserves. The other one-third could
be backed by dollar-denominated Argentine central bank securities at market prices, but
holdings of those securities could not expand by more than 10 percent per year.4 The Plan
effectively converted the central bank into a currency board that could issue domestic
currency only in exchange for foreign currency at a fixed rate. The government
encouraged dollarization by making it legal to write contracts in foreign currencies and
allowing foreign currencies to be used as an alternative means of payment. By 1994,
over 60% of time deposits and 50% of loans to the private sector were denominated in
dollars.

Until the 1990s, trade barriers and restrictions on international investment had insulated
the country from international markets. Another important component of the plan was the
reduction in tariffs and other barriers to trade in goods and the flow of capital.
Restrictions on the entry of foreign banks were lifted. The banks faced high reserve
requirements and to minimize moral hazard, deposit insurance was eliminated.
Effectively, monetary policy for Argentina was set by the U.S. Federal Reserve, and the
Argentine central bank had very limited scope to operate as a lender of last resort.
Implications of this new role for the central bank are discussed in more detail in Section
4.b.

The Menem government also proceeded with the privatization of state-owned firms and
and the deregulation of a number of industries, particularly in the petroleum and gas,
electricity, and communications sectors. According to a study by Galiani, Gertler,
Schargrodsky and Sturzenegger (2001), the privatization dramatically increased the
profitability, sales and efficiency of non-financial as well as financial firms. One of the
negative consequences of the increase in efficiency, however, was the layoff of
employees. Galiani et. al. (2001) estimate employment reductions of about 40 percent as
a result of privatization. One of the positive benefits, and the likely motivator for the
privatization program, was the revenue accrued by the central government. Some of the
revenue from privatization was used to finance another of the Menem government’s
reforms: the transition from a pay-as-you-go social security system to privately-managed
retirement saving accounts.

An additional benefit of the privatization program was the jumpstart it provided to
financial markets. Figure 2 shows the value of mergers and acquisitions of Argentine
companies over the 1990 – 2003 period. In the first M&A boom in 1992, some $8 billion

3
    See Cavallo and Cottani (1997) and Cavallo (2003).
4
    See Pou (2000) for a detailed description of the Convertibility Plan and the Central Bank Charter.


                                                        3
in assets changed hands, over 90 percent of which were in the electricity, gas, petroleum
and telecommunications industries. The second boom occurred in 1997-1999, when a
much larger fraction of Argentine assets were sold to foreign residents.

The government also took some initial steps toward addressing the fiscal imbalances
between the provincial and central government. Under the system of fiscal federalism in
Argentina, the bulk of revenue is raised by the central government, while the provincial
governments retain a large degree of autonomy in allocating expenditures. Expenditures
are covered through a complicated system of intergovernmental transfers from the central
government to the various provinces. Provincial governments also retained some
authority to issue bonds effectively backed by the central bank. In 1991-92, the Menem
government was able to lower the transfer payments to the provinces to help cover the
costs of the pension reform.5

The market response to the economic reforms was swift and dramatic. Table 1 provides
summary statistics of Argentina’s macroeconomic performance, government budget
balance, and its balance of payments. GDP growth picked up in 1991 and continued at
levels above those of the rest of Latin America through 1994. The currency board was
effective in taming inflation – the mean level of inflation dropped from nearly 400
percent per annum to a little under 10 percent in 1991-94 to almost zero in 1995-98. The
economic boom was fueled by increases in private consumption and investment.

The lifting of controls also had a positive effect on capital inflows and on financial
markets. The US investment position in Argentine equity rose from virtually nothing in
the 1980s to around $5 billion by end 1994, roughly 14 percent of Argentine market
capitalization. Figure 3 shows the volume of capital inflow by type (portfolio equity
flows, long-term debt, short-term debt, FDI) into Argentina over the 1986-2002 period.
The country was effectively in financial autarky prior to the Menem reforms, with the
exception of sovereign borrowing. That situation changed markedly in the 1990s. Capital
inflows generally increased in the 1990s, with some ups and downs in the 1994-99
period. The cost of capital reflected in the Emerging Market Bond Index spread for
Argentina hovered between 400 and 600 basis points from late 1993 through mid 1994.

The Convertibility Plan was far-reaching in scope and clearly had a positive impact on
the economy. However, even at the time of its implementation, critics were quick to point
out that it failed to grapple with some structural problems. First, the Plan failed to
consolidate the budget constraint for the central government and the provinces. Second,
there were concerns that the banking reforms were not as deep as they needed to be given
the lack of a national lender of last resort. Third, labor market rigidities slowed the
economy’s response to reforms. Fourth, the question remained whether pegging to the
dollar was a feasible long-term anchor for the Argentine economy, particularly given that
only a small share of Argentine trade was with the US. And finally, the Plan, almost by
design, did not specify an exit strategy from the peg, if it were found to be unsustainable



5
    See Tommasi (2002)


                                            4
in the long run. These issues would resurface precisely when the Argentine economy
weakened and would contribute to the currency board’s eventual collapse.6


3. External Shocks: Weathering the Storm 1994-1999

With hindsight it is easy to see that Argentina’s boom in the early 1990s, with inflation
under control and GDP growth on an upward path, was in fact on precarious footing.
Like many other Latin American countries, the Argentine savings rate was low, and with
Argentine government deficits rising, Argentina was especially dependent on foreign
capital to finance new investments. Argentina’s vulnerability to shifts in external capital
flows was first apparent in the aftermath of the Tequila crisis, and became especially
worrisome by 1999 when Brazil devalued the Real, and foreign capital again abruptly
stopped flowing. The 1990s saw a number of “star” emerging markets falter, Argentina
among them. The ultimate “causes” of the economic crises that shook Mexico in 1994,
East Asia in 1997, Russia in 1998 and Brazil in 1999 are still under debate, but what is
clear is that each of the crises took its toll on Argentina.

3. a. The Tequila Financial Crises

The start of the so-called Tequila Crisis is typically dated December 20, 1994 when the
Mexican Central Bank was forced to widen its peso bands in reaction to massive capital
outflows, leading to an immediate 15% devaluation and further reserve outflows. Two
days later the peso was officially allowed to float and it continued to lose value while
peso interest rates sharply increased. The peso depreciations led to concern that the
Mexican government would default on Tesobonos (short-term government bonds
denominated in pesos but indexed to the dollar) and Mexican Banks would fail (due to
the large and growing proportion of non-performing floating interest rate loans).

These fears led to a chaotic exit of foreign and domestic investors from not only from
Mexico, but from most of Latin America.7 Figure 4 shows U.S. net purchases of Latin
American stocks and bonds, as well as net purchases of Argentine securities. Two things
stand out from the figure. First, US net purchases are highly correlated across Latin
American countries. Second, U.S. net purchases, which reflect a large fraction of total
flows to this region, are highly volatile and are responsive to financial crises in Latin
America as well as in other regions. The Tequila crisis led to a fall in Brady bond prices
and stock exchange indices in most Latin American countries. Figure 5 shows the
increase in the EMBI spread, which jumped to nearly 2,000 basis points.


6
  See, among others, Bleaney (2004), Calvo and Reinhart (2002), Edwards (2002), Feldstein (2002),
Gurtner (2004), Hausmann and Velasco (2002).
7
  On February 1, 1995 the IMF approved an external aid package for Mexico (which included $20b from
U.S., $18b from IMF, $10b from BIS and $2b from commercial banks) which restored investor confidence
in the Mexican government’s ability to honor the Tesobono contracts. Mexico announced a stringent
austerity package in early March, and by July re-entered international capital markets and sold $1b in two-
year dollar-denominated notes at 11%, an interest rate well below the 20% plus rates on Tesobonos sold in
January 1995.


                                                     5
Argentina and Brazil were particularly hard hit by the exit of international investors from
Latin America. The Argentine Merval fell 33% between December 1, 1994 and January
10, 1995 and Argentine banks experienced significant peso deposit withdrawals and
substitutions from peso to dollar accounts.8 Total (peso and dollar) deposits had
increased dramatically in Argentina between March 1991 and November 1994 as
Argentines became more confident about the viability of the new economic regime. At
the end of 1994 the value of peso deposits in Argentina was just 9% lower than the value
of dollar deposits. During the Tequila crisis total deposits in the Argentine banking
system fell for the first time since the establishment of the Convertibility Plan, with the
decline falling disproportionately on peso deposits. After the Tequila crisis, the
dollarization of deposits steadily increased, so that by 2001 over 80% of time deposits
were denominated in dollars.9 A further indication of the impact of the Tequila crisis on
the Argentine banking system shows up in M3 (currency in pesos and deposits of pesos
and dollars) growth, which fell by 4.4% in 1995. Peso prime loan rates rose from 10.1 in
1994 to 17.8% in 1995, and spreads between the peso interest rate and dollar interest rate
widened by over 50 basis points. Argentine Central Bank international reserves fell by
18% in the first six months of 1995.

The Argentine government responded to the deterioration of its financial markets by
putting in place a number of banking sector reforms.10 On December 28, 1994 it reduced
reserve requirements on dollar deposits in order to provide more liquidity to the banking
system. In mid-January reserve requirements on peso deposits were also lowered. A
special security Fund managed by Banco Nacion (the largest government bank), made up
of 5 private institutions and 2 public banks and funded with reserve requirements was set
up to assist institutions which suffered high deposit withdrawals. (Recall that the
Argentine Central Bank could not serve as a lender of last resort under the convertibility
law.) In February 1995 the Trust Fund for Provincial Development was set up to help
support the Provincial banks. In March a similar Trust Fund for Bank Capitalization was
established, and changes were made to the Central Bank Charter to allow it to use repos
and rediscounts to help troubled banks. In the same month, Argentina entered into new
loan agreements with the IMF, the World Bank, and IBD and issued new bonds (for a
total of $7 billion) to increase international reserves and to fund the trust funds. In April
a deposit insurance network was put in place, which covered up to $20,000 per person
(later raised to $30,000) for certain bank deposits.

In the midst of the after-shocks of the Tequila crisis, President Menem won re-election in
May 1995 and the run on Argentina’s banks ended. Argentina’s recovery from 1995 to
1996 was remarkably swift. GDP growth rallied from negative 3.6% in 1995 to positive
5.4% in 1996, led by investment and exports. However, this new growth did little to
improve the fiscal situation; the government deficit as a percent of GDP remained stable

8
  See De La Torre, Levy Yeyati and Schumkler (2003) for a detailed description of the reactions of
Argentine depositors and the banking sector to the Tequila crisis.
9
  Demand deposits remained largely denominated in pesos, while approximately 40% of savings deposits
were dollarized in the 1990s. The large increase in deposit dollarization occurred in time deposits, which
were already 60% dollarized in 1992.
10
   See Dabos and Gomez-Mera (1998) for a detailed description of the post-Tequila crisis banking reforms.


                                                    6
at 1.3% over this period and the ratio of external debt to exports stayed at just under
340% (see Table 1).

While the Tequila crisis and its implications for capital flows was clearly bad luck for
Argentina, it was followed by some good luck in the form of US and Brazilian policy
spillovers. The Fed shifted toward more expansionary monetary policy in early 1995,
leading to a fall in US interest rates and a sharp depreciation in the US dollar, in turn
improving Argentine competitiveness in world markets. At the same time Brazil,
Argentina’s main trading partner, experienced a rise in the value of the Real, further
strengthening Argentina’s relative position. These “good” external shocks allowed
Argentina to recover much more quickly than many had anticipated, and perhaps lulled
Argentine policy makers and investors into a false sense of security. Mussa (2002) goes
so far as to suggest that “were it not for the substantial improvements in bank soundness
and for the external good luck, the Convertibility Plan might not have survived the
Tequila crisis” (pp. 21).

3.b The Asia Crisis

There is little evidence of spillover from the Asian Crisis to Latin America until October
1997 after the attack on the Hong Kong dollar. International bond issues from Latin
America declined to less than $4b in the 4th quarter of 1997 compared to $20b during the
previous quarter. Figure 4 shows that US net purchases of stocks and bonds in Latin
America plummeted from a peak of $8 billion in the summer of 1997 to zero in the fourth
quarter. US net purchases in Argentina, however, remained positive. Stock indices fell
throughout the emerging markets, with Brazil being the hardest hit, apparently because of
its large current account deficit and overvalued currency. At the same time, Argentina
was considered “doubly vulnerable” because of its fixed exchange rate and its
dependence on Brazil as a trading partner. Portfolio equity flows to Argentine fell 380%
and FDI flows fell by 23% between 1997 and 1998, though the net flow of long term debt
increased by 47%. Overall, net capital flows to Argentina over this period actually rose
by 5%, because the sharp decline in portfolio and FDI investment were outweighed by
the increase in long term debt, which accounted for a larger share of the total. The
Argentine governments’ only policy reaction to the Asia Crisis was the introduction of
the “anti-bubble” rule, which increased the capital requirement for new mortgage loans
when a nationwide real estate price index surpassed certain thresholds.

3.c The Russian Default

Just as emerging markets were beginning to recover from the Asia crisis, news that
Russia would default on its sovereign bonds in August 1998 sent markets once again
reeling. Few investors imagined that Russia would not be bailed out, and investors
quickly realized that if Russia was to default, other vulnerable emerging markets were
likely to follow. The news from Russia was a disaster for stock market investors in
Argentina, as the Merval plummeted 40% between August and September 1998. Private
capital inflows to Argentina, which had already slowed in the aftermath of the Asia
Crisis, now turned negative in the fourth quarter of 1998. From July to August 1998, the



                                            7
spread on Argentine sovereign bonds almost tripled. Throughout the fall, the spread
remained about 400 basis points higher than the spread that prevailed in July 1998 and
this, in turn, led domestic peso and dollar interest rates to rise sharply.

Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003) suggest that the dramatic stop in international capital
flows to emerging markets that followed Russia’s partial foreign debt repudiation
provides strong evidence in favor of contagion-based (and against traditional fiscal-
based) explanations for financial flows. Countries, such as Argentina and Brazil, which
had little or no financial or trading ties to Russia found that their access to external capital
had suddenly been cut off.

3.d Brazilian Devaluation

While Argentina was badly affected by the general exit of investors from emerging
markets, Brazil - already hard hit by the Asia Crisis - was dealt a knock-out blow.11 On
January 13, 1999 Gustavo Franco, the governor of the Brazilian Central Bank, resigned;
and the government announced a widening of the band for the Real. This was tantamount
to a devaluation of the real of 8%. The financial reaction in Argentina to the Brazilian
devaluation was immediate. Argentine interest rates rose sharply, the Merval plummeted,
and Argentina was effectively shut out of global financial markets.

Many observers, at least with hindsight, date the beginning of the Argentine economic
crisis in 2001 to the Brazilian devaluation (which, in turn, may have been set off by the
Russia default). Brazil was Argentina’s major trading partner, and the combination of
Brazil’s economic woes, which would surely reduce its import demand from Argentina,
and the exit of international capital flows from the region, had serious implications for
Argentina.

Returning to Figure 3, we see that that short term lending and portfolio equity flows to
Argentina, whose trend had generally been rising throughout the 1990s, with short-term
reversals after the Mexican and Asia crisis, sharply plummeted in 1999. Total capital
flows into Argentina remained positive, primarily because of an unprecedented inflow of
FDI. Interestingly, 64 percent of the inflow of FDI in that year is due to the acquisition of
a single company, YPF, by Repsol, a Spanish company (see Figure 6). Netting out the
YPF transaction, capital inflows would have remained positive in 1999, but drop to $5
billion from $20 billion.

In a series of papers Guillermo Calvo and various co-authors12 make the case that severe
capital flow reversals, such as that experienced by Argentina in 1999-2000, can be

11
   While portfolio flows to all emerging market countries fell dramatically after the Russia default, FDI
flows were less uniform. Noteworthy in this regard is the fact that FDI flows to Brazil rose substantially in
dollar terms from mid-1998 to mid-2001. Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003) suggest that it was in part
these FDI flows that allowed Brazil to recover so quickly from the Russia-crisis induced Sudden Stop.
Other factors in Brazil’s favor were the fact that its’ public debt was only partially dollarized, and that
substantial fiscal retrenchment was politically feasible.
12
   See, for example, Calvo (1998), Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003), and Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia
(2004).


                                                      8
triggers of subsequent economic crisis. Further, Calvo suggests that three factors in
particular exacerbate an economy’s vulnerability to “Sudden Stops”13: the pre-“stop”
level of indebtedness, the degree of domestic liability dollarization, and the dependence
on financing from abroad to pay for imports. Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003) argue
that the Argentine economy in the 1990s had just the characteristics that would lead it to
be hard hit in the advent of a sudden stop. Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004) date
Argentina’s “Sudden Stop” as starting in May 1999.

The “Sudden Stop” literature suggests that it is the capital flows (or lack thereof)
themselves that are pivotal. In theory, a sudden stop in capital flows could arise from
external factors, such as contagion or margin calls14 that arise from economic crises that
are unrelated to the country in question. Internal factors can either mitigate or magnify
the effects of the sudden stop on the economy. In countries like Argentina, with a small
share of tradable goods output relative to domestic absorption of tradeable goods, a
sudden stop in capital flows requires a sharp increase in the equilibrium real exchange
rate to transform the current account deficit into a surplus.15 If the country also has large
financial currency-denomination mismatches (for example, liability dollarization),16 the
real depreciation will, in turn, lead to a weakening of corporate, and in the case of
Argentina, government balance sheets.17

Argentina’s experience immediately following the Russian default closely follows the
Sudden Stop logic. With the fall off in capital inflows, investors and (perhaps most
importantly) official creditors realized that the sustainability of Argentina’s fiscal
situation, though still not dramatically different from where it had been a year previous,
was precarious. Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003) estimate that “once all the elements
triggered by the sudden stop are factored in (valuation effects, interest rate increases,
growth slowdown, and emergence of contingent liabilities from the private sector), the

13
   Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004) define a Sudden Stop as a sharp decline in capital flows that meets the
following three criteria: (1) it contains at least one observation where the year-on-year fall in capital flows
lies at least two standard deviations below its sample mean, (2) it ends once the annual change in capital
flows exceeds one standard deviation below its sample mean, (3) the start is determined by the first time the
annual change in capital flows falls one standard deviation below the mean.
14
   For a further discussion of the potential role of margin calls in sudden stops see Mendoza and Smith
(2002).
15
   Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003) calculate that Argentina would have needed to depreciate its
equilibrium real exchange rate by a whopping 46% in 1998 in order to bring down its current account to
zero.
16
   Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003) estimate that Argentina had an extremely high degree of public sector
debt mismatch in 1998. Their calculation for Argentina was 0.01 on a 1-to-0 scale with 1 representing a
perfect match, and zero representing the highest degree of mismatch. Given this level of currency
mismatch, the authors indicate that had there been a real depreciation of 46% (the amount needed to
balance the current account), Argentina would have had a debt/GDP ratio of just under 50% assuming no
increase in interest rates and no fall in growth rates. If the contingent liabilities of the public sector that
arose out of the (also highly dollarized) corporate and banking sectors are included – the debt/GDP ratio
rises to well over 50%.
17
   Government policy can, in principle, offset the negative effects of a sudden stop induced real
appreciation on corporate balance sheets by providing the private sector with additional collateral. Korea,
with the help of the IMF, was able to mitigate the effects of the Asian crisis induced sudden stop in this
manner.


                                                      9
primary fiscal balance needed to regain sustainability would have exceeded 3% of GDP”
in 1998 (page 32). The political economy implications of this for the Menem
government, which was in its final year (presidental elections were set for December
1999 and the Argentine constitution did not allow Menem to run for a third term) were
dire.

3.e Reduction in world interest rates

Argentina was on the brink of economic collapse in early 1999, but just as had been the
case after the Tequila crisis, Argentina was dealt a “positive” shock in the second half of
1999 that allowed it to make another surprising, even if temporary, recovery.

In this case Argentina’s rescue came from an unusual source: conditions in European
financial markets. As European governments strove to meet the Mastricht criteria in the
run-up to the establishment of the Euro, interest rates - which had been relatively high in
a number of European countries - converged downward. This sent investors seeking
higher yields to alternative markets. Argentina recognized this potential market niche
and successfully floated (high yield) sovereign debt denominated in euros during this
period. As Mussa (2002) points out, “the success of Argentina in floating substantial
amounts of sovereign debt in global credit markets during much of 1999 and the first half
of 2000 testifies both to the special conditions in those markets and to Argentine
authorities’ particularly deft management of public debt.” (pp. 25)

4. Internal Policy Mistakes
At the same time that Argentina was buffeted, in both positive and negative directions, by
external shocks, internal policies also had a major influence on the economy. The role of
fiscal policy in the lead-up to Argentina’s economic collapse is perhaps the most
controversial. Mussa (2002) and the IMF (2003, 2004) emphasize the role of failure in
fiscal policy as the root cause of the crisis. Others suggest that fiscal policy was either
less central, or in some views, irrelevant. Another area of controversy is the role of the
banking sector in the ultimate collapse of the economy, and in particular the currency
mismatches between dollar deposits and peso-denominated assets.

4. a Untamed Fiscal Policy

Out of context, Argentina’s fiscal numbers do not suggest much reason for concern. In
1993 public debt was 28% of GDP, inflation was under control and GDP growth could
arguably have been expected to continue at 6-7%. It was in this seemingly robust fiscal
environment that the Argentine government decided to privatize its social security
system, which produced an extra annual bill equal to 1.5% of GDP (roughly $2 billion
based on GDP in 1995), though in the long run the privatization was expected to save the
government money. Other privatization efforts in the period 1993-1998 resulted in $2.9b
in nonrecurring revenues. By 1998 the Argentine public debt had risen to $112b (as a
ratio to GDP public debt had risen to 37%), which in a broader context might still be
considered moderate.


                                            10
Mussa (2002) points out, however, that this rise in public debt should have been
worrisome because it occurred during a period of relatively high economic growth, it
included a number of one-off revenue increases due to privatizations, and it would have
looked worse but for the fact that Brady bond restructuring in 1993 involved substantial
back-loading of interest payments, and “a good deal of public sector borrowing was not
included in the budget” (Mussa, pp. 16).18 An assessment of the Argentine fiscal situation
is further complicated by the role of provincial government spending, which is not
subject to a balanced-budget rule. While provincial expenditures generally totaled less
than 12% of GDP per year, the system of Argentine fiscal federalism provided little
incentive for provinces to reduce spending.19

Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003) describe Argentina, which has defaulted on its
debts five times since 1820, as a “serial defaulter”. They show that serial defaulters can
develop debt intolerance, where the risk of default begins to skyrocket at debt levels that
might be quite manageable for countries with less checkered credit records. Argentina
appears, in their calculations, to hit debt intolerance at debt-to-GDP ratios of only 25-
30%, so that alarm bells should have been ringing well before 1998.

It is also worth remembering that Argentina’s public debt during the 1990s was almost
entirely denominated in foreign currencies, reflecting its limited ability to issue long-term
debt in its own currency,20 itself a reflection of the fact that the convertibility regime
encouraged dollar-denominated debt.21 As with other emerging market economies,
Argentina could borrow only at sizable spreads over U.S. treasuries, and a negative shift
in market sentiment generally resulted in higher interest rates, creating potentially
explosive debt dynamics even at relatively modest levels of debt.22

At the same time that debt to GDP ratios should have sounded off alarms (and indeed,
seem not to have sounded off alarms at the IMF until it was too late), Argentina’s debt-
to-exports ratio should have also provided cause for concern. One of the costs of the
currency board was a chronic over-valuation of the peso. Figure 7 shows that in the


18
   Perry and Servén (2002) show that if an equilibrium real exchange rate (rather than the one-for-one peso-
dollar rate) is used in the calculation, the public sector debt-to-GDP ratio in 2001 rises by 24%.
19
   Expenditures in the Provinces rose steadily in the late 1990s, while transfers from the Central
Government remained fixed as a constant proportion of tax revenue, which led to widening provincial
deficits. See Cuevas (2003) for a discussion of reforming intergovernmental transfers.
20
   Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2003) describe that the difficulty of emerging market economies to
issue debt in local currency can be traced to one of two (similar though distinct) phenomena: “original sin”
or “debt intolerance”. Original sin implies that the problem arises externally, with the structure of global
portfolios and international financial markets, while debt intolerance implies that the problem arises
internally, with weak institutions. In either case, the authors term “currency mismatches” as the
consequence of these problems. See also Bordo et al (2003) and Rigobon (2002).
21
   The Argentine government did not issue peso-denominated debt, both because peso debt was more
expensive (peso interest rates were always higher than dollar interest rates) and to avoid the appearance of
hedging against the collapse of the Convertibility Plan.
22
   See, for example, Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003), Cespedes et. Al. (2000) and Galiani et. al.
(2003).


                                                    11
period 1991-1993, the real effective peso exchange rate appreciated by almost 25%.23
Between 1996 and 1997 the world price of Argentina’s commodity exports fell by 20%,
followed by a further decline of equal size in 1998.24 By the end of 1998 Argentina’s
debt-to-export ratio was at 379% and debt service payments alone absorbed the majority
of annual export earnings. In 1999, in the wake of the Brazilian devaluation, export
growth fell by over 9 percent and the debt-to-export ratio rose to 427%.

Finally, the Convertibility Plan did not stop the Argentine government from attempting to
monetize its debts. Once foreign capital had been exhausted, the Argentine government,
though unable to directly print pesos, did the next best thing by issuing small-
denomination federal bonds redeemable for federal tax payments. These bonds were
called “lecop” (for letras de cancelación de obligaciones provinciales) and were
considered quasi-money. Many of the provinces followed the federal government’s lead
and printed their own versions of quasi-money to pay for fiscal deficits. For example, the
province of Buenos Aires issued “Patacón” and Córdoba issued “Lecor”. In December
2001 quasi-monies issued by the federal government and the provinces exceeded 24% of
pesos in circulation.

4. b The Role of the Banks

The convertibility regime required an especially strong banking and financial system
because restrictions on monetary policy prevented the central bank from acting as a
lender of last resort through money creation.25 In the aftermath of the Tequila crisis when
banks experienced massive deposit outflows, the Argentine government put in place a
number of banking reforms to strengthen domestic banks, and at the same time
encouraged foreign banking institutions to enter the Argentine market.26 By the end of the
1990s, Argentina was considered a model for other emerging market economies in the
area of banking supervision and prudential policy. Banking system assets doubled from
only 20 percent of GDP in 1991 to 40 percent of GDP in 1999.

At the same time that the Argentine government was instituting important banking sector
reforms, it was also saddling its banks (and especially public banks) with public sector
debt. Banking system exposure to the public sector rose from about 10% of total assets

23
   See Dubas, Lee and Nelson (2004).
24
   Another aspect of Argentina’s trade patterns that increased its vulnerability, was the fact that Mercosur,
established in 1991 (which created a free-trade zone among Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Chile
and Bolivia) likely led to trade diversion and a less diversified trade market. Argentina went from trading
around 20% with Mercosur partners in 1991 to 45% in 1998 (with the bulk of exports going to Brazil).
25
   There was a proviso in the Convertibility Plan Law that allowed up to one-third of international reserves
to be made up of internationally traded, dollar-denominated Argentine sovereign bonds, valued at market
prices. This allowed a very limited “lender of last resort” role since the Central Bank could provide the
banking system with pesos in exchange for sovereign Argentine bonds (rather than dollars).
26
   Foreign-owned banks presumably contribute to a strengthening of the banking system, because they are
less tied to the domestic economy (and politics). In 1994 only 15% of total Argentine banking system
assets were held in foreign banks, this increased to 55% in 1998 and 73% in 2000 (De La Torre, Levy
Yeyati and Schumkler (2003, pp.50). In the midst of the Argentine crisis, however, foreign banks reacted to
the increased financial risk by reducing their exposure so that their presence did little to improve the
situation.


                                                     12
in 1995 to more than 20% by 2001. In April 2001 alone the government placed $2b of it
debts with banks in Argentina, at the same time as the Central Bank charter was amended
in order to allow unlimited lender-of-last-resort liquidity with the backing of government
securities.27 The IMF (2003) was concerned by this growing exposure, and writes that in
the 1990s the Argentine “banking system was vulnerable to three forms of shocks, all of
which eventually materialized: economic downturn, devaluation of the exchange rate, and
default by the public sector.”

Under the currency board the Argentine banking system was heavily exposed to a
devaluation of the peso against the U.S. dollar.28 While most of banks’ assets and
liabilities were matched in terms of their currency of denomination, many dollar-
denominated bank loans went to Argentine companies and households that had earnings
in pesos. A large devaluation would make re-payment of those loans difficult.29

Wealthy Argentine residents have long kept bank accounts outside of Argentina in case
of economic crisis. It is estimated that Argentines held over $100 billion abroad in the
1990s, suggesting that they considered the risk of crisis (and presumably expropriation)
to be substantial. Related to this is the fact that credit from the banking system to the
private sector, which is generally low in Latin America, was particularly so in Argentina
where bank loans to the private sector were only 23% of GDP at its peak in 1999.

5. The Unwinding of Reforms
In December 1999, Fernando de la Rua was elected president and inherited a public debt
in excess of $100 billion. The new government made the decision to tighten fiscal policy
with a series of tax increases, in the hope that this would further reassure investors and
help to lower interest rates. But the tax increases only served to push a recovering
economy back into recession. The country teetered on the edge of default throughout
2000 but once again another “good” external shock in early 2001 steadied the Argentine
economy. U.S. monetary policy loosened, leading to lower U.S. interest rates and a
weaker dollar. This in turn resulted in lower spreads on Argentina’s bonds over US
Treasuries and gave a boost to Argentina’s exports.

The more aggressive fiscal policy also received the endorsement of the IMF. In March
2000, a three-year SBA for $7.2 billion was agreed to and, in January 2001, this was
augmented by $13.7 billion. At the same time, additional financing of $39b was arranged
from official and private sources. In September 2001, the IMF arrangement was further


27
   This amendment, ironically put in place by Domingo Cavallo, effectively dismantled the money-issuance
rule under the Convertibility Plan. Cavallo had hoped that renewing the Central Banks’ ability to serve as a
lender-of-last-resort would encourage banks to extend credit, but it seemed to have only further weakened
the credibility of the banking system.
28
   Although it is worth noting that prior to the Corralito dollarization in the banking system was
concentrated in longer-term bank deposits and loans. Demand deposits (which were presumably used for
transactions purposes) were largely denominated in pesos throughout this period.
29
   See De Nicolo, Honohan and Ize (2003) and Della Paolera and Taylor (2003) for further discussion of
the dollarization of the banking system.


                                                    13
augmented by $22 billion, with up to $3 billion to be used in support of a possible debt-
restructuring operation.

However, it was too little and already too late. Argentines had begun to shift from peso
to dollar deposits starting in February 2001, and this trend sharply increased during the
fall, when outright withdrawals of deposits were observed throughout the banking sector.
De la Torre, Levy Yeyati and Schumkler (2003) document that by November 2001, 47 of
the top 50 banks had suffered major withdrawals. Between July and November 2001,
Argentines withdrew over $15 billion from banks -- on November 30, 2001 alone, banks
saw withdrawals of $1.3 billion.

On December 3rd, in a desperate effort to prevent further massive capital outflows and to
halt the run on banks, the government imposed a set of draconian financial controls. The
Corralito30 limited withdrawals from bank accounts to 250 pesos per week per account31
but depositors could access their accounts to transfer funds within the banking system.
Wire transfers required Central Bank approval, foreign currency futures transactions were
prohibited, and in effect, all investors, foreign and domestic, were prohibited from
transferring funds abroad. Depositors could exchange dollars for government bonds, but
few chose to do so. The restrictions were announced as temporary measures that would
remain in place until the danger of the speculative attack had passed.32 The scheduled
program review by the IMF was not completed, and IMF support of Argentina was
effectively withdrawn. (A detailed time line of the economic and political events that
occurred during the Corralito is provided in the Appendix.)

On December 19th, the ministers in President de la Rua’s cabinet resigned33 and the
following day the president himself resigned. Ramon Puerta assumed the presidency in
the interim as Argentine country risk skyrocketed upwards (see Figure 5 where the EMBI
spread for Argentina rises from 4000 in November to just under 10,000 at the end of
December 2001). A new interim president, Rodriguez Saa was named on December 23 -
his term would last only a week before President Eduardo Duhalde assumed power on
December 30. Foreign exchange trading was suspended on December 21 and was
rescheduled to resume on January 10, 2002.

In January the Argentine peso was officially devalued and all bank deposits and debts
were “pesofied.” Dollar deposits were converted at 1.4 pesos to the dollar, while dollar
loans were subject to one-to-one conversions, effectively imposing the bulk of the costs

30
   A literal translation of “Corralito” is little corral. It is also the word for “playpen.”
31
    Perhaps unsurprisingly there was a sudden increase in the number of new bank accounts in early
December. The government promptly changed the regulations so that the deposit limits applied per person
rather than per account. According to the press, some 500,000 accounts were opened in the two days
following the imposition of bank restrictions.
32
   Some of the original withdrawal limits were eventually modified, though the main restrictions on capital
outflow remained in place until December 2, 2002 (exactly one year after they were first introduced). See
Appendix 1 for a detailed timeline of the changes in financial market regulations in Argentina beginning in
October 2001.
33
   Including Domingo Cavallo, who had left the office in 1996 and returned to the position of Economic
Minister with the de la Rua administration.


                                                    14
of pesofication on the banks rather than depositors. The situation of the banks was made
worse by the fact that they remained exposed to foreign exchange risk on foreign
liabilities, which were not pesofied. Gutierrez and Montes-Negret (2004) estimate that
the banking system had a negative net worth of at least $32b in January 2002. To
“compensate” the banks the government issued new bonds called BODENs, which to
date are illiquid (and their economic value is contingent on future debt restructuring and
the governments’ fiscal sustainability).

Given the political and economic chaos, the payments system ceased to function. Citizens
took to the streets in protest of the economic conditions, and the foreign banks became a
focus for their rage. The number of reported bankruptcies by firms and individuals
reached record proportions. Growth in real GDP, consumption and investment turned
sharply negative and the current account as a percent of GDP swung from –1.4 percent in
2001 to 2.9 percent in 2002.

Amidst the economic crisis, the Corralito triggered a 50 percent expansion of the stock
market. One interpretation of the stock market run up in Argentina is that for some reason
investors viewed the likely devaluation of the peso as beneficial for firms, whereas in
other countries such crises are generally harmful. A more plausible explanation,
however, is that the idiosyncratic reaction of the Argentine stock market was largely due
to the specific restrictions in the Corralito that allowed investors to use their frozen bank
deposits to purchase Argentine stocks,34 and, in so doing, provided a legal mechanism for
transferring funds abroad via ADRs.35

The ADR loophole worked as follows. Under the Corralito, Argentine residents were
allowed to use bank deposits in excess of the $1,000 monthly ceiling to purchase
Argentine stocks. If a stock happened to be cross-listed in the U.S. those shares could be
legally converted from Argentine shares into ADRs. The ADRs could then be sold in the
United States and the dollar proceeds deposited in a U.S. account.36 Under normal
circumstances the dollar proceeds would appear in the Argentine Balance of Payments as
a capital inflow, as U.S. residents have acquired claims on Argentine firms. Under the
Corralito, however, the capital inflows did not occur, and the dollars and/or shares
remained outside of Argentina. In effect, the ADR “loophole” allowed Argentines to
transfer monies abroad, but the transactions did not result directly in a fall in Argentina’s
international reserves (or a fall in Argentine bank deposits). ADR conversions, however,
did reduce the number of (underlying) shares available on the local stock exchange in
Buenos Aires, La Bolsa.

34
   See Levy-Yeyati, Schmukler and van Horen (2003) for a further discussion of the stock market boom
during the Corralito.
35
   ADRs are American Depositary Receipts. We will use the term ADR to mean shares of Argentine firms
that are also cross-listed in the U.S.
   It is clear that the Argentine government understood the role ADRs might play in allowing citizens to
transfer funds abroad. However, because ADRs were associated with most of the largest publicly traded
Argentine companies it would have been difficult for the government to disallow ADR transactions (and
risk sending the Argentine stock market into a tail spin). Also, the fact that ADR conversions did not have
a direct impact on Central Bank reserves meant that the government was less concerned about this channel
of capital outflow.


                                                    15
Auguste, Dominguez, Kamil and Tesar (2002) examine ADR premia for a number of
Argentine securities. The evidence suggests that Argentine investors were willing to pay
a substantial price to move their deposits out of Argentina through ADR conversions. At
their peak, some ADRs were trading at a discount of in excess of 40 cents on the dollar.
Figure 8 shows that a significant wedge appeared between the price of a portfolio of
ADR stocks relative to non-ADR stocks beginning at the time of the Corralito. Figure 9
shows a dramatic increase in the volume of trading in ADR securities, especially for
Perez Companc which seemed to be the most popular security for ADR conversions.
ADR transactions alone resulted in a capital outflow of roughly $835 million to $3.4
billion between December 1, 2001 and May 31, 2002.

Epilogue
The Corralito, with its abrogation of individual and corporate property rights, resulted in
a massive redistribution of wealth between depositors, lenders and financial institutions.
Not surprisingly, the question of who owed what to whom became a matter for the courts
and left the economy in a state of limbo. The courts issued a number of injunctions to
savers who demanded that their dollar deposits be paid at the market exchange rate,
rather than the rate decreed by the government of 1.4 pesos to the dollar, plus inflation.
Honoring these injunctions cost the banks an extra 7 billion pesos. The Supreme Court
finally ruled in October 2004 that the pesofication of dollar deposits that took place in
2001 was legal, relieving the banks of large potential losses from further injunctions.37
As a consequence of this recent history, most bank deposits in Argentina are short-term,
which in turn limits the scope for banks to lend long-term. In early 2004, credit to the
private sector amounted to only 8% of GDP.

In September 2003 Argentina again signed a three-year agreement with the IMF, which
included a fiscal target of a primary surplus of 3% of GDP in the first year (coincidently
exactly the number Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003) calculated as needed in 1998 to
regain sustainability). In return the IMF agreed to lend Argentina $12.5b, the amount
that was due to the IMF over the period 2003-2006.38 In 2003, GDP grew 8.5 percent and
inflation was 12.6 percent.39




37
   The Supreme Court approved the conversion of fixed-term savings in dollars to pesos -- known as
”pesification” -- by five to one on October 26, 2004. The president of the Court, Enrique Petracchi,
abstained from voting as his savings were caught in the freeze on bank accounts when the crisis broke out.
38
   The IMF’s lending to Argentina makes up roughly 15% of its total loans, giving Argentina quite a bit of
leverage.
39
   See the Economist (2004) for further description of the current economic and political situation in
Argentina.


                                                    16
                                     References
Auguste, S., Dominguez, K, Kamil, H and Tesar, L, (2002) “Cross Border Trading as a
Mechanism for Capital Flight: ADRs and the Argentine Crisis,” NBER working paper
9343, November.

Bekaert, G. and Harvey, C., (2003) “Chronology of Economic, Political and Financial
Events in Emerging Markets: Argentina”,
http://www.duke.edu/~charvey/Country_risk/chronology/argentina.htm

Bleaney, M. (2004), "Argentina'
                              s Currency Board Collapse: Weak Policy or Bad Luck?",
The World Economy, Vol. 27, No. 5, pp. 699-714.

Bordo, M.D., C. Meissner and A. Redish (2003), ‘How “Original Sin” Was
Overcome: The Evolution of External Debt Denominated In Domestic Currencies
In The United States and The British Dominions 1800–2000’, NBER Working
Paper No 9841.

Caballero, R. and A. Krishnamurthy (2003), ‘Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial
Development and Underinsurance’, Journal of Finance, 58(2), pp 867–893.

Calvo, G. (1998). “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics
of Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics (CEMA), 1(1): 35-54.

Calvo, G., A. Izquierdo, and L. Mejia (2004). “On The Empirics of Sudden Stops: The
Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects”, NBER Working Paper No. 10520

Calvo, G., A. Izquierdo, and E. Talvi (2003). “Sudden Stops, the Real Exchange Rate and
Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons”, NBER Working Paper No. 9828.

Calvo G. and C. Reinhart (2002), ‘Fear of floating’, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
17(2), pp 379–408.

Cavallo, D. and J. Cottani, (1997) “Argentina’s Convertibility Plan and the IMF,”
American Economic Review, May, vol 87, no. 2, pp. 17-22.

Cavallo, D., (2003), “Exchange Rate Regimes,” in Economic and Financial Crises in
Emerging Market Economies, edited by M. Feldstein. University of Chicago Press for the
NBER.

Cespedes L., R. Chang and A. Velasco (2000), ‘Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate
Policy’, NBER Working Paper No 7840.

Cuevas, A., (2003) “Reforming Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations in Argentina,” IMF
Working Paper 03/90.




                                           17
Dubas, J., Lee, B., and Mark, N., (2004) Effective Exchange Rate Classifications, mimeo,
October.

Dabos, M. and L. Gomez-Mera, (1998) “The Tequila Banking Crisis in Argentina,”
mimeo, September, University of San Andres.

della Paolera, G. and A. Taylor, eds, A New Economic History of Argentina, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003.

della Paolera, G. and A. Taylor, (2002) “Internal vs. External convertibility and
emerging-market crises: Lessons from Argentine Economic History,” Explorations in
Economic History 39, pp. 357-389.

della Paolera, G. and A.Taylor, Straining at the Anchor: The Argentine Currency Board
and the Search for Macroeconomic Stability, 1880-1935 NBER Series on Long-Term
Factors in Economic Development, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.

della Paolera, G. and A.Taylor, (2003) “Gaucho Banking Redux,” Economia, Spring, 1-
42.

De La Torre, A., Levy Yeyati, E., and Schmukler, S., (2003) “Living and Dying with
Hard Pegs: The Rise and Fall of Argentina’s Currency Board,” Economia, Spring, 43-
107.

De Nicolo G., P. Honohan and A. Ize (2003), ‘Dollarization Of The Banking System:
Good Or Bad?’, IMF Working Paper No WP/03/146.

Eichengreen B., R. Hausmann and U. Panizza (2003), ‘Currency Mismatches,
Debt Intolerance And Original Sin: Why They Are Not The Same And Why It Matters’,
NBER Working Paper No 10036.

The Economist, “The long road back: A survey of Argentina,” June 5 2004.

Edwards S. (2002), “The Great Exchange Rate Debate After Argentina”, NBER Working
Paper 9257.

Feldstein, M., (2002) Argentina’s Fall: Lessons from the latest financial crisis. Foreign
Affairs, March/April issue.

Galiani, S., P. Gertler, E. Schargrodsky and F. Sturzenegger, (2001) “The Benefits and
Costs of Privatization in Argentina: A Microeconomic Analysis,” Working paper.

Galiani, S. Levy Yeyati, E., and Schargrodsky, E., (2003) “Financial Dollarization and
Debt Deflation under a Currency Board: The Case of Argentina”, Emerging Market
Review, December, v 4., 4. 340-367.




                                            18
Gurtner F. (2004), "Why Did Argentina's Currency Board Collapse?", The World
Economy, Vol. 27, No. 5, pp. 679-697.

Gutierrez, J and Montes-Negret, F., (2004) “Argentina’s Banking System: Restoring
Financial Viability”, World Bank Working Paper N.2/04.

Hausmann, R. and A. Velasco, “The Argentine collapse: hard money’s soft underbelly:
Understanding the Argentine Crisis,” in Brookings Trade Forum: 2002, edited by S.
Collins and D. Rodrik, Washington. D.C.

IMF (2003) "Lessons from the Crisis in Argentina",
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pdr/lessons/100803.pdf

IMF (2004) “The IMF and Argentina, 1991-2001”, Independent Evaluation Office

Levy-Yeyati, E, Schmukler, S. and N. van Horen (2003). The Price of Inconvertible
Deposits: The Stock Market Boom During the Argentine Crisis. Economics Letters.
Volume 83,1,7-13.

Mendoza E., K. Smith (2002) ‘Margin Calls, Trading Costs, And Asset Prices In
Emerging Markets: The Financial Mechanics Of The ‘Sudden Stop’ Phenomenon’,
NBER Working Paper 9286.

Mussa, M., (2002), Argentina and the Fund: From Triumph to Tragedy. Institute for
International Economics, Washington D.C.

Perry, G. and L. Serven, (2002) “The Anatomy of a Multiple Crisis: Why Was Argentina
Special and What Can We Learn from it?” World Bank.
http://www.nber.org/%7Econfer/2002/argentina02/perry.pdf

Pou, P., (2000), “Argentina'
                           s Structural Reforms of the 1990s”, IMF Finance and
Development, March, volume 37, number 1.

Randall, L., An Economic History of Argentina in the Twentieth Century, New York:
Columbia University Press, 1978.

Reinhart, C., Rogoff, K. and Savastano, (2003) “Debt Intolerance”, NBER working paper
9908.

Rigobon R. (2002), “The Curse Of Non-Investment Grade Countries”, Journal of
Development Economics, vol 69, issue 2, December, 423-449.

Romero, L. A. and J. Brennan, A History of Argentina in the Twentieth Century, Penn
State University Press, University Park, PA, 2002.




                                          19
Taylor, Alan. M., (1998) “Argentina and the World Capital Market: Saving, Investment
and International Capital Mobility in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Development
Economics, 57, October, 147-84.

Tommasi, M. (2002) “Federalism in Argentina and the Reforms of the 1990s,” Working
paper.




                                         20
Appendix: Argentina’s Financial Market Event Time Line

1989
             Carlos Menem assumed the Argentine presidency in the first peaceful
July 9       transfer of power from one democratically elected leader to another
             since 1928.
             New Foreign Investment Regime put into place. All legal limits on
             foreign investment abolished. Capital gains and dividends can now be
             repatriated freely. No need for previous approval of transactions. No
November
             legal limits regarding type or nature of foreign investment. Introduction
             of a free exchange rate regime. Bekaert and Harvey official
             liberalization date.
             The exchange system was again unified for all dealings under a Free
December     Floating Rate and the currency unit depreciated. Dual export rates still
             exist.
1990
             Currency made fully convertible. Foreign portfolio investment by
March
             Argentine residents now possible.
             Menem extends value added tax to services, implements tax on fixed
November
             assets
1991
March 22     Export taxes are eliminated, abolishing the dual export rates.
             Argentina’s Congress enacts the Convertibility Law, which legally
             adopts the currency board guaranteeing the convertibility of peso
             currency to dollars at a one-to-one fixed rate and limiting the printing of
             pesos only to an amount necessary to purchase dollars in the foreign
April 1
             exchange market. Effectively, each peso in circulation is backed by a
             U.S. dollar and monetary policy is forcibly constrained to uphold that
             promise.

August       Law protecting dollar denominated deposits enacted.
             Argentine Fund begins. This fund marks the first time US investors can
             invest in a mutual fund that represents a broad part of the market.
October      Deregulation decree reformed domestic industry, external trade, and
             capital markets. The deregulation decree eliminates capital gains taxes
             for foreigners.
             Argentina enjoys strong economic growth and the currency board is
1992
             considered highly successful.
             Austral replaced by peso. All transactions in currency can now be made
January
             on the free market at free negotiated rates.
July         Moody'  s upgrades Argentina'  s sovereign debt rating from B3 to B1.
             The economy soars, at an annual growth rate above 5.5 percent, as
             inflation subsides and the government embarks on an ambitious program
1993
             of deregulation, lowering trade barriers and privatizing state-owned
             enterprises including oil, telephones and power.
March        Social security reform (announcement of creation of private pension


                                        21
              fund system to begin operation in future). Argentina' s Comission de
              Valores stipulates that only financial intermediary firms belonging to
              self-regulating organizations can participate in public offering of
              securities. This move attempts to cut down on insider trading on the
              Buenos Aires exchange.
              Swaps of bonds for eligible debts agreed to under the Brady Plan by
April 7       Argentina and foreign creditor banks began to take place in accordance
              with the debt- and debt-service-reduction operations.
              Import tariffs on capital goods abolished and a 15% tax reimbursement
May
              to capital goods producers established.
August        S&P assigns first time rating of BB- to sovereign debt.
1994
              Swaps of bonds for eligible debts agreed to under the Brady Plan by
March 28
              Argentina and foreign creditor banks are completed.
August        First T-bill auction in 20 years held.
              Mexican peso devaluation was followed by a withdrawal of foreign
              investors from Latin American countries, leading to banking crises:
              eight banks were suspended and three banks collapsed. Events
December 20   weakened position of wholesale banks that had significant inventories of
              government securities on which they were incurring capital losses due to
              the increase in interest rates. Non-financial firms were affected as well.
              Central Bank provided emergency liquidity assistance.
              Reserve requirements reduced on dollar deposits in order to provide
December 28
              more liquidity to the banking system.
              Following Mexico’s December 1994 peso devaluation, capital flows out
1995
              of emerging markets. Argentina’s GDP declines by 2.8%.
              The Treaty of Asuncion (1991), establishing the Southern Core
January 1
              Common Market (MERCOSUR) became effective.
              Reserve requirements on peso deposits lowered and a special security
January 15    fund managed by Banco Nacion set up to assist institutions which
              suffered high deposit withdrawals.
              Trust Fund for Provincial Development set up to help support Provincial
February
              Banks.
              Tax of 3 percent was reimposed on all imports, with the exception of
              capital goods, fuel, and goods produced in the paper, computer, and
              telecommunications sectors. All goods imported from the member
              countries of MERCOSUR were also exempted. Trust Fund for Bank
March
              Capitalization established and changes made to the Central Bank charter
              to allow it to use repos and rediscounts to help troubled banks. New loan
              agreements made with the IMF, World Bank and IBD and issuance of
              new bonds to increase international reserves and fund the trust funds.
              A limited system of deposit insurance was introduced in response to the
April         banking crisis. Provincial sales tax considered in exchange for lower
              social security contributions.
              New rules for bank reserve requirements implemented. President
May
              Menem is reelected President after convincing Congress to change


                                         22
              electoral laws that prohibit a second term.
              Bank reserve requirement for checking and savings accounts lowered
August        from 33% to 30% and the 2% reserve requirement for time deposits is
              eliminated.
              The central bank announced the creation of a $6 billion emergency fund
1996          to strengthen the banking sector. Labor reform allows companies to
              reduce payroll expenses by firing workers without severance pay.
July 26       Finance Minister Domingo Cavallo is dismissed.
              Tax increases on fuel and public transportation. Government announces
August
              plans to increase personal asset tax on holdings over $100,000 to 1%.
September     Economic hardship leads to a general strike.
              Removal of most entry barriers and branching restrictions of the banking
1997
              sector.
              Standard and Poor'  s raises sovereign debt rating to BB and upgrades 13
April
              private companies to investment grade.
July          East Asian financial crisis begins.
              Argentina enters prolonged recession in third quarter and unemployment
1998
              begins to rise.
              The IMF approves a three-year $2.8 billion line of credit to support
              Argentina' s economic reform program. The major tax package would
February      reduce by 50% the VAT tax on basic consumer goods. The top
              corporate tax rate would boost to 35% from 33% and reduce by 10% the
              social security contributions by employers.
August        Russia announces a partial default on its sovereign bonds.
1999
January 13    Brazil devalues its currency.
              The Argentine Congress passes the Fiscal Responsibility Law,
September     committing to large reductions in both federal and provincial
              government spending.
              Fernando de la Rua of the Radical Civic Union (UCR), the opposition
              coalition candidate, running on a platform to end corruption (under
October 24
              Menem) and the recession, defeats Peronist candidate Eduardo Duhalde
              for President. De la Rua inherits 114 billion-dollar public debt.
              De la Rua is inaugurated President of Argentina and shortly thereafter
December 10
              seeks assistance from the IMF.
              Strikes and fuel tax protests. Beef exports slump after an outbreak of
2000          foot-and-mouth disease. Soya exports suffer from concerns over the use
              of genetically modified varieties.
              The IMF agrees to three-year $7.2 billion stand-by arrangement with
March 10      Argentina conditioned on a strict fiscal adjustment and the assumption
              of 3.5% GDP growth in 2000 (actual growth was 0.5%).
              The government announces $1 billion in budget cuts in hopes that fiscal
May 29        responsibility will bring renewed confidence to economy.

              The de la Rua government announces a $40 billion multilateral
December 18
              assistance package organized by IMF.


                                        23
2001
              Argentina’s continued poor economic performance prompts the IMF to
              augment the March 10, 2000 agreement by $7.0 billion as part of a $40
              billion assistance package involving the Inter-American Development
January 12
              Bank, the World Bank, Spain, and private lenders. The agreement
              assumes GDP will grow at a rate of 2.5% in 2001 (versus actual decline
              of 5.0%).
              Domingo Cavallo, Minister of Economy under Menem and architect of
March 19      the currency board ten years earlier, replaces Ricardo Lopez Murphy,
              who resigns as Minister of Economy.
              Risk rating agencies lower Argentina’s long-term sovereign rating (S&P
March 26-28
              from BB to B+ and Moody’s from B1 to B2).
              Minister Cavallo secures “emergency powers” from Congress. Cavallo
March 28      announces economic program comprising a tax on bank transactions,
              changes in other taxes and tariffs, and sectoral “competitiveness plans.”
              Central bank reduces liquidity requirements and allows banks to include
April
              government securities up to Arg$2 billion among liquidity requirements.
              Standard & Poor’s lowers Argentina’s long-term sovereign rating
May 8
              further from B+ to B.
              Authorities announce the completion of the “mega-swap.” Government
June 3        bonds with a face value of US$29.5 billion are voluntarily exchanged
              for longer-term instruments.
              Minister Cavallo announces package of tax and trade measures,
June 15       including a trade compensation mechanism for exporters and importers
              of non-energy goods.
              The de la Rua government announces a $29.5 billion voluntary debt
June 16-17    restructuring in which short-term debt is exchanged for new debt with
              longer maturities and higher interest rates.
              The peso exchange rate for merchandise trade is priced at a 50/50 dollar-
              euro peg, effectively allowing a 7% devaluation for foreign trade in
June 19       hopes of improving Argentina’s international competitiveness. Many
              analysts raise concern over the effects on the credibility of the
              convertibility regime.
              Much of the country is brought to a standstill by a general strike in
              protest against proposed government spending cuts. Risk rating agencies
July
              lower Argentina’s long-term sovereign rating further (S&P from B to B-
              and Moody’s first from B2 to B3 and then from B3 to Caa1).
              Government pays yield of 14.1 percent to place US$827 million of 90-
July 10
              day 8 paper.
              Minister Cavallo announces drastic program of fiscal adjustment aimed
July 11       at eliminating the federal government deficit from August 2001 onwards
              (the “zero-deficit plan”).
              Senate approves the zero-deficit plan (lower house of Congress had
July 30
              approved it on July 20).
              IMF announces likely US$8 billion augmentation of Argentina’s stand-
August 21
              by credit.


                                        24
               IMF approves augmentation of stand-by credit to about US$21.6 billion
September 7
               and completes Fourth Review.
               The Central Bank activates the contingent repo facility with
September 20   international banks, boosting gross reserves by about US$1.2 billion
               (US$500 million was disbursed in October).
               Risk rating agencies lower Argentina’s long-term sovereign rating
October 9-12
               further (S&Pfrom B- to CCC and Moody’s from Caa1 to Caa3).
               Moody’s lowers Argentina’s long-term sovereign rating from Caa1 to
October 12
               Caa3.
               Pre-set date for Congressional elections. The opposition Peronists take
               control of both houses of Parliament. Cavallo and financial markets
October 16
               (erroneously) expected that a fiscal deal could be worked out after the
               elections (on the 17th).
               Minister Cavallo starts negotiations with the IMF and the U.S. Treasury
October 28     to purchase collateral for new Argentine bonds to be issued in an
               exchange for the nearly $100 billion of local and external debt.
               Mr. Cavallo defines the debt exchange operation as voluntary. The old
               debt would exchange for bonds paying seven percent per year and be
October 29     guaranteed by tax revenues. The IMF and U.S. Treasury require
               compliance with a zero deficit and an agreement with the provinces on
               tax revenue sharing before any kind of financial support is given.
               Standard & Poor’s lowers Argentina’s long-term sovereign rating from
October 30
               CCC+ to CC.
               The authorities announce a new fiscal package, including a new batch of
               competitiveness plans, the rebate of VAT payments on debit card
               transactions, a temporary reduction in employee social security
November 1
               contributions, a corporate debt restructuring scheme, and a tax amnesty
               that writes off interest and penalty obligations accrued to end-September
               2001.
               Standard & Poor’s lowers Argentina’s long-term sovereign rating from
               CC to SD (selective default). Argentina conducts a second debt swap,
November 6     exchanging $60 billion of bonds with an average interest rate of 11-12%
               for extended maturity notes carrying only 7% interest rate. International
               bond rating agencies consider it an effective default.
               The IMF announces it will not make any new disbursements without
November 19    being satisfied that Argentina has secured the goals previously
               designated.
               The Central Bank introduces an effective cap on bank deposits, by
               imposing a 100 percent liquidity requirement on deposits paying an
November 23
               interest rate more than 1 percentage point above average of all local
               banks.
               End of a debt swap with local banks and pension funds for more that 55
               billion (over a total public debt of 160 billions). The authorities
November 30    announce completion of the local-leg of the debt restructuring.
               Government bonds with a face value of US$41 billion at the Federal
               level and US10 billion at the provincial level are “voluntarily”


                                         25
              exchanged.
              Economy Minister Cavallo announces sweeping restrictions to halt an
December
              exodus of bank deposits. The IMF stops $1.3bn in aid.
              The government announces temporary capital control regime (termed
              Corralito) involving bank withdrawal limits and limits on dollar
              transfers abroad as a last-ditch effort to fend off a devaluation and
              prevent a major banking crisis. Withdrawals are limited to 250 pesos
              (dollars) per week per account. Depositors, however, may still access
December 2    funds for larger purchases through checks or debit cards and transfer
              their money among banks. Holders of deposits may also exchange them
              for federal bonds (BODENs) maturing in 2005, 2007 or 2012 in a Canje
              exchange. No limits are placed on domestic payments made with
              checks, credits, debit cards and electronic MEP (Metodo Electronico de
              Pagos) payments.
              The capital control measures announced on Dec 2nd come into full
              effect through Decree 1570-01 on Dec 3rd:
              a) Wire transfers suspended except with prior Central Bank approval.
              b) Cash withdrawals from the Banking System limited to US$ 1000 per
              month.
              c) Financial Argentine institutions prohibited from foreign currency
              futures transactions.
December 3    d) Financial Argentine institutions prohibited from issuing new bank
              loans denominated in Argentine Pesos. All new loans must be issued in
              U.S. dollars and existing peso loans must be converted to U.S. dollar
              loans at a one to one rate.
              e) Foreign investors trading in the Argentine Securities Market subject
              to repatriation restrictions. Funds related to securities transactions must
              remain in the country until government approval is obtained or the
              measure is officially revoked.
              The IMF withholds $1.24 billion loan installment, citing Argentina’s
December 5
              repeated inability to meet fiscal targets.
              Argentina announces it can no longer guarantee payment on foreign
December 7
              debt.
              The BCRA imposes a 98 percent reserve requirement on deposit
December 10   increases after December 1, 2001; aimed at limiting flight to quality
              within the system.
              A 24-hour general strike is held in protest at curbs on bank withdrawals,
December 13   delayed pension payouts and other measures. Phase one of the
              government debt exchange is completed.
              State of emergency is declared to stop protests against Minister
December 19   Cavallo’s economic policies. The lower house of Congress repeals the
              special legislative powers granted to Cavallo.
              President Dela Rua and Minister Cavallo resign after days of riots and
              protests that leave over 20 demonstrators dead. A banking holiday is
December 20
              declared for December 21, extended through December 26. Moody’s
              lowers Argentina ratings to Ca from Caa3. Mr. Ramon Puerta becomes


                                         26
              interim president. Country Risk reaches 4618 points. Global (sovereign)
              bond yields reach their historical maximum of 49% annual return in
              dollars.
December 21   The official Foreign Exchange Rate market is closed.
              Mr. Rodriguez Saa becomes the new interim president for 60 days. He
December 23   declares the suspension of external debt payments for at least 60 days,
              totaling $166bn in federal and provincial debt.
              The government announces that a new fiat currency (i.e., without
December 24
              foreign-currency backing) will be created (the argentino).
              The liquidity standards for banks are relaxed. Rodriguez Saa announces
              a new economic plan based on: 1) suspension of payments on public
December 26   debt; 2) new jobs creation program; and 3) creation of new currency (the
              Argentino) to begin circulating in January 2002 and not to be
              convertible to the U.S. dollar.
              President Saá resigns after his emergency policies are rejected by the
December 30
              Peronist governors.
2002
              Congress elects Peronist Senator Eduardo Duhalde as caretaker
January 1
              president.
              Senator Duhalde is sworn-in as President with a mandate to conclude
              the remaining period of the de la Rúa presidency; President Duhalde
January 3
              announces the end of convertibility, and the introduction of a dual
              foreign exchange regime.
              “Leak” reported in the financial press suggests that a 40% devaluation is
January 4
              imminent.
January 5     The Argentine stock market is closed.
              The Argentine Congress votes to establish the Law of Economic
              Emergency and abolish the Convertibility Law. After the Argentine
              Congress passes necessary legislation, President Duhalde announces the
              end of the currency board and a plan to devalue the peso by 29% (to 1.4
              to the dollar) for major foreign commercial transactions, with a floating
January 6
              rate for all other transactions. Other elements of economic plan include:
              converting all debts up to $100,000 to pesos (passing on devaluation
              cost to creditors); capital and bank account controls; a new tax on oil to
              compensate creditors for the losses that will ensue; renegotiating public
              debt, and a balanced budget.
              The new Minister of Finance, Mr. Lenicov, announces the devaluation
January 7     of the peso and the establishment of a new dual foreign exchange rate
              regime, to be implemented on the 9th of January, 2002.
              Government announces it will “guarantee” dollar deposits, but to curtail
              bank runs, the $1,000 (1,500 peso) limit on monthly withdrawals is
              maintained and all checking and savings accounts with balances
January 10    exceeding $10,000 and $3,000, respectively, will be converted to
              certificates of deposit and remain frozen for at least one year. Smaller
              deposits have the option of earlier withdrawal by moving to peso
              denominated accounts at the 1.4 exchange rate.


                                         27
                After several delays, the exchange rate market re-opens and the new
                dual exchange rate system is put in place:
                a) 1 Argentinean peso= 1 U.S. dollar parity (Convertibility Plan) is
                abolished.
                b) All debts (capital and interests) agreed in ARG currency with
                financial entities - converted into U.S. dollars according to the Decree
January 11
                1570/2001- will be reconverted into the original currency agreed
                (pesos).
                c) The official, fixed conversion rate of 1 U.S Dollar=1.4 pesos is
                relevant for foreign trade operations. The free or floating rate is relevant
                for all other transactions and freely determined by the market.

                The IMF approves request for one-year extension on $936 million
January 16
                payment due January 17, keeping Argentina from falling into arrears.
                Argentine stock market re-opens. The government announces that
January 17      dollar denominated loans exceeding $100,000 will be converted to pesos
                at 1.4 for fixed rate, deepening the balance sheet mismatch of banks.
                Duhalde reverses his decision to guarantee dollar deposits, which will be
January 19-20
                converted to pesos at some undefined devalued exchange rate.
                The government announces the easing of bank withdrawal restrictions:
                a) Up to 7,000 pesos can be withdrawn from term deposits in pesos
                (transferring that money to a checking account)
                b) Up to 5,000 dollars can be withdrawn from term deposits in dollars
January 21
                (transferring that money to a checking account at the official exchange
                rate, 1.40).
                c) Up to 5,000 dollars in a saving account can be pesofied at the official
                exchange rate.
                The Argentine Senate passes bankruptcy law that would use capital
January 23      controls to restrict payment of foreign private debt payments through
                December 2003.
January 24      Utility tariffs are frozen indefinitely.
                Argentina’s Chamber of Deputies passes controversial bankruptcy law,
                stripping it of the Senate provision prohibiting foreign debt payments,
                but other capital controls remain in effect. It retains language allowing
January 30
                conversion of dollar denominated debt below $100,000 to pesos at 1-to-
                1 rate (benefitting debtors) and suspending creditor action on loan debt
                defaults for 180 days.
                Mr. Lenicov announces an asymmetric pesofication and the end of the
                dual exchange rate regime:
                a) pesofication of all dollar deposits at 1.4 pesos per dollar.
                b) corporate and consumer debts are also pesofied, but at the exchange
February 3      rate prevailing during the Convertibility period. Both deposits and credit
                will be indexed to inflation.
                c) the end of the dual exchange rate regime and a unified floating
                exchange rate determined by market forces.
                d) the right to withdraw wage and pension income from the Corralito


                                            28
              without any amount restrictions (before workers could only extract up to
              1.500 pesos).
              Corralon starts which freezes bank term deposits (holders of term
              deposits had the option to convert them into CEDROs or BODENs
              maturing in 2007 or 2012 in a Canje exchange).
              The government decrees the unification of the exchange rate regime and
              the asymmetric pesoization of bank balance sheets (assets at
February 4
              Arg$1/US$1, and liabilities at Arg$1.4/US$1). The official foreign
              exchange market is closed.
              The BCRA establishes a new unified free foreign exchange market,
              which replaces the two markets - official and free - implemented in
February 11   January. The exchange rate market re-opens and the floating dollar
              exchange rate reaches 2.1 pesos, well below the devaluation
              expectations built-into asset prices.
              The federal government and the provincial governors reach agreement
              on a temporary revenue sharing arrangement that abolishes the
              minimum floor on transfers to the provinces in exchange for: (i) the
February 27   broadening of the coparticipation base to include the financial
              transactions tax; and (ii) better terms for their debt servicing. The
              provinces commit to reduce fiscal deficits by 60 percent in 2002 and to
              achieve balance in 2003.
              Export taxes of 10 percent and 5 percent are imposed on primary
March 5
              products and process agricultural and industrial products, respectively.
March 8       The pesoization of government debt under Argentine law is decreed.
              A voluntary bond swap (Swap I) is decreed authorizing the exchange of
              reprogrammed time deposits for government bonds. The decree also
March 13
              authorized issuance of bonds to banks in compensation for the
              asymmetric pesoization of their balance sheets.
              The peso reaches a peak of Arg$4 per dollar. To contain the
              depreciation of the currency, the authorities intervene heavily in the
              foreign exchange market (US$800 million in March), tighten the access
              to central bank liquidity assistance (a matching dollar from the parent
March 25
              being now requested as a condition for assistance to foreign banks), and
              introduce a variety of exchange regulations affecting banks, foreign
              exchange bureaus, and exporters. Thirteen new regulations are issued on
              March 25 alone, bringing the total for the month of March to about 50.
              The Central Bank announces new measures related to foreign exchange
              transactions and ADR/CEDEAR conversions aimed at improving the
              functioning of the foreign currency market and regulating the buying
              and selling of foreign currency by order and for the account of the
March 26      Central Bank. The press communication also mentions that there will be
              coordination between the Comision Nacional de Valores (CNV) and the
              Bolsa de Comercio de Buenos Aires (BCBA) in order to adopt new
              measures to regulate capital outflows via ADR and CEDEAR
              transactions.
April         Banking and foreign exchange activity suspended; Duhalde says the


                                        29
           financial system could collapse.
           Export taxes on agricultural primary products were increased to 20–23½
April 9
           percent.
           The central bank suspends for 30 days Scotiabank Quilmes. A bank
           holiday is declared until Congress approves a solution to the problem of
April 19   judicial injunctions (amparos) releasing bank deposits. The authorities
           begin working on a plan (the so-called BONEX II plan) to convert
           reprogrammed time deposits into government bonds.
           Economy Minister Remes Lenicov presents to congress the BONEX II
April 20
           plan; the draft law is rejected and Minister Remes resigns.
           President Duhalde reaches agreement with provincial governors on a 14-
April 23
           point Federal-Provincial Pact.
           Congress approves the Ley Tapón to ease pressure from the amparos.
           The law modifies court procedures, and states that depositors can only
April 25
           access funds once the judicial process is over; in the meantime funds are
           deposited in an escrow account.
May 6      The Federal Congress approves the February Federal-Provincial Pact.
           Congress approves law that reverses the most harmful provisions of the
May 15     January emergency law and makes limited improvements to the
           insolvency law.
May 30     The Economic Subversion Law is repealed.
           In order to tighten the control over the sale of export receipts, the central
           bank announced that dollar export revenues in excess of US$1 million
           will have be sold directly to the central bank. Province of Buenos Aires
May 31
           and Federal government sign full-fledged text of Bilateral Agreement.
           Agreement on the Annexes (quarterly fiscal targets and calendar for
           disbursement) is reached in June.
           President Duhalde signs the Options Plan on reprogrammed deposits, a
June 1     revised version offormer Minister Remes’ BONEX II Plan, giving
           depositors the option to exchange deposits into bonds.
           The minimum level of export proceeds that should be surrendered to the
June 18
           central bank lowered from US$1 million to US$500,000.
           Duhalde calls early elections for March 2003, later put back to April, to
July       try win public support for the government'   s handling of the economic
           crisis.
           In response to a class action suit lodged by the country’s ombudsman on
July 9     behalf of all depositors, a federal court declared the deposit freeze and
           pesoization unconstitutional.
           The government issued a decree suspending court ordered withdrawals
July 24
           of frozen bank deposits for 120 business days.
           The decree suspending deposit withdrawals obtained through court
July 25
           orders is declared partially unconstitutional by a federal judge.
           Following a demand by the national ombudsman a judge rules
July 26    unconstitutional the government decree suspending lawsuits on
           December'   s bank curbs for 120 business days.
July 29    A panel of monetary policy experts made public several proposals to


                                       30
               resolve the country’s financial crisis including a monetary policy
               anchor, an independent central bank, the ending of peso printing deficit-
               financing, and an end to the use of quasi-currencies by the provinces.
               The report calls for a floating exchange rate and urges Argentina to stop
               using international reserves to support the peso.
               Congress approves a bill extending for 90 days (through mid-November
               2002) the provision that suspends certain kinds of creditor-initiated
August 15      nonbankruptcy law enforcement actions. Congress also approves a bill
               extending for 60 days (through end-September 2002) the application of
               price indexation to loans.
               The Supreme Court declares unconstitutional the 13 percent salary cut
August 22      for federal government workers and pensioners, implemented from July
               2001.
               The government issues a resolution to allow the issuance of bank-
August 26
               compensation bonds for the asymmetric pesoization.
               A federal court establishes that parent banks should be fully responsible
August 28
               for the liabilities of subsidiaries in Argentina.
               The central bank passed a very restrictive regulation (circular #3723)
               that mandated that every stock be traded in its underlying currency.
               After intense opposition from the financial community, the central bank
               rescinded #3723 and instead passed a resolution (circular #3727) that
               forbids “contra cable” operations. These operations allowed brokers to
September
               sell stocks purchased in Buenos Aires instantaneously in New York (or
               any foreign market) using the Mercado de Valores as a clearinghouse.
               Under #3727 it was still possible for investors in Argentina to convert
               CEDEARs and sell them in New York, but this new restriction
               significantly increased the transactions costs to do so.
               The government introduces new exchange controls in an attempt to
               boost international reserves and defend the peso: (i) the limit for
               exporters’ foreign exchange surrender to the central bank is reduced
               from US$500,000 to US$200,000; (ii) the minimum maturity of external
September 3    debt contracted by private nonfinancial entities is set to 90 days; (3)
               exchange bureaus are required to deposit with the central bank foreign
               exchange holdings exceeding US$1.5 million on a daily basis; and (4)
               the net dollar positions held by exchange dealers operating on behalf of
               the central bank are reduced by an average 40 percent.
               The federal administrative dispute chamber, an appellate court, rules
               that the decrees establishing the corralito and pesoization, were
September 5
               unconstitutional. The ruling applies to only one case, but opens the door
               for further similar rulings.
               Further tightening of foreign exchange controls: prior authorization from
               the central bank for dollar purchases exceeding US$100,000 for
September 9
               portfolio and other financial investments abroad, as well as for the
               purchase of foreign banknotes.
               The Federal Court of Appeals declared the corralito, pesoization, and the
September 13
               120 days suspension of executions against the corralito,


                                         31
               unconstitutional; the decision allows depositors to claim their deposits in
               court immediately. The 2003 budget was submitted to Congress.
               The government issued a decree that extends the negotiation period for
September 17   utility tariffs for another 120 days with the possibility of a further 60
               days extension.
               The government launched a second swap of bonds for frozen deposits
September 20   and announced the easing of restrictions on frozen time-deposits of up to
               Arg$7,000.
               The monthly cash withdrawal limit on the corralito raised to Arg$2,000
October 31
               from Arg$1,200.
               Argentina defaults on an $800m debt repayment to the World Bank,
November       having failed to re-secure IMF aid. The World Bank says it will not
               consider new loans for the country.
               After discussions with the government, the banks announced a voluntary
November 11
               75 day stay on foreclosures.
               The government did not fully meet an $809 million World Bank debt
November 14    payment; only $79.2 million in interest was paid. President Duhalde
               signed a decree lowering the VAT rate by 2 percentage point
               A lower court suspended the public hearings designed to grant a tariff
November 15
               increase to the privatized utility companies.
               President Duhalde signed a 12-point agreement with provincial
November 18    governors and some key legislators over the new election timetable and
               the government'    s economic policies.
               The Senate approved President Eduardo Duhalde'       s plans for delaying
               the presidential election by a month to April. The first round of
November 21
               presidential elections is scheduled to be held on April 27, 2003 and will
               be followed by a second round on May 10, if necessary.
               The government announced that it will lift the remaining corralito
               restrictions on sight accounts effective December 2. Term deposits (the
               corralón) remain frozen. Minister Lavagna submitted a draft decree to
November 22
               President Duhalde lifting the tariff rates on electricity and natural gas.
               On average, electricity rates will rise 9.0 percent and natural gas 7.2
               percent.
               Executive decree issued authorizing court imposed stay on foreclosures
November 27
               for 30 business days, during which time mediation is required.
December 2     Corralito rescinded.
               The resignation of Central Bank President Pignanelli is accepted by
December 9
               President Duhalde.
               President Duhalde appointed Mr. Alfonso Prat Gay to be central bank
December 10    president. Legislation eliminating the ability of the executive to grant
               tax amnesties becomes effective.
December 11    A court order reverses the decreed increases in electricity and gas tariffs.
2003
               The Supreme Court ruled that conversion to pesos was illegal.
March 9        According to the Central Bank, approximately to 8,760 million US
               dollars are at stake.


                                          32
                Nestor Kirchner sworn in as president. Former President Carlos Menem
May             gained most votes in first round of elections but pulled out before
                second round.
                Argentine finance officials reached an agreement with the International
                Monetary Fund (IMF) for a three-year, US$ 12.6 billion stand-by credit.
September 10    Under the terms of the new arrangement, the government pledges to
                raise the consolidated primary fiscal surplus from 2.5% of GDP this year
                to 3.0% next year.
2004
                Argentina decided to make a $3.1 billion payment to the IMF, a retreat
                from a vow by Buenos Aires that it would not pay up unless the IMF
April 9
                sends signals it would approve an upcoming report on Argentina '   s
                economic progress as part of the 2003 accord.
                Argentina filed a shelf registration statement with the U.S. Securities
                and Exchange Commission, completing the documentation needed to
July 2
                seek regulatory approval in the U.S. for a debt exchange to restructure
                some $100 billion in defaulted debt.
                The Supreme Court ruled that the conversion of fixed-term savings in
October 26      dollars to pesos – known as “pesofication” – was legal, relieving the
                banks of large potential losses from further injunctions.

Sources: Ambito Financiero, La Nacion, Clarin, Pictet, IMF (2003) , BBC News,
Bekaert and Harvey online Chronology.




                                          33
Table 1: Economic Performance, 1990-2002
                                                                   1990      1991     1992     1993    1994     1995      1996      1997      1998      1999     2000        2001     2002    1985-90 1991-94 1995-98      1999-02
National income accounts and Macroeconomic Indicators 1/
   Real GDP                                                        100.0    108.9    118.3    125.5    133.8    129.0    136.1     147.2     152.9     147.7     146.5      140.1    124.8      103.3   121.6     141.3      139.8
   GDP growth (%)                                                    0.1      8.5      8.3      5.9      6.4     -3.6      5.4       7.8       3.8      -3.4      -0.8       -4.5    -11.5        0.2     5.3       4.3       -4.1
   Consumption growth (%)                                            0.8     14.4     10.6    -14.9      6.7     -4.9      5.3       9.0       3.4      -1.9      -2.0       -5.1    -22.3        0.4     0.6       4.5       -7.1
   Investment growth (%)                                           -12.1     14.5     22.3     18.8     10.2    -13.5      6.2      14.7       6.7     -13.6     -11.5      -17.8    -28.5       -4.0    13.7       7.1      -13.5
   Export growth (%)                                               -23.5    -19.6     -6.3      9.3     14.2     22.0     12.9       9.0       2.4      -9.4       9.8        1.2     76.1       -2.2     4.4       6.3       24.3
   Import growth (%)                                               -36.9     37.9     39.6     17.1     18.6     -8.0     14.8      22.1       5.0     -14.9      -0.9      -16.6     11.1       -5.2    20.7      11.0       -1.6
   Investment (% GDP)                                               14.0     14.6     16.7     19.1     19.9     17.9     18.1      19.4      19.9      18.0      16.2       14.2     12.0       17.0    17.6      18.8       15.1
   Current account (% GDP)                                           2.3     -0.9     -3.1     -3.3     -4.1     -2.0     -2.5      -4.2      -4.9      -4.2      -3.2       -1.4      2.9       -1.4    -2.9      -3.4       -1.5
   Unemployment rate 11/                                             9.2        6        7        9      12       16     16.56     13.41      12.1     13.48     14.65      18.06     17.5         …      8.5      14.5       15.9
Inflation, interest rates, and financial markets
   CPI inflation 1/                                                318.4   99.9    22.2        10.1    4.1    3.3           0.2       0.5       0.9      -1.2      -0.9       -1.1   23.0       396.3    9.5        0.4          5.4
   M3 growth (%) 2/                                                   …      …       …           …      …    -4.4         18.2      23.8        9.8       2.3       4.3     -25.6      …           …      …        13.0         -7.1
   Average EMBI+ index 3/                                             …      …       …        100.0  88.6   82.9         112.1     140.9     148.4     155.2     175.3      153.7    57.4          …    94.3      121.1       135.4
   International Reserves (ARP mil.) 4/                               …      …       …           … 17,938 16,749        17,738    18,463    19,775    19,151    18,775     19,792 35,231           … 17,938      18,181      23,237
   Real Effective Exchange Rate 5/                                 100.0   35.6    39.5        76.3 103.1 105.1          112.4     122.5     133.1     148.5     167.0      129.6    44.8          …    63.6      118.3       122.5
   Merval Index 6/                                                 316.9 798.2 427.4          582.8 460.0 519.0          649.0     687.0     429.0     550.0     417.0      295.0 155.0            … 567.1        571.0       354.3
   Peso (prime) loan rate 1/                                          …      …       …           …   10.1   17.8          10.5        9.2     10.6      11.0      11.1       27.7    51.7          …      …        12.1        25.4
   Spread between peso and USD interest rates (basis points) 1/       … 6,564.7 1,158.6       328.5 345.3 362.6           93.0     117.3     145.9     202.4     191.1    2,101.1 3,968.4          … 2,099.3      179.7     1,615.8
   JP Morgan Sovereign Bond Spread (basis points) 3/                  …      …       …           …      …      …             …     456.0     596.9     720.4     667.9    1,481.7 5,795.1          …      …       526.4     2,166.3
Fiscal measures
   Government deficit (% GDP) 1/                                     -0.3   -0.5    0.0   -0.6   -0.7   -0.6    -1.9    -1.5    -1.4    -2.9    -2.4                          -3.3     -1.1       -2.1   -0.5       -1.3       -2.4
   Provincial government expenditures (% GDP) 7/                     -9.4 -10.2  -11.5   -12.5 -12.4   -12.7  -11.9   -11.8   -12.4   -13.7   -13.5                         -14.5     -11.6       -9.4 -11.6      -12.2       -13.3
   Public debt (% GDP) 2/                                              …      …      …    28.2  29.9    33.8   35.7    34.5    37.6    43.0    45.0                          53.8      43.9         …      …       35.4        46.4
   External debt (USD mil.) 8/                                    62,233 65,406 68,345 64,718 75,139 98,802 111,380 128,410 141,550 145,290 145,880                       136,710        …     58,030 68,402    120,036    142,627
   Debt (% exports) 8/                                             373.7 405.4 385.3 341.1 327.9 336.0        338.9   352.2   379.4   426.6   377.6                         373.7        …      535.9 365.0       351.6       392.7
   Privatization revenue (ARP mil.) 9/                                 …      …      … 523.3 732.9 1,171.2    374.9    21.5    96.3 2,579.1   144.7                          60.2       4.5         …      …      416.0       697.1
   IMF loans (USD mil.) 1/                                        -257.3 -589.8  -73.0 1,211.2 455.3 1,924.1  367.3   -37.6  -654.3 -826.5    773.1                       9,334.9    -739.3     173.7 250.9       399.9     2,135.6
Banking sector figures 10/
   Lending to private sector/GDP (%)                                   …       …        …        …      17.5     18.1      18.8     20.5       22.4     23.0      21.8       18.7       …         …       …        20.0        21.2
   Lending to public sector/GDP (%)                                    …       …        …        …       1.9      2.2       2.3      2.4        3.1      4.2       5.3        8.1       …         …       …         2.5         5.9
   ARP deposits/GDP (%)                                                …       …        …        …       8.0      7.4       9.0     10.9       11.7     11.5      11.3        7.0     19.1        …       …         9.7        12.2
   USD deposits/GDP (%)                                                …       …        …        …       8.7      9.1      10.4     12.5       14.0     16.2      18.3       17.4      0.3        …       …        11.5        13.0

1/ Sources: Della Paolera and Taylor (2003); International Financial Statistics (2004); and authors'calculations.
2/ Sources: Ministry of Economy and Production. Average M3 growth for 1999-02 are through 2001 only.
3/ Source: Data Resources International. Average EMBI+ figures for 1991-94 includes data from 1993-94 only. Sovereign bond spread for 1995-98 includes data from 1997-98 only.
4/ Source: Central Bank of Argentina. Figures for 1991-94 are from 1994 only.
5/ Source: Dubas, Lee and Nelson (2004). An increase indicates a peso appreciation.
6/ Source: Ministry of Economy and Production. Index is in US dollars. Year end figures.
7/ Source: Ministry of Economy and Production. 1997-2002 data are provisional.
8/ Source: Global Development Finance. Average for 1999-02 includes data through 2001 only.
9/ Sources: Secretariat of Treasury and Ministry of Economy and Production.
10/ Source: Central Bank of Argentina. Year end figures.
11/ Source: IMF international Financial Statistics




                                                                                                               34
                                      Figure 1: Real GDP and Inflation 1980-2003

                           160                                                                                                                                                                                                                                120%
                                                                                                                                                            Menem takes power                                                             Real GDP
                                                                                                                                                            in July 1989                                                                  Inflation
                           150                                                                                                                                                                                                                                100%



                           140                                                                                                                                                                                                                                80%
Real GDP index: 1990=100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Monthly CPI inflation
                           130                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60%
                                                                              Austral Plan
                                                                               May 1985

                           120                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40%


                                                                                                                                                                         1991 Convertibility Plan
                           110                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20%



                           100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0%



                            90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -20%
                                 Jan-80


                                          Jan-81


                                                   Jan-82


                                                            Jan-83


                                                                     Jan-84


                                                                              Jan-85


                                                                                       Jan-86


                                                                                                Jan-87


                                                                                                         Jan-88


                                                                                                                  Jan-89


                                                                                                                           Jan-90


                                                                                                                                    Jan-91


                                                                                                                                              Jan-92


                                                                                                                                                       Jan-93


                                                                                                                                                                Jan-94


                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-95


                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan-96


                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan-97


                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jan-98


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan-99


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan-03
                                    Source: International Financial Statistics, International Monetary Fund




                                                                                                                                             35
Figure 2: Mergers and Acquisitions in Argentina, 1990-2003


                 25,000
                                                                                                                                        Total value of mergers
                                                                                                                                        and acquisitions



                 20,000




                 15,000
  $ US million




                 10,000




                  5,000
                                                                                                            of which acquisitions
                                                                                                            by foreign residents



                     0
                            1990      1991      1992      1993      1994      1995     1996      1997      1998      1999        2000    2001     2002     2003



                          Source: Securities Data Corporation (SDC) Thompson’s International Mergers and Acquisitions database




                                                                                            36
                        Figure 3: Capital inflows to Argentina by type of flow, 1986-2002


              40,000
                            Portfolio Equity Flows
                            LT Debt
                            ST Debt
              30,000        FDI




              20,000




              10,000




$US million
                   0
                         1986      1987      1988     1989      1990      1991   1992       1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002




              -10,000




              -20,000


                        Source: Global Development Finance, World Bank.




                                                                                        37
                                                                                                                                                      $US million
                                                                                   -4,000
                                                                                                                               -2,000
                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                      2,000
                                                                                                                                                              4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                    6,000
                                                                                                                                                                                            8,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10,000




                                                                                                                                        1990-03
                                                                                                                                        1990-06
                                                                                                                                        1990-09
                                                                                                                                        1990-12
                                                                                                                                        1991-03
                                                                                                                                        1991-06
                                                                                                                                        1991-09
                                                                                                                                        1991-12
                                                                                                                                        1992-03
                                                                                                                                        1992-06
                                                                                                                                        1992-09
                                                                                                                                        1992-12
                                                                                                                                        1993-03
                                                                                                                                        1993-06
                                                                                                                                        1993-09
                                                                                                                                        1993-12
                                                                                                                                        1994-03
                                                                                                                                        1994-06
                                                                                                                                        1994-09
                                                                                                                                        1994-12
                                                                                                                                        1995-03

                                                                                        Mexican crisis
                                                                                                                                        1995-06
                                                                                                                                        1995-09




     Source: Treasury International Capital (TIC) system, US Treasury Department
                                                                                                                                        1995-12
                                                                                                                                        1996-03




38
                                                                                                                                        1996-06
                                                                                                                                        1996-09
                                                                                                                                        1996-12
                                                                                                                                        1997-03
                                                                                                                                        1997-06
                                                                                                                                        1997-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 4: Quarterly US Net Purchases of bonds and equity in Latin America




                                                                                                                                        1997-12




                                                                                                               Asia crisis
                                                                                                                                        1998-03
                                                                                                                                        1998-06
                                                                                                                                        1998-09
                                                                                                                                        1998-12




                                                                                        Russian default
                                                                                                                                        1999-03
                                                                                                                                        1999-06
                                                                                                                                        1999-09
                                                                                                                                        1999-12
                                                                                                                                        2000-03
                                                                                                                                        2000-06




                                                                                                          Brazil devaluation
                                                                                                                                        2000-09
                                                                                                                                        2000-12

                                                                                                                                                                                              bonds and equity
                                                                                                                                        2001-03
                                                                                                                                        2001-06
                                                                                                                                        2001-09
                                                                                                                                        2001-12
                                                                                                                                        2002-03




                                                                                                                                                                                              US net purchases of Latin Am
                                                                                                                                        2002-06
                                                                                                                                        2002-09
                                                                                                                                        2002-12




                                                                                                                                                               of which Argentina
                                                                                                                                        2003-03
                                                                                                                                        2003-06
                                                                                                                                        2003-09
                                                                                                                                        2003-12
                                                                                                                                        2004-03
                                             Figure 5: Emerging Market Bond Index Spreads, 1992 - 2001

                                    10,000


                                     9,000
                                                           Argentina
                                                           Brazil
                                     8,000                 Mexico
                                                           Russia
                                     7,000

                                                                                                                                      Russian Default
                                     6,000
                                                                                                                                                                                  Corralito
                                     5,000

                                                                                             Tequila Crisis
                                     4,000




Basis points over the US Treasury
                                     3,000


                                     2,000


                                     1,000


                                        0
                                       12/31/1991        12/31/1992       12/31/1993   12/31/1994      12/31/1995        12/31/1996       12/31/1997    12/31/1998   12/31/1999     12/31/2000   12/31/2001


                                              Source: Data resources international.




                                                                                                                    39
                       Figure 6: FDI inflow and Foreign Acquisitions of Argentine companies


              30,000

                                                                                                                                               Note that the acquisition of YPF
                                                                                                                                               by Repsol (Spain) accounts for
              25,000                                                                                                                           $15.1 billion of all foreign
                                                                                                                                               acquisitions in 1999 (63% of
                                                                                                                                               FDI inflow)
              20,000



              15,000
                                                                     FDI inflow          Acquisitions by foreign




$US million
                                                                                         residents
              10,000



               5,000



                  0
                           1990         1991        1992         1993        1994         1995        1996         1997        1998     1999   2000       2001         2002

                       Source: FDI data from Global Development Finance, World Bank. Mergers and acquisitions data from SDC Thompson'
                                                                                                                                    s
                       International Mergers and Acquisitions database.




                                                                                             40
                   Figure 7: Argentine Real Effective Exchange Rate


                   180



                   160



                   140



                   120



                   100



                    80




index 1990 = 100
                    60



                    40



                    20



                     0
                           1990        1991         1992          1993         1994         1995         1996         1997          1998         1999         2000   2001   2002


                              Source: Dubas, Lee and Nelson (2004), an increase indicates a peso appreciation relative to a trade-weighted basket of currencies




                                                                                                                41
Figure 8: Index of Value Weighted Portfolio of ADR and Non-ADR Equities




                                                                                     ! "




Date of Corralito = 100
                                                                           #   " $
                                                                                           ! "




                          Source: Economatica




                                                                      42
Figure 9: Trading volume in ADRs and in Perez Companc as a percentage of Total Trading Volume


  )%


                                                 #    " "+   *,
  (%



  '%



    %



    %
                                                     *


  &%



    %


                                                         #
    %



    %



    %




          Source: Bolsar




                                                                       43
