                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MONOPOLY-CREATING BANK CONSOLIDATION?
                       THE MERGER OF FLEET AND BANKBOSTON

                                         Charles W. Calomiris
                                       Thanavut Pornrojnangkool

                                         Working Paper 11351
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11351


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




We thank seminar participants at Columbia Business School, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and
the City University of New York for helpful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by Charles W. Calomiris and Thanavut Pornrojnangkool. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Monopoly-Creating Bank Consolidation? The Merger of Fleet and BankBoston
Charles W. Calomiris and Thanavut Pornrojnangkool
NBER Working Paper No. 11351
May 2005
JEL No. G21, L13, D43, L41

                                           ABSTRACT

The merger of Fleet and BankBoston in September 1999 resulted in a regional New England lending

market in which only one large, universal bank remained. We explore the extent to which that

merger resulted in monopoly rents for the combined entity in some niches within the regional loan

market. For small- and medium-sized middle-market borrowers, prior to the merger, Fleet and

BankBoston charged unusually low loan interest rates, reflecting their ability to realize economies

of scope and scale. After the merger, those cost savings were no longer passed on to medium-sized

middle-market borrowers, which resulted in an increase in the average interest rate credit spreads

to those borrowers of roughly one percent. Small-sized middle-market borrowers (which continued

to enjoy the advantage of loan market competition from remaining small banks) maintained their low

spreads. Our results suggest that it may be desirable for regulators to consider the concentration in

lending markets in addition to deposit markets when evaluating mergers and structuring appropriate

divestiture requirements.

Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

Thanavut Pornrojnangkool
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
bobbytp@aol.com
1. Introduction

       Historically, the structure of the U.S. banking industry was highly fragmented.

Initially, Supreme Court rulings, restrictions on national banks imposed by the Office of

the Comptroller of the Currency, and state laws and regulations governing state chartered

banks limited branching. The Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 and its amendments

effectively prohibited interstate banking. During the 1980s, most states entered into

selective interstate banking agreements that gradually allowed interstate banking on a

limited basis. In 1994, legislation effectively eliminated interstate banking restrictions.

As a result of these changes, the U.S. banking system has witnessed an accelerated pace

of consolidation within and across state borders over the past quarter century.

       Proponents of branching and consolidation argued that the removal of such

restrictions would promote competition and reduce market power stemming from barriers

to entry (e.g. Flannery 1984, Evanoff and Fortier 1988). Consolidated banks also can

operate more efficiently through their ability to achieve scale economies associated with

better portfolio diversification, scale related economies of scope in product delivery, and

lower costs (e.g. Calomiris 2000, Calomiris and Karceski 2000). For the banking system

as a whole, an increase in interstate mergers and acquisitions improves average bank

performance through better “bank manager discipline” and “survival of the fitness”

effects (Jayaratne and Strahan 1996, Hubbard and Palia 1995).

       On the other hand, opponents of consolidation have been concerned about an

increase in market concentration in some banking markets as a result of mergers. On the

deposit side, the potential problem of market power seems to be of little concern, since

regulators act to ensure continuing post-market competition in the deposit market, and




                                                                                              1
because all banks (large and small) can effectively compete for customer deposits. The

Bank Holding Company Act requires that the Federal Reserve Board consider the

competitive effects of any merger proposal before granting merger and acquisition

approval. As an operational procedure, the Fed applies the Department of Justice Merger

Guidelines to measure how such a merger will affect the degree of competition in deposit

markets. In particular, the Fed considers the change and the level of the Herfindahl-

Hirschman Index calculated from deposit shares of all banks in a particular local banking

market as a determinant of level of competition in banking markets.

         Cetorelli 2002 studies some deposit markets that are highly concentrated and

finds evidence that as few as two or three banks competing in the same market are

sufficient to create “tough” price competition that would remove monopoly profit. This

finding is not surprising given that all banks in the market can compete for customer

deposits, and the ability of consumers to access alternative suppliers by car, bus, subway,

or the internet.

         The concentration of lenders resulting from bank mergers, however, is not

emphasized by regulators. The Federal Reserve Board does not extend its anticompetitive

analysis of a proposed merger to the lending market. Ensuring that there is no excessive

concentration in deposit markets does not preclude market power in at least some

segments of the lending market. Theoretical analysis and empirical evidence suggest that

lending market concentration may be a bigger area of potential concern than deposit

market concentration.1 In particular, unlike the deposit market, small banks are unable to

compete for large loans (because of diversification concerns and loan-to-one-borrower


1
 Cetorelli 2001 provides a review of several theoretical and empirical studies for the positive and negative
effects of competition and concentration in banking markets.


                                                                                                           2
regulatory limits). Thus a highly fragmented deposit market may coincide with a market

where very few banks are able to provide large loans.

        The effects of loan market concentration (defined here as the absence of a

sufficient number of local competitors in bank lending) should be heterogeneous across

different segments of the loan market. Small borrowers can borrow from all banks,

including local community banks.2

        Very large borrowers typically operate in many different regions of the country,

have established track records of creditworthiness with many national or international

banks, and often have access to capital markets. Money center banks compete for their

business in a borderless environment. Local loan market concentration should have little

or no effect on the largest firms’ access to credit.

        Of greatest concern, then, is the effect of loan market concentration on middle-

market borrowers. We hypothesize that adverse-selection and transaction costs3 can

constrain middle-market borrowers to a geographic area with a limited number of

potential suppliers (that is, banks large enough to meet their needs).4 Thus, middle-

market borrowers are most likely to suffer from allowing monopoly power to be created

in their local lending market.




2
  Petersen and Rajan 1994, 1995 find evidence that small firms may even benefit from market
concentration. Their stylized model demonstrates that monopoly bank can solve adverse selection problem
suffered by lenders in a competitive lending market when they are faced with a pool of risky but unknown
borrowers. It may be easier in a highly concentrated lending market for lenders to establish lending
relationships with relatively less known firms.
3
  Higher transaction costs potentially stem from higher search costs, higher monitoring costs, and higher
information gathering costs required for lenders to build business expertise in a particular local lending
market.
4
  Degryse and Ongena 2002 provide a review of theoretical papers that show the importance of distance in
loan pricing and availability. They also provide empirical evidence in support of that model, using data
from Belgium banks.


                                                                                                         3
       This study measures the effects of loan market concentration on middle-market

borrowers in the clearest case of a merger that reduced competition among large banks

within a region – the merger of Fleet and Bank Boston in 1999. We take advantage of the

unique circumstances associated with this merger. Notwithstanding the branch

divestitures required by regulators to maintain competition in the deposit market,

middle-market lending activities in New England became highly concentrated in the

hands of the combined Fleet-BankBoston entity after the merger.

       For a bank to meet the current and prospective needs of a borrower, it must be of

sufficient size such that a loan to that borrower would not constitute an imprudently large

risk relative to the equity capital of the lender. Loans to one borrower are limited both by

prudence and by regulatory limits on loans to one borrower relative to bank equity. Thus,

there tends to be a correlation between the size of the lender and the size of the borrower

(as demonstrated in Table I below).

       Virtually no other bank with the ability to supply loans of significant size was

operating in New England alongside Fleet-BankBoston. Figure I shows the commercial

and industrial middle-market lending market shares of the twelve largest Bank Holding

Companies located in New England immediately before the merger. Fleet and Bank

Boston controlled more than 50% of the pre-merger market share.

       To measure the effects of the merger on loan pricing for middle-market

borrowers, we compare all-in-spreads of loans made by Fleet and BankBoston to those of

loans made by other lenders to middle-market borrowers located inside and outside of

New England for the period before and after the merger using both regression analysis

and matched-sample comparison methods. We organize the paper as follows. The next




                                                                                              4
section describes our theoretical framework for modeling the relationship between loan

pricing and borrower size. Section 3 describes data sources and outlines the research

methods used in the paper. Section 4 presents our empirical findings. Conclusions and

policy implications are discussed in Section 5.



2. Borrower Size and Interest Rates on Loans

       Why should the size of a middle market borrower affect the interest rate paid by

the borrower? For very small loans, transaction costs of processing loans favor larger

borrowers, but this would not have any discernible impact on interest rates over the size

range of loans relevant in middle market lending.

       Borrower size effects, however, proxy for three potentially important influences:

(1) economies of borrower size that reflect economies of scope, (2) diseconomies of

borrower size that reflect information costs, and (3) the competitiveness of pricing, which

varies with size in a non-monotonic fashion, depending on local market circumstances.

Borrower Size and Economies of Scope

       Economies of scope refer to relationship cost savings that come from selling more

than one product to the same customer. Providing multiple products to the same customer

economizes on the costs of marketing, reduces the physical costs per product of

managing the customer relationship, and economizes on the costs of monitoring

customers (by avoiding duplicative monitoring).

       Larger firms have more complex needs and typically require more services from

their bank. For example, larger firms are more likely to be engaged in exporting, and

therefore, may desire to establish accounts abroad or hedge foreign exchange risk. Larger




                                                                                            5
firms may decide to have their bank manage their 401-K plan. Larger firms are more

likely to enter the public equity market and to use their bank to underwrite securities.

Because large firm size is correlated with more product needs, economies of scope will

reduce the cost of servicing loans to larger firms, ceteris paribus.

Borrower Size and Information Cost

       The information cost literature (reviewed by Degryse and Ongena 2002) shows

the importance of locational proximity for reducing information costs in lending. If a

bank’s offices are located in one city or region, but a borrower is located partly or

entirely outside of that region, the bank will face higher information costs when

undertaking due diligence prior to making the loan and when monitoring borrower

condition and actions after the loan is made.

       Borrower size is positively correlated with the geographic scope of the borrower

(i.e., bigger firms will tend to be located in a larger geographic area). Thus, for a bank

with offices confined to one region, larger borrower size will proxy for higher

information costs. It is also possible that larger borrower size raises information costs

even for banks located throughout the geographic range of the borrower, since larger

firms, which on average have more diverse locations and types of operations, may be

more complex, and therefore, harder to monitor.

Borrower Size and Loan Market Competition

       Borrower size also may affect the degree of competition faced by banks that

consider lending to the borrower. A small borrower will be able to consider lending

offers from many small banks located close to the borrower. But large borrowers, even if

their operations are geographically concentrated in one place, will not be able to borrow




                                                                                             6
from small banks because banks require diversified portfolios. Loan-to-one-borrower

regulatory limits require that banks limit their loans to any one borrower to a small

fraction of their existing book equity. Even without those regulatory limits, banks would

voluntarily self-regulate to limit their risk exposures to particular borrowers or industries.

       In New England during our period of study, Fleet and BankBoston were the only

two large bank lenders, but there were many small banks in existence. When Fleet and

BankBoston consolidated, competition for small borrowers remained in place because

small banks continued to provide that competition. But after their consolidation, large

borrowers had to either borrow from Fleet-BankBoston or turn to lenders from outside

New England (and those lenders faced a cost disadvantage due to their distant location).

Summary

       When these three considerations are combined, they have the following

implications for our study of the cost of making loans to banks, and the pricing of loans

to bank borrowers:



(1) Loans to the smallest middle-market borrowers will have lower information costs to

local lenders, and those information costs will be passed on to borrowers, both before and

after the merger of Fleet-BankBoston, because of the continuing competitiveness of the

loan market for those loans. That is, there is a sufficient supply of local lenders to offer

economical loans to small borrowers, both before and after the merger.



(2) The combined effect of information cost and economies of scope on loan pricing prior

to the merger of Fleet-BankBoston should be to produce a U-shaped relationship between




                                                                                               7
loan interest rates and borrower size for Fleet-BankBoston borrowers. In the middling

size range, where costs are lowest, borrowers are small enough to be geographically

concentrated in New England but large enough to produce significant economies of scope

for lenders. Pre-merger competition between Fleet and BankBoston would ensure that at

least some of the cost economies of lending to this middling size group of borrowers

would be passed on to borrowers. At some sufficiently large borrower size level, the

marginal effect of economies of scope diminishes (i.e., at some size threshold, firms are

large enough to demand a full range of products), and the marginal effect of the

diseconomy of size related to information costs dominates the marginal effect of

economies of scope in the cost function.



(3) After the merger of Fleet-BankBoston, the U-shaped relationship should become

more of a monotonically increasing relationship. Smaller borrowers continue to enjoy the

same competition in the local market (due to the continuing existence of small banks),

but after the merger, larger borrowers have no alternative local source of funds to the

newly combined Fleet-BankBoston. Consequently, cost savings enjoyed by the new

Fleet-BankBoston will not be passed on to those borrowers.



       These predicted pre- and post-merger patterns are illustrated in Figure II. Note

that after the merger, there is a jump in the pricing function for loans, which raises the

cost of loans for medium-sized middle-market borrowers, but not for small- or large-

sized middle-market borrowers. In Figure II, the pricing function jumps at a point

determined by the maximum loan-to-one-borrower limit of the remaining small banks




                                                                                             8
(assuming a correspondence between loan size and a borrower’s total annual sales). For

example, if after the merger the largest of the remaining small banks can only compete

for loans to firms with under $25 million in sales, then the jump in the pricing function

will occur at that level of borrower sales.



3. Data Sources and Research Methods

         The loan pricing data are constructed from the DealScan database for U.S.

borrowers from two periods. The pre-merger period is from 07/01/1996 to 06/30/1999

and the post-merger period is from 01/01/2000 to 12/31/2002. The six month window of

three months before and after the merger (September 1999) is excluded from the sample

to allow sufficient time for merger integration to take place. We focus on middle market

borrowers, defined as borrowers with annual sales between $10 million and $500 million.

Loan observations, including all-in-spread data, are then matched with Compustat or SEC

filings for financial statement information.

         The final pre-merger sample consists of 183 and 2,447 loan facilities to firms

headquartered inside and outside of the New England states, respectively.5 The final post-

merger sample consists of 147 New England borrowers’ loan facilities and 1,771 non-

New England borrowers’ loan facilities. All loans are assigned to a bank. For syndicated

loans, the lead lender is identified using the method defined by DealScan, i.e., the top-left

name in the loan documentation6.




5
 CT, MA, ME, NH, RI, and VT.
6
 By DealScan convention, names listed on the top line are those at agent level such as administrative,
documentation and syndication agents. The first name of the top line is typically the lead arranger with
pricing power for the loan.


                                                                                                           9
       Table II provides descriptive statistics for loans in our sample, both inside and

outside of New England, before and after the merger. Table III breaks down the market

share of middle-market lending into three sub-categories according to borrower sales

size: the small-sized segment of the middle market ($10-$100 million), the medium-sized

segment of the middle market ($100-$250 million), and the large-sized segment of the

middle market ($250-$500 million).

       For the medium- and large-sized segments of New England middle-market

borrowers, the combined market share of Fleet and BankBoston increased from around

40% before the merger to 52% and 66% after the merger respectively, although the

amount of their lending to the medium-sized category actually fell substantially. Their

market share for the small-sized segment of New England middle-market borrowers

decreased from 22% to 10% after the merger. The significant amount of branch

divestitures required by regulators may have had a negative impact on the market share of

Fleet-BankBoston in the small-sized segment of the market.

       It is interesting to note the growth in the middle-market lending market share of

Fleet-BankBoston outside of New England after the merger. Their overall market share

roughly doubled from 8% to 15% after the merger. Thus, the merger seems to have

encouraged them to expand outside of New England. Interestingly, that expansion largely

reflects growth in lending to the largest middle-market borrowers. It may be that the

expanded size of the combined Fleet-BankBoston entity allowed it to lower its cost of

supplying larger loans (a large loan from the combined entity, after the merger, posed less

of a problem for bank diversification than a comparable loan from either bank before the

merger).




                                                                                           10
         Table IV provides summary statistics for the all-in-spread on all loans broken

down by size categories, inside and outside of New England, before and after the merger.

In New England, Fleet and BankBoston charged 37 and 43 basis points less than their

competitors, before and after the merger, respectively.7 Outside of New England, loan

spreads on Fleet-BankBoston loans were not significantly lower than average before the

merger but were 18 basis points lower than competitors after the merger.8 Of course,

simply looking at the average of all-in-spreads without controlling for the risk

characteristics of borrowers or differences in cost associated with different types of loans,

and without distinguishing among borrowers of different size, may provide a misleading

picture of changes in loan pricing as a result of the merger. Indeed, we will show below

that one can detect important changes in pricing policies for some classes of borrowers,

once one takes account of changing characteristics in the sample of borrowers and loans.

Simple regressions

         We estimate OLS regression equations predicting the all-in-spreads for loans as a

function of loan and borrower risk characteristics. Specifically, we consider the following

regression, run separately for loans made to borrowers inside and outside New England.

                                                                                                (1)

where,

                -       creates a vector of proper interaction terms of its elements9,

                -       is one if BankBoston or Fleet is the lead lender,

                -       is one if the observation is from the post-merger period,

7
  Significant at the 1% level.
8
  Significant at the 1% level.
9
  Specifically, we run the regression with
 BBF , BBF * SMALL , BBF * MEDIUM , POST * BBF , POST * BBF * SMALL, POST * BBF * MEDIUM .


                                                                                           11
                 -        is one if the borrower’s sales are between $10 and $100 million,

                 -        is one if the borrower’s sales are between $100 and $250 million,

and         contains control variables. We include loan characteristics such as loan size,

loan maturity, indicator variables for loan type (revolver, short-term revolver,10 and term

loans), indicator variables for the purpose of the loan (e.g., working capital, repayment of

existing debt, or acquisition finance), an indicator variable for a secured loan, an indicator

variable for loans made by sole lenders, and an indicator variable for loans that are

indexed by prime rate instead of Libor. 11 For characteristics of the borrower, we include

the equity-to-assets ratio (inverse leverage ratio), sales as measure of borrower size,

indicator variables for market credit ratings, and indicator variables for industry and time.

The majority of the borrowers in our dataset (95%) do not have senior debt credit ratings

by any major rating agencies. To ensure that we adequately capture and control for the

credit risk of borrowers, we include actual credit ratings (when available) and estimated

credit ratings for non-rated firms as additional control variables in our regressions. To

arrive at estimated credit ratings, we run an ordered Probit regression on loan

observations with available ratings as shown in Table V and then use the estimated

equation to forecast credit ratings for the whole sample. 12

        We also run a regression combining all loans inside and outside of New England,

rather than separating the two samples, and in that specification we include an additional

variable,       , as an indicator for loans to borrowers in New England.



10
   Due to difference in regulatory capital requirements between revolve loans with less than one year
maturity and loans with more than one year to maturity, separate dummy variables are used to capture the
loan pricing difference.
11
   Beim 1996 documents a pricing premium paid by borrowers whose loan spreads are quoted against prime
rate over borrowers whose loan spreads are quoted against Libor.
12
   In fact, our results are not sensitive to the omission of the credit rating dummies.


                                                                                                     12
         In all of these regressions, the coefficients of    and its interaction terms with

borrower size can be used to gauge the impact of the merger on borrowers in different

size classes.

Two-step Estimators

         Additionally, we estimate a two-step model of loan interest spreads, to control for

the potential endogeneity of a borrower’s having a relationship with Fleet-BankBoston,

where we allow the BBF indicator to be endogenous. If BBF is endogenous to borrower

characteristics, then that endogeneity could produce selectivity bias and affect our

estimates of the effects of BBF on interest cost.

         We model          as an outcome of an unobserved latent variable:


                                                                                                  (2)



                                                                                                  (3)


where      is a vector of exogenous variables, including        . That is, the matching of

borrowers to Fleet and BankBoston is not random and the factors that determine the

matching potentially influence the all-in-spread, as well. As the middle-market borrowers

are potentially spatially constrained, we include three exogenous distance variables,

namely                 ,                 and                 into the first-step Probit

regression.                  measures the mileage distance between the borrower’s

headquarters and the Fleet or BankBoston corporate headquarters in Boston.

                 and                   is simply the map coordinate of the borrower’s




                                                                                             13
headquarter. In the second-step regression, appropriate hazard terms must be added to (1)

and standard errors must be adjusted.13




13
   Our framework produces the same estimation result as a switching regression with an endogenous
selection equation. Under that framework, one assumes there are two underlying loan rate equations, one
by BBF and the other by their competitors. The borrowers select one of the lenders based on an
endogenous selection equation. Specifically, the problem can be expressed as follows:
(BBF offer rate equation)                                                                                           (i)
(Other offer rate equation)                                                                                        (ii)
(Selection equation)                                                                                               (iii)
(Observed rate)




where      is a vector containing exogenous variables that determine spread and          is a vector containing
exogenous variables that determine a firm’s likelihood of borrowing from BankBoston and Fleet. Inserting
(i) and (ii) into (iii), we can rewrite (iii) in reduced form as


where     contains all exogenous variables in (i) and (ii). To apply the two-step estimation procedure,
consider the following expressions for conditional expectations of                and              given
and




where we define                  so that the null hypothesis of interest can be written as            .
Assume joint normality of error terms, which is not required for consistency of two-step estimators, to
write out hazard terms explicitly. We have



where      is the covariance between         and    ,     is the covariance between          and   , and      is
standard deviation of   . The function       is the inverse Mills ratio and    is the probit ML estimate of
from the first stage regression. The second stage regression can be implemented on all observations in the
following OLS regression:
                                                                                .




However, the standard errors from the second-step regression are incorrect and need to be adjusted for the
variation introduced by       in the first stage Probit regression. The standard error adjustment for this
problem is essentially that of the generated regressors framework that is treated extensively in the literature
(see, for example, Wooldridge 2001 Chapter 6 and Heckman 1979).



                                                                                                              14
Matched-sample Analysis

        As a robustness test to our regression results, we calculate matching estimators to

measure the difference between the average all-in-spread of BBF loans and average all-

in-spread of non-BBF loans. In our context, we assume that a loan can be grouped into

two groups indexed by the BBF variable. Conceptually, each loan i in our sample has a

SPREADib that would result if the loan were made by BBF and a SPREADio that would

result if the loan were made by other, non-BBF lenders. The quantity of interest is the

mean effect of treatment on the treated as commonly used in the program evaluation

literature:

                              E(SPREADib − SPREADio | X i , BBFi =1)                           (4)

where X i contains all variables that explain the relevant difference between BBF and

non-BBF loans. Since the quantity E(SPREADio | X i , BBFi =1) is unobservable, we can at

best use its observable counterpart from self-selected non-BBF loans

                                     E(SPREADio | X i , BBFi =0)

for our comparison.

        As described in Heckman, Ichimura and Todd 1997 and Heckman, Ichimura and

Todd 1998, the bias introduced by using

                      E(SPREADib | X i , BBFi =1) − E(SPREADio | X i , BBFi =0)


instead of (4) to estimate the mean effect of treatment on the treated can be minimized by

matching each BBF loan to a subset of non-BBF loans whose propensity scores are

closest to the score of that particular BBF loan. In our case, we can simply use the Probit



                                                                                          15
regression in the first-step regression of our two-step estimators in the previous section to

construct a propensity score Pr( BBFi = 1| X i ) for all loans in our sample. We consider

two simple matching estimators in our study: the nearest neighbor and the Gaussian

kernel.14



4. Empirical Results

           Table VI presents our main regression results, where New England and the rest of

the country are treated separately. The first two columns are the OLS and two-step

estimators for the all-in-spread in New England (where the two-step regression uses a

first-stage regression that only includes New England borrowers), whereas the last two

columns are the corresponding results for loans outside New England (where the two-step

regression uses a first-stage regression that only includes borrowers outside New

England). The control variables play an important role. The equity to total asset ratio, EA,

enters the regressions significantly with the expected negative sign. The size of the

borrowers, LOGSALES, is also significant and has a negative sign. The variable

SECURED is also significantly positive, reflecting the fact that unobservably riskier loans

have a greater chance of being secured. Consistent with Beim 1996, we also document a



14                b
     Let SPREADi be the spread of BBF loan i. Then, the nearest neighbor matching estimator with
parameter N constructs the average spread of N non-BBF loans with the closest propensity score as
            o
SPREAD i = (1 / N )           SPREAD j ; j = 1,..., N . The Gaussian kernel matching estimator uses a weighted
                                       o
                          j

average of spread of all non-BBF loans by assigning higher weight to loans with closer propensity score to
BBF loan i. Specifically, for each non-BBF loan j, the weigh assigned to its spread is
wi , j = φ ( propensityscoreib − propensityscore oj ) , where φ is normal density. Then, the weighted
                                                  o

average spread of non-BBF loans is SPREAD =       i
                                                         j
                                                             ( wi , j   × SPREAD ) /
                                                                                 o

                                                                                 j     j
                                                                                           wi , j . Finally, (6) can be

estimated by      i
                      ( SPREADib − SPREADio ) .


                                                                                                                          16
large and significantly positive coefficient for PRIME, an indicator variable for loans that

are quoted relative to prime rate (instead of Libor).

       In the OLS regression, we find that, before the merger, loans by Fleet and

BankBoston to the small-sized segment of the middle market are priced on average 50

basis points (-67 + 17) lower than their competitors for otherwise identical loans to New

England borrowers. The pre-merger discount for the middle-sized segment of New

England’s middle-market lending is even greater, averaging 82 basis points (-99 + 17).

There is no discount for the large-sized segment of the middle market. Thus, our

empirical results confirm the predicted pre-merger U-Shaped relationship between loan

pricing and borrower size for New England borrowers of Fleet and BankBoston. Outside

of New England, we find no discount for any category of middle-market borrowers

before the merger.

       This evidence is consistent with the view that Fleet and BankBoston enjoyed

special economies of scale and scope in middle-market lending within New England,

which allowed them to underprice other competitors. Competition between them, as the

two largest lenders in the region, effectively forced them to pass on their efficiency

advantages to borrowers. These efficiency advantages did not extend beyond their own

regional market, as is shown by the results for loans outside of New England.

       After the merger, the discount for the small-sized segment of middle-market

borrowers increases slightly (but not statistically significantly) to 84 basis points (-67 +

17 – 18 – 16). For the medium-sized segment, however, the pre-merger discount

disappears. This result demonstrates the post-merger exercise of market power within

New England, and shows that it only occurs within the middle-sized category of middle-




                                                                                               17
market borrowers. The market for loans to small-sized borrowers is still competitive (as it

contains many small banks especially as a result of asset divestiture), and the loan market

for large-sized borrowers is as competitive as it used to be before the merger because

those borrowers have access to national capital markets and to large banks in other

regions.

        The results from two-step regressions are similar to the OLS results. In fact, the

coefficient of the inverse Mills ratio in the second-step regression for New England loans

is not significant, rejecting the presence of endogeneity bias from BBF. Even though the

coefficient of the inverse Mills ratio for loans from outside of New England is highly

significant, the only noticeable difference between two-step and OLS regression is that

the coefficient of the BBF variable becomes positively significant (28 basis points),

which affects loan spreads of middle-market borrowers of all sizes. Table VIII shows the

first-step Probit regression where we include the log of distance (in miles) between the

borrower and Boston, LDIST, and its square term together with the latitude and longitude

of the borrowers’ headquarters.15 Our choice of these instruments reflects our assumption

that middle-market borrowers are spatially constrained and select their lenders partially

based on their location.

        In addition, we run OLS and two-step regressions combining all loans from inside

and outside of New England, together with an indicator variable for loans from borrowers

within New England, NE. The results are similar and are reported in Table VII. To test

whether our results are sensitive to our choice of the size cut-offs for the small, middle


15
  Using the range of distance between Fleet-BankBoston headquarter and borrowers within the U.S. in the
sample, the net marginal effect of distance on Pr(BBF=1) estimates is negative both inside and outside of
New England. The variables Latitude and Longitude are significant for regressions of loans outside of New
England and combined loan observations, but their economic significance is very small.


                                                                                                      18
and large segments of middle-market borrowers, we replaced discrete indicator variables

for the size of borrowers, which interact with BBF, with the continuous measures,

LOGSALES and LOGSALES squared. The results are qualitatively similar and are not

reported here.

       As a robustness test, we also apply the econometric matching methods of

Heckman, Ichimura and Todd 1997 and Heckman, Ichimura and Todd 1998 to our data,

as described above. The results are shown in Table IX for the Gaussian kernel estimator.

The results are very similar for nearest neighbors (with N=1), and thus are not reported

here. Within small-sized and medium-sized segments of New England borrowers before

the merger, non-BBF loans are priced on average 56 and 94 basis points higher than the

corresponding BBF loans respectively. After the merger, the BBF discount increases to

89 basis points for the small-sized borrowers but disappears for the medium-sized

segment of the market. Consistent with the regression results, there is no discount in loan

pricing for the large-sized segment of middle-market borrowers before or after the

merger, nor is there a discount for non-New England loans.



5. Conclusions

       Our findings that Fleet and BankBoston offered pre-merger interest rate discounts

to medium-sized borrowers in middle market lending in New England, and that the

discount disappeared after the merger, indicate several important points. First, large

universal banks seem to enjoy location-specific economies with small- and medium-sized

middle-market borrowers.




                                                                                           19
       Second, the pre-merger pricing for middle-market borrowers indicates that the

banking market can be very “competitive,” even when it is highly concentrated. Fleet and

BankBoston competed away nearly a full percentage point of their cost advantages in the

medium-sized segment of the middle-market loan market prior to the merger, even

though they were the only two large banks in New England. That result is consistent with

Cetorelli’s (2002) finding for deposit market competition. Kreps and Scheinkman (1983)

show that, in theory, the extent to which oligopolistic competition results in lower pricing

depends on the costs of generating both capacity and production. The Bertrand

equilibrium in which price competition between duopolists results in the perfectly

competitive outcome depends on the ability of the duopolists to produce whatever is

demanded. That assumption requires firms to be able to increase capacity rapidly at no

cost. In banking, lending capacity is dictated by the availability of equity capital and

human capital (lending officers). Given the ability to shift both equity capital and human

capital across different lending niches (defined by sizes and locations of borrowers) it is

reasonable to view capacity in any one lending niche as relatively easy to expand. In such

a circumstance, it is not surprising that competition between two banks would produce

significant cost savings for affected borrowers relative to monopolistic pricing.

       Third, once Fleet and BankBoston merged, the economies of information and

product scope that large universal banks can realize no longer accrued to borrowers, and

instead became captured by the consolidated entity.

       Fourth, competition for smaller firms’ loans was not affected by the merger. After

the merger, the combined entity controlled about half of the loans made to middle-market

lenders in New England. Discounts on middle-sized middle-market loans in New




                                                                                           20
England disappeared after the merger, but not on small loans, indicating that competition

remained strong for small borrowers (who could borrow from small banks as well as

large ones), but that middle-sized middle-market borrowers in New England had limited

alternatives to the combined Fleet-BankBoston entity after the merger since they are

spatially constrained.

         In the 1970s and 1980s, many advocates of the elimination of branching

restrictions envisioned a new banking structure for the United States consisting of a

competitive, nationwide branching system, dominated by many universal banks. While

some regions have seen an increase in competition resulting from branching, others have

not. In some regions, given the initial conditions of bank fragmentation, and the barriers

to entry into new regions posed by an absence of a preexisting set of customer

relationships, consolidation has resulted in reduced competition in some regional loan

markets, with New England being an extreme case.

         Our results suggest that the Fed could expand its anticompetitive study of merger

proposals to consider the lending side of the banking business, and could look at

particular niches within the lending market when examining anti-competitive effects of a

merger. At a minimum, the equivalent version of a Herfindahl-Hirschman index for

deposit markets could be calculated for middle-market loans in the areas in which the

merger candidates are operating. The availability of loan data, such as those used in this

paper, makes it possible to perform such an analysis.16


16
  The analysis of loan pricing using the DealScan database in this study requires a substantial amount of
manual matching of loan observations to other data sources due to the lack of variables that link loan
pricing data to lender and borrower financial information. We suggest a few additions to the data fields
available in LPC DealScan database that will make such linking more accurate and automated, and thus
will make regulatory use of such data more viable. First, FDIC CERT ID or Federal Reserve RSSD ID of
the lenders in the loan should be collected at the time of loan filing with DealScan. These variables enable
us to link DealScan data to bank financial data, holding structure, and merger information at the FDIC or


                                                                                                          21
        Divestiture requirements could take into account the need to support a

competitive lending market for middle-market borrowers. Doing so may require not only

that the merging institutions divest some branches, but that they also divest a significant

number of middle-market lending relationships so that the divested assets and capabilities

of the merging institutions be sufficient in size and scope to ensure that a large entrant

would be interested in bidding on them. In the Fleet-BankBoston merger, this was not

done. Instead, branches were spun off to small banks to ensure sufficient fragmentation

of the deposit market.

        Achieving a change in merger approval and divestiture policy may require more

than regression evidence. Merger policy is also affected by political pressures brought to

bear on regulators by banks and politicians. The failure to attract a large entrant as a

purchaser of divested assets was not the result of the failure to anticipate the effects of the

merger. One of the authors of this study (Calomiris 1999) acted as a consultant to the

governments of Massachusetts and Connecticut prior to the Fleet-BankBoston merger.

Based on regression analysis of only the pre-merger sample of middle-market borrowers

in New England, he advised regulators, in an opinion filed on July 20, 1999, that:

The highest risk of costs to the public from this merger comes from the potential
destruction of competition for middle market relationships. In these areas competition
favors large banks because of economies of scale and scope. It is crucial, therefore, that a
viable competitor of substantial size and technical capability be able to credibly bid for,
and continue, a competitive large-scale bank (in particular, one with middle market
lending capability) alongside the new merged entity…..

…the Federal Reserve Board’s approach to measuring market concentration – which
focuses on local deposit concentration – is fundamentally flawed and especially
inadequate for measuring the potential effects on competition in particular bank niches
(e.g., middle-market lending)….

Federal Reserve System. Second, when possible, DealScan should identify a unique identification number
of the borrower (such as Compustat GVKEY or CRSP PERMNO) that can be linked to the borrower’s
financial data.


                                                                                                    22
The regressions indicate that Fleet and BankBoston currently possess significant cost
advantages, which translate into more than a full percentage point relative to their
competitors….in the absence of continuing competition by at least two such banks in the
New England area, those cost advantages would not be passed on in the same way to
bank customers, since competitive pressures would be lacking. If the two banks could
combine, and if no new entrant with similar scale, scope, and geographic presence were
to enter, significantly higher interest costs would result.

       Despite that evidence, and despite much opposition from middle-market

borrowers in New England at the time, who feared that they would suffer higher rates

from the merger and voiced that fear to the authorities, there was little chance of stopping

Fleet and BankBoston from merging, or of forcing them to divest a large chunk of their

middle-market business. According to some sources, Fleet, BankBoston, and some of the

smaller banks that anticipated gains from being able to acquire some divested branches

enlisted the help of influential members of Congress to pressure the Justice Department

and the Fed to ignore arguments made by experts, middle-market borrowers, and state

government officials that divestiture should be handled differently.




                                                                                          23
                                    REFERENCES

Beim, D.O. “The Prime Premium: Is Relationship Banking Too Costly for Some?”,

   Columbia Business School Working Paper, 1996.

Calomiris, C.W. “Statement of Charles W. Calomiris, Ph.D.” July 20, 1999.

Calomiris, C.W. “Regulation, Industrial Structure, and Instability in U.S. Banking: An

   Historical Perspective” in U.S. Bank Deregulation in Historical Perspective, New

   York, Cambridge University Press, 2000, 1-92, originally published in Michael

   Klausner and Lawrence White (eds.), Structural Change in Banking, New York

   University, New York 1993, 19-116.

Calomiris, C.W., Karceski, J., “Is the Bank Merger Wave of the 1990s Efficient? Lessons

   from Nine Case Studies,” in Steven N. Kaplan (ed.), Mergers and Productivity,

   Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2000, 93-178.

Cetorelli, N. “Competition Among Banks: Good or Bad?” Federal Reserve Bank of

   Chicago, Economic Perspectives, 2Q 2001.

Cetorelli, N. “Entry and Competition in Highly Concentrated Banking Markets” Federal

   Reserve Bank of Chicago, Economic Perspectives, 4Q 2002.

Degryse, H., Ongena, S. “Distance, Lending Relationships, and Competition” Centre for

   Studies in Economics and Finance, Working Paper No. 80, March 2002.

Evanoff, D., Fortier, D. “Reevaluation of Structure-Conduct-Performance Paradigm in

   Banking” Journal of Financial Research, I, June 1988, 277-294.

Flannery, M. “The Social Costs of Unit Banking Restrictions” Journal of Monetary

   Economics, 13 (1984), 237-249.




                                                                                         24
Heckman, J. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error", Econometrica, 47, 1,

   January 1979, 153-162.

Heckman, J., Ichimura, H., Todd, P., “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation Estimator:

   Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Programme”, Review of Econometric

   Studies, 1997, 64, 605-654.

Heckman, J., Ichimura, H., Todd, P., “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation

   Estimator”, Review of Econometric Studies, 1998, 65, 261-294.

Hubbard, G, Palia, D. “Executive Pay and Performance: Evidence from the U.S. Banking

   Industry” Journal of Financial Economics, XXXIX, 1995, 105-130.

Jayaratne, J., Strahan, P. E. “Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution and Dynamic

   Efficiency: Evidence from Commercial Banking” Federal Reserve Bank of New

   York, Research Paper No. 9630, August 1996.

Kreps, D.M., and Scheinkman, J.A. “Quantity Precommitment and Bertrand Competition

   Yield Cournot Outcomes,” Bell Journal of Economics, 1983, 14, 326-38.

Peterson, M.A., Rajan R.G. “The Benefits of Lending Relationship: Evidence from Small

   Business Data” Journal of Finance, 1994, 49, 3-37.

Peterson, M.A., Rajan R.G. “The Effect of Credit Market Competition on Lending

   Relationships” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1995, 110, 406-443.

Wooldridge, J. M. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, First Edition,

   MIT Press, October 2001.




                                                                                     25
                              !!" # " $    !!!%       #               &               '       # ' $ ' '%        #
      &                      (              )       )*
                                                                          +               ,-                     (

                                                                                  -       %        )2       &
                                                          .                   *       #                    /*        0
                                             078 097          8           #
1         -   %)2   &'* #*                                      $$                                          $              *$
#         3                                                    $*3                        '"3              '3             $ 3
1         -   %)2   &   #'*                                     $'                         '"               "              "4
#         3                                                    $43                        $!3              43             $"3
1         -   %)2   & #                                         $                          '$               "              *!
#         3                                                    $'3                        $*3              43             $43
0 1                                                             !*                         ""               *               "
                                             078 197          8           #
1         -   %)2   &'* #*                                       "!                         ''                *             !"
#         3                                                    $'3                         53               "3            '$3
1         -   %)2   &   #'*                                      "                          4'               '4             $$
#         3                                                    $ 3                        $43              $ 3            $'3
1         -   %)2   & #                                                                     "                *'             !
#         3                                                    $"3                        4!3              "43            4*3
0 1                                                             '$                          '*               5             4!
                                          078     9:           7 8                #
1         -   %)2   &'* #*                                     45                         $*                $4            5
#         3                                                    $"3                        $43               '3            $'3
1         -   %)2   &   #'*                                    **'                        $*"               !4            6 '
#         3                                                    43                         $43              $43            $ 3
1         -   %)2   & #                                        $'5                        $$                *             55
#         3                                                    '43                        $'3              *43            $ 3
0 1                                                            6
                                                               $"                         6$"              '5            '6
                                                                                                                          "5
                                          078 ;9:              7 8                #
1         -   %)2   &'* #*                                     !''                     *'5                                6
                                                                                                                          **
#         3                                                    $43                     '*3                  *3            '53
1         -   %)2   &   #'*                                    !4'                       '                                6
                                                                                                                          5'4
#         3                                                    $*3                     $$3                 '*3            $$3
1         -   %)2   & #                                        54                      !5                  $!!           '6'
#         3                                                    $ 3                     4'3                 " 3            $!3
0 1                                                           '6
                                                               " 5                    '645                 "             *6
                                                                                                                          4!"
                                                                                     <;    -                                          ,-
     #                                  !!"        " $    !!!                #                                  '       '$      ' '
            "          #$                      $                                 #
 (                    ) #)*              ,-;                             (            :2 ,- 0         -8                    (     ##
                (                   #                               5$       '6
                                                                              44                                    7   8
     (           #                            4           6                                       7        8                 (
                 =>
                                                                   078 090           1:??:A 8?-
                                          7    8          1                                                       :     7    8         1
 1                                   #                                   #                                       #                            #
                       2            - ; ( 2                   2         - ; ( 2                   2             - ; ( 2           2          - ; ( 2
-0 8-%)     &                 4         $!           *                '     $             '4            "5           $4      '"         !        4'     ""
02 %)     &                 54          '            '              "*      '$            '             5            $*      $*         55       ""     4
80                          44          $'           4!             4*      '4            45            4            '5      44         4        '5     44
2 0 ,?> @                  $$4         !4            !"             $      * 4            !"           $ $          5        $          5$      "54     !"
;>- 07 8                      4         '*           4$             "       *"            '            '            5"$      '$        '!$      5'*     *!
A :?B>7C 0                    *                                     $4                                   !                              '$
? 0@;81                     $                                       '!                                  $!                              '"
0 D,>-> >:7                 '                                         '                                 '4                               *
-: 8 87;                    '5                                                                          '*
 8?2                          4                                      '
- ?8=: =8?                  '                                       '5                                     '                           '!
-8 ,?8;                     54                                      !                                      5                           !
?0 8E:?8 0-                 !$                                      !"                                     !4                          !'
 ?>2 8                        *                                      '                                                                  "
-2 0                        4                                       4$                                     4$                          $4
2 8;>,2                     $'                                      '"                                     $                           $'
                                                                  078 19-2 0         1:??:A 8?-
                                          7    8          1                                                :     7           8         1
 1                                   #                          #                                         #                                 #
                       2            - ; ( 2             2      - ; ( 2                            2      - ; ( 2                  2        - ; ( 2
-0 8-%)     &               4"          '*           4$    *"      '                      *4         *        '"             4!         *'     '"       *'
02 %)     &                 '5          *"                   4     $5                      *         $"        4                        $*
80                          *           '4           45    *$                             *4         4$       '!             4*         4      '5       *
2 0 ,?> @                  ''$         5$             *   !*$     *4"                     4         ''       5$5             !*         !*       '      !*
;>- 07 8                    "$          4'           '"    "       *4                     '         $$       54              !"        $'     5"        5*
A :?B>7C 0                    *                            4                                           $                                '"
? 0@;81                     '$                             '*                                        $                                  '5
0 D,>-> >:7                 '                                *                                         !                                 '
-: 8 87;                    *5                               !                                       44                                 '
 8?2                          4                              4                                                                           '
- ?8=: =8?                  $                              $'                                              '!                           $'
-8 ,?8;                     !                              !4                                              !*                           !*
?0 8E:?8 0-                                                                                                !"                           !5
 ?>2 8                         '                                    !                                      $                            $$
                                                           078           92 8;>,2 1:??:A 8?-
                                          7    8          1                                                       :     7 8      1
 1                                   #                                    #                                      #                    #
                       2            - ; ( 2                   2          - ; ( 2                  2             - ; ( 2        2     - ; ( 2
-0 8-%)     &               "!          $"            5             *!       4            *!            "!           4*     "$    "5     4$             ""
02 %)     &                 !!          '            $*                      *"           '5            !$           "      *     5      '"             4
80                          *'          ''           *4         4            '$           44            4            '      44    $!     $'             4$
2 0 ,?> @                  4$5          !*           !"         "*          *5            !"           4*           !*    $       !$    "$              !"
;>- 07 8                     "          44           4$         "5           *!           4            '4"          5!*     4'   $54    5'"            $'"
A :?B>7C 0                   4                                  '4                                        5                       ''
? 0@;81                     $'                                  *                                       $!                        '5
0 D,>-> >:7                 '                                     $                                     '"                         !
-: 8 87;                     '                                    5                                       4                        *
 8?2                                                              5                                                                5
- ?8=: =8?                     '                                $'                                         '*                     '!
-8 ,?8;                        5                                !'                                         54                     5!
?0 8E:?8 0-                    5"                               !                                          !                      !
 ?>2 8                                                            $                                         "
                                                              078 ;9 0?C8 1:??:A 8?-
                                        7 8               1                                                :     7 8     1
 1                                   #                                    #                               #                    #
                       2            - ; ( 2                   2          - ; ( 2                  2      - ; ( 2       2      - ; ( 2
-0 8-%)     &              $                        $"             $4          $          $''       $"$        '   $*    $"5       $                   $"
02 %)     &                 *            4                          '4       4'             '        $        *$          4!     '$$                     *
80                          '*           4$          $"             $!       '!            44        $!       '5    4'    $       '4                    $!
2 0 ,?> @                  $ *          5$'         *44            $44      *$            $ *       **       5$*   5*    '"'     "!4                    !"
;>- 07 8                    5!           *'           "             *$       *             '"       ''4       !!    4"    5'       "                    *4
A :?B>7C 0                    5                                     $$                                 4                  '
? 0@;81                     $5                                                                       4'                   '
0 D,>-> >:7                 '5                                      ''                               $                      "
-: 8 87;                      '                                                                        *                    $
 8?2                          '                                                                                             '
- ?8=: =8?                  $                                       '                                '                    '5
-8 ,?8;                       "                                     5*                                 !                  5
?0 8E:?8 0-                 !                                       5!                               !'                   5!
 ?>2 8                        5                                      '                                 *                    *
                     !       "#                                $%%
                 ;   -                                     (         ##
                     1   1    E
                                                    9          (6         6
             (

                                                -   - %)2       &
                                  #                 #'*              '* #*
                                  097   8       #
E        1   1                    6
                                  4'$               46
                                                     " *               *6
                                                                        4*      6
                                                                                4
#   3                              '3                43                 43
#        3                        ''3                43                 43      $ 3
:   1                            *6 "               "6
                                                     *54               56
                                                                        '4$    !6
                                                                                !'
#   3                             '"3                $$3                43
#        3                         53                *!3                " 3     "$3
0                                "6
                                  4!5                655               $6
                                                                        "!$   $ 6
                                                                                $ !
#   3                             '3                 $"3                443
                                  197   8       #
E   1                             6$'            $6
                                                  4!5                  56
                                                                        !!     $6
                                                                                *'
#    3                             53             '"3                   " 3
#        3                          3             *'3                   ""3     443
:   1                            !6
                                  '!'            $6
                                                  '*4                  46
                                                                        "!      6
                                                                                '$"
#   3                             *43              !3                   '3
#        3                        !3              453                   $43     *"3
0                                 6
                                  $'4            "6*'                  $6
                                                                        "5    $ 6"$
#   3                             $43             ''3                   443
                               9:       7   8      #
E        1   1                   '6"4             6*$                  '6
                                                                        5'5   4'64*
#   3                             '!3             43                    $ 3
#        3                         53              !3                    "3      53
:   1                           $*6'$           "*6                  ' "6
                                                                        !*    * 6 $
#   3                             '"3             $'3                   4'3
#        3                        !'3             !3                    !43      !'3
0                               4 65            5'6*$                ''!6 5   **!6 5
#   3                             '"3             $$3                   43
                              ;9:       7   8       #
E   1                             6
                                  *'$           '6'                   '56*!   "*655
#    3                            '3              $ 3                   4$3
#        3                         *3              *3                    *3       *3
:   1                            '6
                                  54             46
                                                  !!5                 *"6
                                                                        "45   $ 46
                                                                                 *'
#   3                             '3              $ 3                   4'3
#        3                        5*3             5*3                   5*3      5*3
0                               '6$!            $*6
                                                  '4                  546     44 6
                                                                                 $ !
#   3                             '3              $ 3                   4'3
                                                 !
                 & &   '
                               ;       -                 ##              (
 1   1       E
                               9            (6           6


                                                             * +,-   .

                           /           0! 1 2        /   #



 !"# $   %
&'


!"# $    %
 (


!"# $    %
                           /           0! 1 2        /   #



 !"# $   %
&'


!"# $    %
 (


!"# $    %
                       /   30&"            %! 1 2            /   #



 !"# $   %
&'


!"# $    %                         )                     )                   )   )
 (


!"# $    %                       )                       )                   )   )
                       /       0&"         %! 1 2         /      #



 !"# $   %
&'


!"# $    %                         )                     )                   )   )
 (


!"# $    %                         )                     )                   )   )
                                                   !
     (         )                         )                        *         (


             (               ;       -                                  9F      6 F16
'F116$F11164F06*F00                          #                                          6
                                                                              (
                   :C0--8 -                            6-> '#5>             680 8G
          6?:0 ?                 6- ;81 ?0 >: -    #                  6@?'#" @              6
D,> B D

                    >                =
                    >                                              * '!* HHH
                                                                  % " !&
                    >                                                   * HHH
                                                                  % "54&
                    >            '                                 5'$4 HHH
                                                                  %     &
                    >            $                                 ! $! HHH
                                                                  % ! 5&
                    >            4                                   '!*'HHH
                                                                  % 5$"$&
                     :C0--8 -                                     # $" !HHH
                                                                  % $ 5&
                    -> '                                               !"
                                                                  % "'"&
                    -> $                                             '" 4H
                                                                  % 4$ &
                    -> 4                                          # '
                                                                  % '**&
                    -> *                                              !'
                                                                  % 5 "&
                    -> "                                          # * " HH
                                                                  % '4"'&
                    ->                                                454
                                                                  % 45!&
                    -> 5                                              4$ HH
                                                                  % 5 '&
                    80                                            # *4" HHH
                                                                  % 4'*&
                    ?:0                                           # !**'HHH
                                                                  % $'''&
                    - ;81 ?0 >:                                   # 4'$'HH
                                                                  %' &
                    D,> B                                             5* HHH
                                                                  % $"'&
                    @?'                                              '"5 HH
                                                                  % $44&
                    @?$                                               *!5
                                                                  % $$"&
                    @?4                                              4'"$ HHH
                                                                  % $! &
                    @?*                                              $" HH
                                                                  % 4* &
                    @?"                                              ' "$ H
                                                                  % 4' &
                    7            :       (                            5$'
                                     E                            #! 5$*
                    3                                                 * 5
                    3                        I #       (              !'$
                    HHH6
                       HH6
                         H                             36*36      3 (6          (
                                                                 !
                           "           +                    ,          *                   & &
                               *                                        (                     "
                   (                                    ##
                           : -                  #                            #
          (        11E6                                                              E     1    1                       #
                                       #                                           =>>>
                                                                  >>
                                                        (                                   11E>            (
G              1       1           E
                                                  (6        6      9                                                   6
-20        >           (                          628;>,2 >       ()
                    ) #)'*       6 :- >      (            (           #
     6 :C02                6 :C-0 8-                680 8G    (     6
20 ,?> @                              6A :?B>7C 0 >
           6? 0@;81 >                           60 D,>-> >:7 >
 G           6-: 8 87; >                           6 8?2 >
   6- ?8=: =8? >              ( (                      6-8 ,?8; >
       6 ?>28 >                G            (         6?0 8E:?8 0- >
                              006
                                061116
                                     11616   -                   6-> #
@?'#@? "


                                                       7    8                                     :     7       8
>              =                                  : -                   #                       : -                   #
>                                           "*4"44 HHH            "" *       HHH          **$ $*4 HHH           *$" !$ HHH
                                           %4$ ''4 &             %$ $!4 &                 %*" $'*5&             %*" !4'!&
11E                                               4 5                 " 445                      "!$              '5'*" HH
                                            %' "5 "&              %4* 55""&               %!'55 &               %$$ *' $&
11EH-2 0                                     #" " 54HH             #" *''5HH                  ''4 !                #$ "!!
                                            %$ !*!*&              %'!' * &                %''4 &                %' 4 45&
11EH28;>,2                                   #!!'*4'HHH            # '4 HHH                 ' ' '$                  ! 4*
                                            %$ *"5!&              %'! 5$&                 %'$ '$ &              %' !5* &
    :-                                            $'"$                5*!$                  $" !4! HHH            $" 4"$" HHH
                                            %" $" &               % '!$ &                   %4! ''&               %4!"* &
    :- H11E                                  #5$ !*                # 545 4                 #' 5 '                  #5'44*
                                            %$'"' 4&              %$ !$ &                 %'* 5$*!&             %'4* *&
    :- H11EH-20                              #* 5 4!               # * 55"'                   $ *$!$                  4
                                            %$5!""'&              %$" "5$&                %$ !4* &              %$ ' "&
    :- H11EH28;>,2                              '4'* HHH              $ '$ " HHH             #4!!!4                #" '
                                            %' 445&               %'5      &              %$$       &           %$ $4'!&
    :C02                                     #' *''!HHH            #' 5*'4HHH                # '!*                 # 4* "
                                              %4" &                 %* 5!&                  % 4!! &               % *45*&
    :C-0 8-                                  #' " H                # $ *' H                #' *4HHH              #'' $ HHH
                                              %" "* &               % $* "&                 % !* &                % !5 &
80                                           #** 4 HHH             #*! '"4HHH              #"'"55 HHH            #"'"4 $ HHH
                                            %" !**$&              %' "" &                   %* ' $&               %* '* &
20 ,?> @                                          ""*                   $"55               #       'HHH          #'4$ 'HHH
                                              %54! 4&               %5 *$&                  %'"4! &               %' '45&
A :?B>7C 0                                    '" ! "5HH             '"       HH                  $                    5$$" H
                                            %'5 5 &               %'""5$&                   %4*4* &               %4" 44&
? 0@;81                                       '" *55 HH             '4$" * H                    5 ""               # 4'$
                                            %'$ !'&               %4 $$&                    %$ ""5"&              %$ 5 &
0 D,>-> >:7                                   $* "5 5HHH            $* $ * HHH                ! ''4HHH              ! 44HHH
                                            %$ "45 &              %'!"$ &                   %4$$ "&               %4$ "*&
-: 8 87;                                          !!44                  4                       4'$'                  !!5
                                            %4' $ &               %4554$&                   %4"' &                %4" *'&
    8?2                                             55                $ !"$                 $$ ! 4 HHH            $4*!$ HHH
                                            % ! "!&               % ! &                     %$ 4" "&              %$ * $ &
- ?8=: =8?                                   #'" 5'                #' $'!5                 #' 4$!HHH             #' $ "$ HHH
                                            %544!5&               %5 * &                    %* !'5!&              %* !!$ &
-8 ,?8;                                       45 *'HHH              4!" 5HHH                *!"4"5HHH             * $ !" HHH
                                            %$ "' 4&              %$ 4" *&                  %4"!* &               %45$ &
    ?>28                                      $4'*5 HHH             $" "! HHH               ''" $ HHH             '" !!" HHH
                                            %4 4! &               %* 4$!!&                  %4" ! &               %4!* &
?0 8E:?8 0-                                  #* * $                # 4$ !*                 #'* '4HHH             #'" !5 'HHH
                                            %'* $55"&             %'4''!!&                  %! ""&                %! '$"&
00                                                                                        #'$ 5$" HH            #'4'*4 HH
                                                                                          %*' ' !&              %*' $ *&
0                                            #45'' !               #4 *' $                #4 4 " HHH            #4 4! HHH
                                            % 4'4 &               %$ 4*$&                 %$!'" "&              %$!'* &
111                                           '" '$                 '54'*'                # !455 HHH            #      $$ HHH
                                            %*! 4!&               %* " !&                 %$ ! ' &              %$ 555"&
11                                           # '' *                 #!5 *                  #4$ ''4$              #4 '!4
                                            %*" ! " &             %*4"' 4&                %$ 4 !$&              %$ 44!4&
1                                              ' $                   '5**'                 #'" '                 #'4 "!
                                            %*45 &                %*   !&                 %$ $"$5&              %$ $$' &
                                                                                             #4                    #' 4*"
                                                                                          %$5$4 '&              %$5$$4'&
>(        2    ?                                                    #* "! !                                      #$" $5$ HHH
                                                                  %''! ! &                                      %$ ! !!&
7        :             (                        $$                      $$                     4' 5                   4' 5
0 J    #? G                                     *'4                     4$5                     *''                    444
HHH6
   HH6
     H                                         36*36            3 (6        (
                                                                 !
      '                                 *                   "            +           ,            *
                                       & &                           *           $% %
                  (                 ##
                  (                                     7   8                        (
      =>                        (      6786            G           7     8                 -
                                          #                              #
                      (         11E6                                                      E   1   1
              #                                   #                                      =>>>


                                                                                 0
>             =                                                       : -                                   #
>                                                               *" $4$ HHH                            **       5 HHH
                                                                %*45 &                                %** '445&
78                                                                 #4$""*                              #4 ' $
                                                                  %5*$!4&                             % $!"!&
11E                                                                 5 44'                               *" $ 5 H
                                                                % ! '4*&                              %$$ '$4*&
11EH78                                                            $$ 4 '                                '$ $!5'
                                                                %$" *554&                             %$" '"! &
11EH-2 0                                                           # 4'                                  #''* 5
                                                                %''' * &                              %' ""5&
11EH-2 0      H78                                                #*' 5'* H                             #* 54'* H
                                                                %'* $!5'&                             %'" * *5&
11EH2 8;>,2                                                         5 4*                                  5"* 4
                                                                %'$ 45'&                              %''4""$&
11EH2 8;>,2 H78                                                 # ''$*" HHH                           # $ !5' HHH
                                                                %4'"!" &                              %4 ***&
 :-                                                               $" $* HHH                             $* $5! HHH
                                                                  %4 "4!&                               %4 !4!&
 : - H78                                                           #5 !4!                                # *'$
                                                                %' ! &                                %' 4 &
 : - H11E                                                        # '"!                                 #       5
                                                                %'* "$' &                             %'* 4'4&
 : - H11EH78                                                     # 45*!!                               # " *4*5
                                                                %4" $$$!&                             %4* $$!'&
 : - H11EH-2 0                                                      $    !                                  *$!
                                                                %$ "!$!&                              %$ ! 5"&
 : - H11EH-2 0            H78                                    # 5*5*"                               # 5"!
                                                                %** *!5 &                             %*4$*4!&
 : - H11EH2 8;>,2                                                  #* !55                                #" ""
                                                                %$'! 4&                               %$'      *&
 : - H11EH2 8;>,2 H78                                             '5 '5 HHH                             $ 5'' HHH
                                                                %* "'$ &                              %*" $'4 &
    :C02                                                           #'"' ' H                              #! !
                                                                  % 4$'*&                               % 4!4!&
    :C-0 8-                                                      # '"*$" HHH                           # '45'* HHH
                                                                  % 5 4!&                               % 55 *&
80                                                               #" 5"4 HHH                            #"' * $ HHH
                                                                  %4! 55&                               %* "4&
2 0 ,?> @                                                          #!4!'4 HHH                          # $'5 HHH
                                                                  %'*4*'&                               %'*! &
A : ?B>7C 0                                                         5 ! H                                 5 " "H
                                                                  %4$ 4&                                %4$' *&
? 0@;81                                                             '5!!                                    44 4
                                                                  %$ *'!"&                              %$ 5 '$&
0 D,>-> >: 7                                                        !    4 HHH                            !""*$ HHH
                                                                  %4 **$&                               %4 ""4&
-: 8 87;                                                              5"5*                                  55
                                                                  %44 !5&                               %44$ &
    8?2                                                           $'45"4 HHH                            $$ "* HHH
                                                                  %$ $'"'&                              %$ $*5*&
- ?8=: =8?                                                       #'" 5 $ HHH                           #' '5" HHH
                                                                  %* " $*&                              %* "! '&
-8 ,?8;                                                           *5$* ! HHH                            * '5 $ HHH
                                                                  %44" &                                %4*' '&
 ?>2 8                                                            '' ! HHH                              '* * $ HHH
                                                                  %44 " &                               %45 *'&
?0 8E: ?8 0-                                                     #'$ $$ " HHH                          #'$ '' ! HHH
                                                                  %54' &                                %544 !&
00                                                              # ''4' HH                             # ''** HH
                                                                %*'$     &                            %* 55*5&
0                                                               # 4 $5$ HHH                           # 4 '44 HHH
                                                                %$55"*!&                              %$5 5 !&
111                                                             # $ " HHH                             # 5 ' HHH
                                                                %$ *"*"&                              %$ 45"$&
11                                                               #4* !!"$                              #4$ !* "
                                                                %$     * &                            %$ !$ &
1                                                                #' 5" '                               #'" $!4$
                                                                %$      5&                            %$" !5 '&
                                                                   #4"55                                 #$ !4*
                                                                %$5 $' &                              %$ !4'"&
>(        2   ?                                                                                        #'$ "!$ H
                                                                                                      % $ "* &
7        :            (                                            4*45                                     4*45
0 J    #? G                                                         4$5                                      4$5
HHH6
   HH6
     H                                       3 6*3 6        3   ( 6     (
                                                         !
         +      &           )                )               +                     +

                                                 11E #          (
     E          1       1                             11EF                             (     2
                        #                           =>     =>>    (
>>         =>                    (                     ; >-
                    G               E 1        G     6 ; >- '     G
                                 G         E 1        G      6 0 > ,; 8
                    G           6 : 7C > ,; 8  (                                       G
>

>                   =                       0                    7   8                 :       78
>                                               # * "$           #$* 5! $ HH                 5!5$" HHH
                                               % '! &            % * 5 *&                  %* !* &
    ; >-                                          "*"* HHH           4 44 HH                   $ " HHH
                                               % 5" &             % 55$&                   % *4"&
    ; >- '                                      #     * HHH        # ! ! HHH                #    ' HH
                                               % '$ &             % '45&                   % 4 !&
    0 > ,; 8                                    # 4 * HHH          # ' "*                   #    " HH
                                               % $ &              % ! &                    % $$&
    : 7C > ,; 8                                 # '!$ HHH          # *!                     # $ $ HH
                                               %     5&           % *!*&                   % '*&
78                                                "4" HHH
                                               % 5 $&
    :-                                            "'"             # !45!                    #* 44"$
                                               % '!$&            %44 45 *&                 %5*'*!&
    : - H78                                        5"
                                               % '5'*&
    : - H ; >-                                  # $!$                # ' $$                   444
                                               % '*!5&               %* 4&                 %'" !5&
    : - H ; >- '                                   ""$ H                    4               # !'*
                                               % $4!&                % '"4&                % '4 &
    : - H 0 > ,; 8                                 $* H              # 5"$                     '54
                                               % !5&                 %' &                  % '!'&
    : - H : 7C > ,; 8                              '4 H              #4                          '
                                               % '*&                 % *$5!&               % ' !&
    : C 02                                      # '!4 HHH            # '5$ HHH              # ! HHH
                                               % $'"&                %      &              % $" &
    : C -0 8-                                   # $*"                   4''$                #    !
                                               % 4'*&                % ' 5&                % 4 4&
80                                                 !" H                 4'$' HHH
                                               %     '&              % 4$$5&               % '"$&
2 0 ,?> @                                          * 4 HH               ' $5                   5" HH
                                               % "* &                % !5&                 % $5&
A : ?B>7C 0                                          4                  '*!4               #      4
                                               % 45&                 % '*"5&               % '"4&
? 0@; 81                                          4 ! HHH               5 '! HHH              $* " HHH
                                               % 5' &                % '4'$&               % ! &
0 D ,>-> >: 7                                      '$"                    **'              # 4!"
                                               %     *&              % '! 5&               %     "&
-: 8 87;                                        # '                     *     HH           # $
                                               %     5&              % '"!5&               % 5&
    8?2                                         # '"$ H              # **!" HH             # 5'!
                                               % " &                 % ''""&               % 5'"&
- ?8=: =8?                                         45"                  " 4                # 5*$
                                               % 45$&                % $5 &                % 5 4&
-8 ,?8;                                           ''$ HH             # 4 4'                   4     HHH
                                               %     $&              % ' "'&               % $! &
    ?>2 8                                       # '" HHH             # ""' HH              #      4 HHH
                                               % 5'&                 % ' "'&               % 4$ &
?0 8E: ?8 0-                                       "                 # "*'                    $ *'
                                               % 554&                % ** &                %'* &
0                                               # $ 54                                     # ' 4"
                                               % * '&                                      % *5 5&
111                                             # *4!$               # 5'45                # 4" !
                                               % *$4'&               % 54 "&               % *44!&
11                                              # *'!!               # * 5*                # 4$'"
                                               % *''5&               % 5$ "&               % *$ 5&
1                                               # 4*"4                  $$!                # 44!$
                                               % * 5!&               % 5 44&               % *'*!&
                                                # $!                                       # $!45
                                               % *" "&                                     % * '$&
7                                                 4*45                  $$                    4' 5
      #? G                                         !"                  '5'                     *$4
HHH6
   HH6
     H                                     3 6*3 6      3 ( 6         (
                                                                    -
               *                          & &                             +               *                 & +

                                                           ##             11E         #11E
                                                       6                                                        K      6
>      6               %!! 6 !!5&                                               11E
=>>>                                               6                            6C        6   8             (        :
               C                                                                                      11E           #11E   6
           (                        11E           ##                              #11E            (
                                                                                 HHH6
                                                                                    HH6
                                                                                      H                             36
                                                                                                                     *36
 3 (6              (
                                              -            7      8             7   #7 8
                                                               #*" "HHH                #5*'
                                          -                     %$ ''&               %" '"&
                                                               #!4*'HHH                 !
                                          2                     %5' &                %!**&
                                    #




                                                                 "'"$                   "!
                                                                %4" 55&              %'5$!&
                                                               #5! $HHH               #'54
                                          -                     %5' &                %'4*5&
                                                                 # 5                  # *4
                                          2
                                    #




                                                                %'" *&               %" 5'&
                                                                  $ 4$                  $*
                                                                %" " &               %'$ &
                                                                                                        % 4  6"
                                                                                                        ' % " ' 1




                         (
                                                                                                        '
                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                        7
                                                                                                         3 ##
                                                                                                            4




                                                                                            (22
                                                                                          5! !35 (
                                                                                         89&:/)5!37
                                                                                                            5 "




- @ # "# (
                                                                                         !; &    &!




(# % 3 #
                                                                                       3&9/&9    5&!
                                                                                                            (




                                                                                          35 5<2!
                                                                                          5! !35 (




     &
                                                                                         89&:/)5!37




#
             /
                   /
                                                                                           2 922
                                                                                                            + ,




                                                                                       3&9/&9 5&!




             #
                   #
                                                                                           /2&/(2




     1
                                                                                          =295 82
                                                                                          5! !35 (
                                                                                           /2&/(2>
                                                                                                            . %1




                                                                                           -: : (




             / 4
                   / 4
                                                                                          =&( 5!8




                                                                           Figure II
                                                                                          :     3&9/7




             " 4
                   " 4
                                                                                                            $




                                                                                          !;!&9 =
                                                                                        89&:/)5!37
                                                                                                            '




                                                                                        3=5 2! 2!
                                                                                       3&9/&9 5&!

                                                                                          !; & !2?


                             Fleet and BankBoston Loan Pricing Functions
                                                                                                            4#




    -
                                                                                        = - / =592
                                                                                       3&9/&9 5&!
                                                                                          2   29!




1
                                                                                             !;
                                                                                       3&9/&9 5&!




    -
                                                                                          /2&/(2
                                                                                         =295 82




*
                                                                                                            ! 12




                                                                                       - 29829 3&9/7
                                                                                                            '
