                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

                                               Manju Puri
                                             David Robinson

                                          Working Paper 11361
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11361


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




Duke University and NBER (Puri) and Duke University (Robinson). The authors are grateful for the
comments and suggestions of Simon Gervais, Dirk Jenter, Ahmed Khwaja, Rick Larrick, Cade Massey, John
Payne, Luca Rigotti, and seminar and conference participants at the University of Chicago, Duke, UNC, Ohio
State, Carnegie-Mellon, the World Bank, ISB Hyderabad, the NY Federal Reserve and the NBER. The usual
disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Manju Puri and David Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Optimism and Economic Choice
Manju Puri and David Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 11361
May 2005
JEL No. G1, D1

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper presents some of the first large-scale survey evidence linking optimism to major
economic choices. We create a novel measure of optimism using the Survey of Consumer Finance

by comparing a person's self-reported life expectancy to that implied by statistical tables. Optimists

are more likely to believe that future economic conditions will improve. Self-employed respondents

are more optimistic than regular wage earners. In general, more optimistic people work harder and

anticipate longer age-adjusted work careers. They are more likely to remarry, conditional on divorce.

In addition, they tilt their investment portfolios more toward individual stocks.

Manju Puri
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive, Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
mpuri@duke.edu

David Robinson
Duke University
davidr@duke.edu
2                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

                           1. Introduction

    Social and medical scientists have amassed a wealth of experimental
evidence indicating that dispositional optimism—having a positive gen-
eral outlook in life—is important in a wide range of settings. Optimistic
cancer patients face lower mortality risk (Schulz, Bookwala, Knapp,
Scheier, and Williamson, 1996). Optimists experience faster recov-
ery after coronary artery bypass surgery than pessimists do (Scheier,
Matthews, Magovern, Lefebvre, and Abbot, 1989), and they adjust
more smoothly to major life transitions like going to college (Aspin-
wall and Taylor, 1992) or failure to achieve a desired pregnancy (Litt,
Tennen, Affleck, and Klock, 1992).
    Similarly, optimism is posited to be at the root of many economic
phenomena. For example, Gervais and Goldstein (2004) model how
overconfidence in one’s own ability leads to excessive effort, resolving
moral hazard problems in teams. Rigotti, Ryan, and Vaithianathan
(2004) develop a model in which optimists are more likely to embrace
occupations with ambiguous returns, leading optimists to naturally
choose entrepreneurship. In asset pricing, optimism among a few in-
vestors may cause stock prices to exceed fundamental values in the
presence of short-sale constraints (Miller, 1977). And many scholars
have argued that optimism is a potential explanation behind the seem-
                                                                1
ingly peculiar financial choices that the self-employed make.
    While the idea that optimism underlies many economic phenomena
is compelling, there is a dearth of direct evidence on the role that opti-
mism plays. In this paper, we present large-scale micro-level evidence
linking optimism to a series of significant work and life related choices.
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                           3

We ask whether optimism affects outcomes in family economics, port-
folio choice, occupational choices, and beliefs about retirement. We
find strong evidence that it does.
  The major hurdle to amassing large-scale economic evidence on opti-
mism is the difficulty in measuring optimism in economic survey data.
To overcome this hurdle, we develop a measure of optimism using data
from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). The survey does not ask
respondents about optimism directly, but it does ask respondents how
long they expect to live. In addition, the survey tracks detailed de-
mographic characteristics for each respondent. Using actuarial tables,
we measure optimism by calculating the difference between a respon-
dent’s self-reported life expectancy and their statistical life expectancy
obtained from smoking-, age-, gender-, race-, and education-corrected
life tables.
  Our measure of optimism correlates with beliefs about future eco-
nomic conditions. Respondents who report that they think economic
conditions will improve over the next five years are statistically much
more optimistic according to our measure than respondents who think
conditions will stay the same or deteriorate. This effect is large: those
who think economic conditions will improve are almost two years more
optimistic than those who do not. Demographic variables that are
likely to correlate with unobserved health quality show no relation to
beliefs about future economic conditions.
  With a measure of optimism in hand, we next examine how it re-
lates to significant life choices. Some of the most important economic
decisions that people face occur relatively infrequently. These are the
decisions that are most ripe for being influenced by attitudes and emo-
tional disposition, since there is relatively little relevant data on which
4                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

to base an opinion. Our aim is to focus on questions such as these,
including marriage decisions, retirement plans, and vocational choices.
We examine the relation of optimism to the self-employment decision,
retirement plans, re-marriage, and portfolio choice.
    Looking at the labor market, we find evidence that self-employed
people are more optimistic than regular wage earners. Also, we find
that more optimistic people (regardless of their employment status)
seem to view work more favorably: they work longer hours, they an-
ticipate longer age-adjusted work careers, and they are more likely to
think that they will never retire.
    When we examine the decision to re-marry after divorce, we find
that more optimistic people are more likely to remarry. This holds
even after controlling for wealth, age, demographic characteristics, and
after controlling for attitudes towards risk.
    Optimism also affects portfolio choice. The SCF allows us to mea-
sure how much investment wealth is in equities versus other financial
securities. It also further categorizes equity wealth into investments in
mutual funds and individual stocks. Optimists are more likely to own
individual stocks, and they own a larger fraction of their equity wealth
in individual stocks. Thus, they appear to be stock-pickers. This sug-
gests that our measure of optimism captures the idea that optimists
place greater weight on more positive outcomes than pessimists do.
However, there is no evidence that more optimistic people tilt their
portfolios more toward equity per se. This suggests that our results
do not arise mechanically from life-cycle investment decisions, such as
the tendency for individuals who are at earlier points in their lifetime
consumption profile to hold a greater fraction of their wealth in equity,
                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                           5

as suggested by Dybvig and Liu (2004) and conventional advice from
personal investment counsellors.
  Our findings contribute to the intersection of psychology and eco-
nomics. Psychologists point out that optimism in one domain need
not correlate with optimism in other domains. Weinstein and Klein
(1996) caution, “Studies of biases...must be careful to ask, ‘Biased
about what?,’ and should refrain from assuming that what is found
in one domain will apply in another.” This biases against us finding
results outside the domain of life expectancy, but our findings never-
theless suggest that optimism about life expectancy may be a good
proxy for dispositional optimism suitable for use in large samples. Be-
havioral economics has long held the view that psychological consid-
erations play an important role in many economic choices, but direct,
                                            2
large-sample evidence on this has lagged.       The evidence presented
here complements recent theoretical work by Brunnermeier and Parker
(2005), who develop a framework for analyzing expectations that may
be biased towards optimism.
  The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we
discuss the SCF in greater detail and highlight some of the econometric
challenges that are often overlooked when using the SCF. In Section
3, we develop our measure of optimism, while in Section 4 we relate
optimism to a range of socio-economic and demographic characteristics.
Sections 5 through 7 present our main findings linking optimism to a
range of economic choices, including entrepreneurship, labor market
participation, re-marriage, and portfolio choice. Section 8 concludes.
6                    OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

                 2. Data and econometric issues

2.1. The Survey of Consumer Finances. Our primary data source
for this research is the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Since 1989,
the SCF has been conducted every three years. The survey randomly
samples individuals to develop a picture of the economic health of a
wide spectrum of the U.S. economy. Respondents are surveyed on a
number of dimensions: employment status, whether they own their own
business, retirement plans, portfolio holdings, and many other facets
of financial life. And in recent years, the survey has begun to ask
respondents about their beliefs regarding the outlook of the economy,
their life expectancy, and attitudes toward risk, making it an ideal
vehicle for observing the affect of attitudes on economic choices.


2.2. Multiple Imputation in the SCF. To provide the most com-
plete data possible to the research community, the SCF employs a
statistical technique called multiple imputation to correct for missing
or sensitive data.
    The exact multiple imputation procedures used by the Federal Re-
serve in the design of the SCF are described in great detail in a series
of articles by Arthur Kineckell and other economists at the Federal
Reserve. In particular, the interested reader should refer to Kinneckell
(2000) and the references therein.
    A simple description of the multiple imputation approach to missing
data is as follows. In general, some data from the SCF are missing
due to non-response or the desire to protect sensitive information that
might identify a particular respondent. To create a survey with the
most usability for researchers, the SCF replaces missing data with im-
putations that are chosen to best adhere to the covariance structure
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                           7

of the data in question. For example, suppose a respondent does not
answer a question regarding the value of her primary residence, but we
do know the person’s education level, income, and geographic region.
Then it would be possible to impute her missing value with a best
guess chosen to preserve the overall correlation between house value,
education, income, etc.
  The SCF uses Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to carry
out the imputation procedure. This, by its very nature, introduces an
element of randomness into the imputed data. Thus, the SCF actually
provides five distinct iterations of the data, with possibly differing val-
ues of some responses across implicates, depending on the stochastic
structure of the imputation algorithm.
  Correctly accounting for the effect of multiple imputation is often
overlooked, but is critical for making appropriate statistical inference.
When data have been treated by multiple imputation, the appropriate
point estimate is simply the mean of the point estimates obtained from
each separate imputation. But standard errors must be adjusted to
correctly account for the statistical properties of multiple imputation.
Put simply, standard errors based on the average across implicates are
too small; standard errors based on a randomly chosen implicate may
be too small or too large.
  To adjust our standard errors, we follow techniques described in
Montalto and Sung (1996a) and Little and Rubin (1987). The correct
standard error is the average of the standard errors from each imputa-
tion, plus an add-on that accounts for the variation across implicates.
Thus, a multiple imputation-corrected standard error may be smaller
than that obtained from a randomly chosen implicate (if the imputa-
tion of the data chosen produced large standard errors relative to the
8                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

average across implicates, and the across-imputation variance was not
too large). But it will always be larger than the standard error ob-
tained by averaging the covariates across the imputations of the data
before analysis (because doing so ignores across-imputation variance
and may shrink within-imputation variance). We describe the exact
procedures for producing the standard errors in an appendix available
                    3
from the authors.


                          3. Measuring optimism

    Our measure of optimism involves comparing respondents’ self-reported
life expectancy to that implied by actuarial tables. Formally, let Er (l|x)
be the expected value of respondent i’s remaining lifespan l conditional
on a vector of personal characteristics x, taken under their subjective
probability distribution, denoted by Er (·). Similarly, let Ea (l|x) be the
conditional expectation of l taken from an actuarial table. Our measure
of optimism is then simply

(1)                     Optimismi = Er (l|x) − Ea (l|x).

First we describe how the pieces of Equation 1 are calculated or ob-
tained. Then we study optimism in greater detail, exploring, in par-
ticular, whether the measure captures differences in expectations, or
whether it instead mainly captures differences in individual character-
istics that may be difficult to observe.


3.1. Self-assessments of life expectancy. Beginning in 1995, sur-
vey participants were asked the question “About how long do you think
you will live?” We use the answer to this question as our value for
Er (l|x).
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                          9

  Table 1 tabulates responses to this question for each year of the
survey. Each entry reports the fraction of that survey year’s responses
that fell in that interval: e.g., in 1995, 22.41 percent of respondents
answered that they expected to live to age X, where X is an integer
between 80 and 84.

                          [Insert Table 1 here]

  Respondents were allowed to report any positive integer, but there
is a great deal of clustering in the data around ages that are evenly
divisible by five. Living to exactly 100 years old is also a fairly common
response: about 8% of the sample in any given year expects to die at
age 100. However, relatively few individuals report capricious answers.
  As a safeguard, we checked that none of our results were sensitive to
these outliers. We use unwindsorized values throughout the paper, but
windsorizing at 1% and 99% has no effect on our results. In addition,
we inspected the data by hand to ensure that peculiar interpretations of
the question were not affecting any of our measurements. For example,
if some types of individuals were disproportionately prone to respond
in remaining years of life, rather than age at death, this would impart a
difference in recorded life expectancies for no real reason. For instance,
if all 50-year old respondents expected to live to age 80, but non-
entrepreneurs answered with 30 and entrepreneurs answered with 80,
then this would impart a difference where no difference existed. This
does not appear to be the case.


3.2. Actuarial life expectancy. By itself, thinking that one will live
longer does not constitute a valid measure of optimism, for an indi-
vidual may have good reason to hold this view. Some individuals may
be healthier than average, engage in fewer risky behaviors, or come
10                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

from demographic groups pre-disposed towards greater longevity. The
challenge is to correct for these measures so that the optimism measure
simply measures miscalibration in beliefs.
     We do this by consulting statistical tables that calculate expected
mortality rates over a person’s life span. These are commonly known
as ‘life tables’ in demography and forensic economics. Standard life
tables are known as current life tables, since they are obtained by
assembling a large sample of individuals running the gamut from very
young to very old, rather than by following a particular cohort from
birth to death.
     The linchpin of a life table calculation is the mortality rate at age
x, which we will denote m(x). The (age-specific) mortality rate is
typically calculated empirically by observing the proportion of a sample
of individuals x years of age that die over the interval (x, x + 1). Using
the mortality function, we can define the number of individuals alive
at year x as
                                               x
                                               X
(2)                     l(x) = l(0) exp(−            m(j))
                                               j=0

where l(0), the radix of the life table, is typically normalized to 100,000
                            l(x)
individuals. Effectively,   l(0)
                                   is the probability of being alive at age x
given that an individual faced the mortality conditions summarized in
P
   j m(j). The life expectancy of an individual at age x is calculated by

taking the sum of the remaining person-years until all currently living
individuals are dead, and dividing by the number of individuals alive
of that age:
                                        PT
                                           x l(x)
(3)                            e(x) =
                                           l(x)
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                         11

                                                                       4
where it is assumed that all individuals have died by some year T .
  We draw life tables from a number of sources to create the most ac-
curate possible estimate of a respondent’s lifespan. These are reported
in Table 2. The third column in Panel B, labelled ‘life table’, summa-
rizes the mean life expectancy for respondents based on age-, gender-,
and race-specific life tables obtained from the National Institutes of
Health. Taking the difference between this and the respondent’s self
report results in a level of optimism recorded in column (4). Under this
measure, the average optimism for females in the survey is about six
months, whereas the average optimism for males is over three years.
This difference is highly statistically significant, even controlling for
multiple imputation.


                          [Insert Table 2 here]


  Using age, gender and race specific life tables helps to account for
exogenous differences across individuals, but it still leaves this opti-
mism measure open to many potential alternative interpretations. The
most glaring alternative is that some individuals take better care of
themselves, or are naturally healthier, and this is reflected in their
self-assessments. To account for this, we make further corrections for
whether a person smokes, and what their level of education is. Our
smoking and education corrections follow (Richards, 1999).
  As column (5) indicates, women are more likely to smoke than men.
About one quarter of women in the SCF report that they smoke; only
one-fifth of men do. We also know that education affects mortality risk
(Richards, 1999). Highly educated individuals tend to hold jobs with
fewer occupational hazards; this translates into longer life expectancies.
12                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

     To control for this effect, we made adjustments for a person’s level
of schooling following the tables in Richards (1999). The effect of ed-
ucation differs across race and gender categories: in general, it has a
stronger effect for blacks and hispanics than for whites, and a stronger
effect for men than women, because men are more likely to find them-
selves in more dangerous jobs absent higher education. The smoking-
corrected life expectancy is reported in column (6).

                     4. Understanding optimism

     Our optimism measure differs substantially from measures used in
prior work in behavioral economics and finance. For example, Mal-
mendier and Tate (2004) use the early exercise behavior of CEOs who
hold stock options in their own firms as a proxy for optimism. Jenter
(2004) uses manager’s private portfolio trades to proxy for the man-
ager’s perceptions of his firm’s mispricing. While these measures shed
light on important economic questions, by their very nature they lack
the breadth to be applied to broader questions that go beyond CEO
or managerial decisions.
     Before we conclude that we have uncovered an empirical proxy for
optimism, we first must rule out the possibility that we are simply cap-
turing unobserved differences in health quality, or other characteristics
that are likely to cause a person to rationally and accurately believe
they will live longer. We do this in Tables 3 through 5.

4.1. The socio-demographics of optimism. In Table 3 we regress
optimism on a variety of socioeconomic and demographic measures to
see which groups of people display more optimism. This also allows us
to relate optimism to proxies that may be related to unobserved health
characteristics.
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                         13

                          [Insert Table 3 here]

  The first column also reports OLS regressions of optimism on race,
gender and education. Across specifications, white respondents are
statistically less optimistic than respondents of other racial categories.
Confirming a wealth of prior experimental studies on optimism, males
are more optimistic by our measure, and this effect is large. Being male
raises mean optimism by over two years, and this is highly statistically
significant, with a standard error of a little more than four months.
Likewise, more educated respondents are also more optimistic.
  In the second model we add the respondent’s age, their net worth,
and a dummy for whether they are currently self-employed. The net
worth figure is obtained from programs used to derive the Federal Re-
serve Bulletin’s net worth calculations. Net worth, age and whether
a respondent is self-employed are each important for explaining opti-
mism.
  The third column includes a vector of health measures that are likely
to correlate with unobserved health quality. Smokers are statistically
much more pessimistic about their life expectancy; smokers are six
years less optimistic than non-smokers after controlling for wealth and
other demographic characteristics. Since the life table calculation al-
ready controls for whether the respondent is a smoker, this effect is not
being driven by an inappropriate choice of benchmark for smokers.
  To account for a genetic predisposition towards longevity, we include
variables from the SCF that proxy for parent’s life-span. Ideally, the
survey would ask respondents to report either their parents’ current
age or at what age they died. Instead, the survey asks only whether
the parents are still living. While this is less informative for older
respondents, the average age of a respondent is roughly fifty years, and
14                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

indeed about forty percent of respondents still had a living father at
the time of the survey. Variables for whether the father and mother are
still living are statistically significantly related to optimism. Having a
living father raises optimism by about two years.
     The final column includes two variables that are completed by the
interviewer, rather than the respondent. In particular, the interviewer
is asked to rate how articulate the respondent is, and whether they
showed a good understanding of the questions at hand. These assess-
ments may reflect some cognitive ability that is correlated with health,
or they may measure overall success in life in a way that net worth does
not. Indeed, articulate respondents are more optimistic, but there is
no evidence that a good understanding of the questions is correlated
with beliefs about longevity.
     While many of the demographic and health-related variables are im-
portant for explaining optimism, the r-squared values reported in Table
3 suggest that nearly ninety percent of the variation in optimism is un-
explained.

4.2. Does optimism measure health quality? To dig deeper into
the relation between optimism and health quality, we explore respon-
dents’ answers to questions in the SCF about their health. The SCF
asks respondents to rate their own health. They can respond with ei-
ther ‘excellent,’ ‘good,’ ‘fair,’ or ‘poor.’ Since the survey contains no
way to measure a respondent’s health objectively, self-reported health
quality likely measures some combination of optimism and unobserved
health quality. Indeed, the responses tabulated in Table 4 indicate that
around 80% of respondents report being in good or excellent health.
This suggests that health quality could be used as an alternative mea-
sure of optimism. However, we avoid using it as such, since there is no
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                        15

way to calibrate beliefs about health against a well-accepted standard
based on objective characteristics such as demographics and smoking
behavior.

                         [Insert Table 4 here]

  To see whether health quality or optimism is likely to be responsi-
ble for our findings, we compare our optimism measure, self-reported
health quality, and a number of other factors that might affect longevity
with the survey respondent’s assessment of future economic conditions.
The SCF asks respondents how they expect the economy to fare over
the next five years. Respondents can answer that they think the econ-
omy will improve, will stay the same, or will get worse. The fraction
reporting that the economy will improve declines from over one-third to
less than one-quarter between 1992 and 1998, but improves in 2001. In
contrast, between thirty-five and forty percent of respondents in each
survey report that conditions will get worse.
  In Table 5, we report mean optimism and health quality for each an-
swer to this question. The average optimism for respondents reporting
that economic conditions will improve is more than twice that of the
other groups. The null hypothesis that the ‘conditions will improve’
group is equal to the other two groups is strongly rejected, with a t-
statistic of 6.61. Thus, our measure of optimism is highly correlated
with respondents views of future economic conditions.

                         [Insert Table 5 here]

  In the next column we report the average health quality for each
group. Since excellent health quality is coded ‘1’, and poor health coded
‘4’, the t-test shows that respondents who think economic conditions
16                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

will improve are also much more likely to believe that they possess
excellent health.
     The remaining columns of Table 5 report variables that are likely
to be correlated with unobserved health quality. The next column
illustrates that smoking rates do not vary across the three categories–
respondents who think the economy will improve are no less likely to
smoke than respondents with a less sanguine economic outlook. Nor
is the fraction of respondents with a father still living different across
economic outlook categories.
     In the final column we report average years of schooling by economic
outlook. Education is known to impact mortality through job choice,
but there is no difference across categories in the average education
level.
     In sum, when we compare our measure of optimism to beliefs about
future economic conditions, we find a strong positive correlation be-
tween economic outlook and biased life expectancy. This correlation
carries over into self-assessments of health quality, but when we look
deeper into variables that are potentially correlated with unobserved
health characteristics, we find no evidence that more objective mea-
sures of health quality are correlated with economic outlook.
     In the remainder of the paper, we use optimism as an explanatory
variable in a range of economic settings. To ease exposition, we re-scale
optimism so that it is mean zero with unit variance. While this makes
interpreting point estimates in regression easier, it is intrinsically diffi-
cult to attach economic significance to the point estimates, because we
ultimately do not know how to calibrate our optimism measure against
the latent variable for which it proxies. Nevertheless, to ensure that our
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                         17

results were not being driven by measurement error related to unob-
served health quality, we re-estimated all our results replacing optimism
with the error obtained by regressing optimism on socio-demographic
and health characteristics, as reported in last column of Table 3. This
regression-error optimism displays an identical pattern across economic
outlook categories, and to each of the tables that follow. These results
along with our results of correlation of our measure of optimism to
positive economic outlook suggests that our results are being driven by
optimism rather than unobserved differences in health quality.


                  5. Optimism and work choices

5.1. Optimism and the self-employment decision. Given evidence
from Hamilton (2000) that the self-employed face lower lifetime wage
profiles, a natural question is how the decision to be self-employed is
related to optimism. Of course, this evidence is also consistent with
                                                             5
the self-employed displaying a greater tolerance for risk.
  To disentangle these explanations, we use variables from the SCF
that gauge respondents’ attitudes toward financial risk. In each year of
our sample, the SCF asked: Which of the statements on this page comes
closest to the amount of financial risk that you and your (spouse/partner)
are willing to take when you save or make investments? Respondents
were allowed to choose between the following four answers: Take sub-
stantial financial risks expecting to earn substantial returns; Take above
average financial risks expecting to earn above average returns; Take
average financial risks expecting to earn average returns; Not willing
to take any financial risks.
  Table 6 presents results from a Probit analysis, correcting for mul-
tiple imputation. The dependent variable is a dummy for whether the
18                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

respondent is self-employed. The key independent variables are opti-
mism and risk tolerance, but we also include demographic controls as
well as other control variables. Point estimates are reported as the
marginal change in the probability of being self-employed associated
with each independent variable.

                            [Insert Table 6 here]

     The table illustrates that optimism and risk tolerance have a statis-
tically significant effect on whether a respondent is self-employed, even
controlling for a range of possible correlated factors. Looking at risk-
tolerance alone, or risk-tolerance paired with optimism, we see that
moving up one category of response (from above average to substan-
tial, or from average to above average) is associated with roughly a ten
                                                      6
percent increase in the chance of self-employment.
     The demographic controls illustrate the fact that the self-employed
are largely white, male, college-educated respondents. Being white
as opposed to black or Hispanic raises the probability of being self-
employed by roughly ten percent, being male, twelve to fifteen percent.
The effect of college education is smaller at five percent, but still sta-
tistically significant. Controlling for family traits such as marriage and
family size illustrates the importance of family characteristics in ex-
plaining self-employment, but does not drive out the importance of risk
tolerance or optimism. Finally, Column (5) shows also that controlling
for age and net worth (as defined by the Federal Reserve Bulletin) does
not drive out the importance of risk tolerance or optimism.
     In sum, Table 6 illustrates that risk tolerance and optimism are im-
portant determinants of self-employment, even controlling for a range
of family, demographic, and wealth characteristics. Moreover, opti-
mism and risk tolerance seem to be capturing different aspects of the
                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                           19

decision to be become self-employed, as including them in the same
regression does not diminish the importance of either.


5.2. Allocating time to work and leisure. Given the previous re-
sults linking self-employment to optimism, a natural question is how
broader aspects of labor market participation are affected by optimism
and attitudes toward risk. Table 7 explores explores this issue with
three sets of regressions aimed at understanding hours worked and at-
titudes toward retirement.
  The first pair of columns explores how attitudes affect current hours
worked. The data include all respondents, regardless of whether they
are self-employed. The dependent variable is the response to a question
in the SCF that asks respondents how much over the last year they
                                  7
worked in an average week.            As explanatory variables we include
the respondent’s age, their optimism, risk tolerance, net worth, and a
                                                 8
dummy for whether they are self-employed.            The p-values (reported
in brackets below point estimates), as elsewhere, are adjusted for the
effects of multiple imputation.

                         [Insert Table 7 here]

  The first column indicates that both optimism and risk tolerance
affect hours worked. More optimistic respondents work longer hours.
This is consistent with the theoretical predictions of Gervais and Gold-
stein (2004), who show how optimism can alleviate shirking in team
production settings, and Chacko, Chowdhry, Cohen, and Coval (2004),
who also predict that optimists work harder.
  The other variables in the first column indicate that respondents with
greater risk tolerance work longer, and that higher net worth respon-
dents work longer. Based on the results of the previous section, this is
20                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

consistent with the interpretation that risk-takers with higher net worth
are running (in the case of entrepreneurs) or involved with more com-
plex organizations that are more demanding of their time. The loading
on life expectancy indicates that younger respondents work longer, and
that controlling for age, longer-lived respondents also work longer. The
first interpretation is a reflection of the fact that most respondents to
the SCF are in the downward sloping portion of their age-earnings pro-
files, while the second interpretation indicates that people who expect
to live longer work more so that can be better prepared for retirement.
This result is consistent with theoretical predictions from Dybvig and
Liu (2004).
     When we include a dummy for self-employment in column (2), we see
a very large effect on hours worked. The data indicate that the self-
employed work roughly seventeen hours per week longer on average
than do non-entrepreneurs. This speaks very clearly for the fact that
the self-employed derive non-pecuniary benefits from work. Neverthe-
less, this does not drive out the significance of optimism and attitudes
toward. Even accounting for the fact that entrepreneurs work much
longer per week than the typical non-entrepreneur, more optimistic
and more risk-tolerant individuals work longer hours.

5.3. Attitudes toward retirement. Not only do more optimistic
and more risk tolerant people work more each week, their total ex-
pected work-life is longer. This is illustrated in the remaining columns
of Table 7, which explore attitudes toward retirement.
     To explore attitudes toward retirement, we use a question which
asks respondents when they expect to stop working. Respondents were
allowed to report the year in which they expected to retire, or they
were allowed to respond, “Never stop working.”
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                          21

  The second pair of columns in Table 7 present regressions in which
the dependent variable is a dummy for whether the respondent an-
swered that they would never stop working. More optimistic people
are more likely to report that they will work forever. Thus, not only
do they work more currently, but they intend to continue doing so in-
definitely. This works against the possibility that increased optimism
leads to false beliefs about early retirement.
  Overall, age, risk tolerance, net worth and self-employment explain
the no-retirement decision in much the same way that they explain the
allocation of time to current work. Younger respondents and respon-
dents with greater expected longevity are more likely to report that
they will work forever. Risk-tolerant and higher net worth individuals
are also more likely to continue working indefinitely. The fact that
net worth increases the probability of working forever speaks against
common perceptions of retiring to a life of leisure after striking it rich.
  Self-employment has a dramatic effect on the expected retirement de-
cision. Being self-employed raises the probability of expecting to work
                                9
forever by seventeen percent.       This evidence supports the view that
self-employed individuals derive non-pecuniary benefits from work. But
this explanation does not diminish the fact that optimism makes non-
retirement more likely, since we find significant loadings on optimism
even when we include a dummy for self-employment.
  The third pair of columns in Table 7 present censored regressions
of the time to retirement on the same set of independent variables
described above. Respondents who indicate that they expect to never
stop working are treated as right-censored. Again, we see that more
optimistic respondents report that they wish to work longer, controlling
for age.
22                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

     In sum, Table 7 establishes an important link between labor market
participation (both in the short- and long-run), self-employment, and
optimism. We find strong evidence that more optimistic individuals
work more, both now and in the future.


                    6. Optimism and remarriage

     Samuel Johnson called remarriage the triumph of hope over experi-
ence. In Table 8 we explore whether optimism is related to the decision
to remarry.
     The coefficients in Table 8 are reported as the marginal change in
the probability of remarriage associated with a change in each inde-
pendent variable. Since we know that there is a high degree of correla-
tion between optimism, self-employment, and a series of demographic
characteristics (white, male, college-educated), we include demographic
controls in each of the regressions. As the figures illustrate, these con-
trols have a large impact on the decision to remarry: being male as
opposed to female raises the probability by over 70% in each of the
specifications; being white as opposed to black or Hispanic raises it by
over 6%. Being more educated also raises the probability of remar-
riage. Therefore controlling for these correlated factors is critical for
establishing a link between life-style choice and optimism.
     Column (1) of Panel B reports the effect of optimism on remarriage
without additional controls. It shows that more optimistic respondents
are much more likely to remarry. Across each specification, increased
optimism raises the probability of remarriage. This effect holds regard-
less of the other variables included in the regression. Age, for example,
has a positive effect on the rate of remarriage, but including age does
not drive out the significance of the optimism measure.
                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                        23

  Controlling for education, gender, and race, we see that risk toler-
ance has no statistical impact on the probability of remarriage. In
unreported regressions that exclude demographic controls, risk toler-
ance is an important determinant of the remarriage decision, and risk
tolerance increases the probability of remarriage. But this seems to
capture an effect that varies primarily across demographic categories.
  Finally, tying back to self-employment, we see that the self-employment
dummy is significant for explaining remarriage even after we include
demographic characteristics and the underlying attitudes that we think
are responsible for entrepreneurial decisions. Even controlling for net
worth, which is insignificant after other demographic controls are in-
cluded, the self-employed are much more likely to remarry than those
who are not.




         7. Does optimism affect portfolio choice?

  Portfolio choice provides another setting in which to gauge the eco-
nomic effects of optimism. We calculate several measures of an individ-
ual’s portfolio holdings. The SCF reports whether an respondent owns
individual shares of stock; this is distinct from other equity holdings
that the respondent may own through an individual retirement account
or mutual fund. Thus, we begin by creating a dummy for whether an
individual owns any stock.
  The SCF also draws a distinction between equity holdings and over-
all financial wealth. This allows us to create two additional variables
of stock ownership. The first is the ratio of stock wealth to total eq-
uity wealth. The second is the ratio of equity wealth to total financial
wealth. Ownership in private equity investments is not included in
24                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

either of these calculations, so these measures are not biased by corre-
lations between optimism and self-employment.
     In the first column of Table 9, we report a Probit regression in which
the dependent variable is a dummy for whether the respondent owns
any individual stock. We explain stock ownership with optimism, atti-
tudes toward risk, net worth, and a variety of demographic character-
istics that are likely to be correlated with financial sophistication.
     The regression shows that optimism is highly positively correlated
with stock ownership, even after controlling for a wide range of vari-
ables that might be correlated with optimism and equity participation.
Optimism has a strong positive relation to equity participation even
after controlling for the respondent’s self-assessment of risk and their
net worth.
     Is this finding important for portfolio allocation? To gauge this,
we replace the stock ownership dummy with the fraction of individual
stock assets to total financial assets. To rule out participation effects,
we restrict the estimation to individuals who own some equity. Again,
optimism is positive and significant.
     The obvious alternative explanation for our findings on stock own-
ership are that optimistic people think they will live longer. Therefore
they think they are further from retirement, all else equal, in which case
our findings square with conventional advice offered by personal invest-
ment advisers (see also Dybvig and Liu (2004)). To guard against this
possibility, the third column repeats the analysis but instead of mod-
elling the probability of owning individual stock, we model the amount
of equity assets as a fraction of total financial assets. In this specifi-
cation, optimism is insignificant. Thus, optimism affects how equity
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                        25

wealth is allocated between various equity instruments; it is not driv-
ing the portfolio allocation decision along the equity/debt dimension.
Thus, it is unlikely that our findings are being driven by differences in
unobserved health quality or by mechanical relations between portfolio
decisions and life expectancy.
  Another alternative explanation is that optimism is capturing fi-
nancial sophistication. To control for this, we replace the dependent
variable with a dummy for bond ownership. If optimism is simply cap-
turing financial sophistication, we would expect bond ownership to load
positively on optimism. On the other hand, if optimism is a manifes-
tation of some deeper psychological phenomenon like self-attribution
bias, then we would not necessarily expect more optimistic people to
own more bonds.
  These results are reported in the fourth column. The relation be-
tween optimism and bond ownership is insignificant. Moreover, opti-
mism has no impact on the ratio of bond wealth to overall financial
assets.
  In sum, this section illustrates that more optimistic individuals are
more likely to be ‘stock-pickers’: that is, they are more likely to have
equity invested in individual stocks, as opposed to mutual funds or
other equity investment vehicles. Surprisingly, their portfolios are not
more heavily tilted towards equity overall. Only the amount of eq-
uity allocated to individual stocks is higher. This puzzling fact speaks
against the alternative explanation that we have merely captured dif-
ferences in expected life-span, and indeed suggests a tantalizing link
between the optimism we are measuring and self-attribution bias.
26                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

                            8. Conclusion

     We develop a novel way of measuring optimism by comparing a sur-
vey respondent’s self-reported life expectancy to their actuarial life ex-
pectancy, controlling for factors that are known to affect a person’s
lifespan. This measure allows us to relate optimism to key economic
choices across a large sample of individuals in the Survey of Consumer
Finances.
     We find overwhelming support for the idea that optimism impacts
economic decision-making. We find that optimism affects work choices,
career choices, retirement choices, portfolio choices and marital choices.
     These findings are important for a number of reasons. From a psy-
chological perspective, many researchers have noted that optimism in
one domain of activity does not necessarily translate into optimism
about other domains (Weinstein, 1980). In other words, optimism is
often thought to be event, or domain based, and while individuals may
display optimism about a certain event, this does not necessarily trans-
late into optimism about other events. Weinstein and Klein (1996) cau-
tion, “Studies of biases...must be careful to ask, ‘Biased about what?,’
and should refrain from assuming that what is found in one domain
will apply in another.” Our measure of optimism is indeed domain-
based: it measures expectations in future life span. Prior research in
psychology indicates that optimism in this domain need not necessarily
apply to other arenas. Yet, our measure of optimism, even though it
is domain-based, seems to capture important elements of dispositional
optimism.
     The fact that optimists work more, are less pre-disposed towards
retirement, are more likely to be self-employed, to remarry, and to
pick individual stocks suggests that optimism is a critical component
                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                  27

of economic decision-making, and that optimism plays an important
role in economic outcomes. However, we must be cautious in drawing
normative implications from these findings. Does optimism increase
social welfare? We leave this question to future research.
28                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

                               References

Aspinwall, L.G., and S. E. Taylor, 1992, Modeling Cognitive Adapta-
     tion: A longitudinal investigation of the impact of individual differ-
     ences and coping on college adjustment and performance, Journal of
     Personality and Social Psychology 63, 989–1003.
Baker, Malcolm, Richard Ruback, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2004, Behav-
     ioral Corporate Finance: A Survey.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Richard Thaler, 2003, A Survey of Behavioral
     FinanceElsevier North-Holland vol. 1b of Handbooks in Economics
     chap. 18 1st edn.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Jonathan Parker, 2005, Optimal Expecta-
     tions, American Economic Review forthcoming.
Chacko, George, Bhagwan Chowdhry, Randolph Cohen, and Joshua
     Coval, 2004, Rational Exuberance: The Effects of Anticipation Util-
     ity, UCLA Working Paper.
Dybvig, Philip, and Hong Liu, 2004, Lifetime Consumption and In-
     vestment: Retirement and Constrained Borrowing, Working Paper
     Washington University.
Gentry, William, and Glenn Hubbard, 2001, Entrepreneurship and
     Household Saving, NBER Working Paper No. 7894.
Gervais, Simon, and Itay Goldstein, 2004, The effects of biased self-
     perception in teams, Working paper Duke University and The Whar-
     ton School.
Hamilton, Barton, 2000, Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical
     Analysis of the Returns to Self-Employment, Journal of Political
     Economy 108, 604–631.
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas, 2000, Asset pricing and portfolio
     choice: the importance of entrepreneurial risk, Journal of Finance
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                           29

  55, 1163–1198.
Hirshleifer, David, 2001, Investor Psychology and Asset Pricing, Jour-
  nal of Finance 56, 1533–1598.
Jenter, Dirk, 2004, Market Timing and Managerial Portfolio Decisions,
  Journal of Finance forthcoming.
Kinneckell, Arthur B., 2000, Wealth Measurement in the Survey of
  Consumer Finances: Methodology and Directions for Future Re-
  search, Working paper Federal Reserve Board of Governors Federal
  Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
Landier, Augustin, and David Thesmar, 2005, Financial contracting
  with optimistic entrepreneurs: theory and evidence, Working Paper,
  NYU.
Litt, M.D., H. Tennen, G. Affleck, and S. Klock, 1992, Coping and
  cognitive factors in adaptation to in vitro fertilization failure, Journal
  of Behavioral Medicine 15.
Little, Roderick J. A., and Donald B. Rubin, 1987, Statistical Analysis
  with Missing Data. (John Wiley and Sons New York, NY) first edn.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoff Tate, 2004, CEO Overconfidence and
  corporate investment, Journal of Finance forthcoming.
Miller, Edward, 1977, Risk, Uncertainty, and Divergence of Opinion,
  Journal of Finance 32, 1151–1168.
Montalto, Catherine Phillips, and Jaimie Sung, 1996a, Multiple Impu-
  tation in the 1992 Survey of Consumer Finances, Financial Counsel-
  ing and Planning 7, 133–146.
Montalto, Catherine Phillips, and Jaimie Sung, 1996b, SAS Code for
  RII Scalar Estimation, Computer program Ohio State University
  http://hec.osu.edu/people/shanna/scf/riiq.htm.
30                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

Moskowitz, Tobias, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002, The Returns
     to Entrepreneurial Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?,
     American Economic Review 92, 745–778.
Puri, Manju, and David T. Robinson, 2005, Optimism, Entrepreneur-
     ship and Risk-taking, Working Paper, Duke University.
Richards, Hugh, 1999, Life and worklife expectancies. (Lawyers &
     Judges Publishing Company Tucson, AZ).
Rigotti, Luca, Matthew Ryan, and Rhema Vaithianathan, 2004, En-
     trepreneurial Innovation, Working paper Duke University.
Scheier, M.F., K. A. Matthews, J.F. Magovern, R.C. Lefebvre, and
     R.A. Abbot, 1989, Dispositional optimism and recovery from coro-
     nary artery bypass surgery:    The beneficial effects on physical
     and psychological well-being, Personality and Social Psychology 57,
     1024–1040.
Schulz, R., J. Bookwala, J.E. Knapp, M. Scheier, and G.M. Williamson,
     1996, Pessimism, age and cancer mortality, Psychology and Ageing
     11, 304–309.
Weinstein, Neil, 1980, Unrealistic optimism about future life events,
     Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39, 806–820.
Weinstein, Neil, and William M. Klein, 1996, Unrealistic Optimism:
     Present and Future, Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 15,
     1–8.
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                       31

                                   Notes




1. For example, self-employed individuals hold poorly diversified port-
folios (Gentry and Hubbard, 2001; Heaton and Lucas, 2000), they
bear excessive risk for the returns they earn (Moskowitz and Vissing-
Jorgensen, 2002), and they accept lower median life-time earnings than
similarly skilled wage-earners (Hamilton, 2000).

2. For more on the link between optimism and financial economics, see
Barberis and Thaler (2003) for a broad survey of behavioral finance,
Baker, Ruback, and Wurgler (2004) for a survey of the literature on
behavioral corporate finance, and Hirshleifer (2001) for a survey of how
psychology affects asset prices.

3. In an appendix to be made available from the authors, we provide
the exact formulas, as well as the STATA code, for producing multiple
imputation-corrected standard errors. See Montalto and Sung (1996b)
for SAS code.

4. Note that this implies life expectancies are biased downward, since
current mortality of a person aged x+t is used to assign t-period-ahead
mortality risk to a person aged x, rather than the expected future mor-
tality t periods from now. In other words, the mortality risk of persons
currently aged 60 is used to assess the life expectancy of individuals
currently aged 40, even though current 40-year-old persons may face
lower mortality in 20 years than current 60 year-old persons do today.
This bias has no impact on our measurements, since we are interested
in cross-sectional variation in this measure.
32                 OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

5. In a companion paper (Puri and Robinson, 2005), we explore ques-
tions related to self-employment, private equity ownership, entrepreneur-
ship, and risk-taking in greater detail.

6. These findings agree with those reported by Landier and Thesmar
(2005), although our measures differ considerably. They use French sur-
vey data to relate entrepreneurial capital structure to optimism. They
measure optimism as the miscalibration in the expectations of the suc-
cess of their business. We measure optimism about one’s expected life
span, which seems to capture important elements of dispositional opti-
mism and relates to many different kinds of economic choices including
the self-employment decision itself.

7. Similar results were obtained based on a question asking how much
respondents had worked over the last few weeks, but the variance of
this response was considerably higher.

8. In alternative specifications available from the authors, we replaced
age with statistical life expectancy and obtained qualitatively identical
findings. None of the variables of interest is sensitive to this spec-
ification choice, but this specification allows us control for expected
retirement affects more easily.

9. In unreported tables, we have repeated this regression including de-
mographic controls for gender, race, and education. The controls only
weaken the loading on risk tolerance. Optimism and self-employment
are unaffected.
                           Table 1. Self-reported life expectancy

Survey                Percentage of respondents with self-reported age at   death:
Year     < 60 60-64    65-69 70-74 75-79 80-84 85-89 90-94 95-99            100 > 100 Total
1995     2.73 3.15       4.7 12.14 14.28 22.41 14.64 11.9 4.62              8.76 0.67  100
1998     2.59 2.56      3.65 11.66 13.62 21.07 17.59 12.82 4.76             7.9 1.79   100
2001     1.86 2.48      3.97 10.42 12.79 22.43 16.06 15.37 4.32             8.59 1.71  100
Total    2.39 2.73      4.1   11.4 13.56 21.97 16.1 13.38 4.57              8.42 1.4   100
                                                                                              OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE
                                                                                              33
                                                                                     34


                         Table 2. Calculating optimism

             Life expectancy, based on age, gender, race: Smoking/Educ. corrected:
        Age Self-reported Life table       Optimism       % who smoke Optimism
Female 51.24     82.76        82.17           0.59           26%          -0.33
Male   49.61     81.66        78.54           3.12           21%          2.00
                                                                                     OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE
                  OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                                35

             Table 3. The demographics of optimism

                      Dependent variable is optimism, in years
Explanatory variable:     (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)
                              ∗∗        ∗∗         ∗∗
Constant               3.9482    4.7429     2.6995    2.3997∗∗
                       [0.3587] [0.4689] [0.6834] [0.6893]
White?                -6.5463∗∗ -6.6083∗∗ -6.7608∗∗ -6.8954∗∗
                       [0.3554] [0.3593] [0.3488] [0.3510]
Male?                 2.8298∗∗ 2.5041∗∗ 2.3645∗∗ 2.3200∗∗
                       [0.2659] [0.2710] [0.2627] [0.2624]
Education              1.0084∗∗ 0.9162∗∗ 0.5389∗∗ 0.4932∗∗
                       [0.0724] [0.0745] [0.0731] [0.0743]
Age                              -0.0151∗ 0.0334∗∗ 0.0345∗∗
                                 [0.0066] [0.0096] [0.0096]
Net worth                        0.0141∗∗ 0.0130∗∗ 0.0122∗∗
                                 [0.0036] [0.0035] [0.0035]
Self employed?                   1.1609∗∗ 0.7625∗∗ 0.7203∗∗
                                 [0.2599] [0.2518] [0.2522]
Smoker?                                    -6.4064∗∗ -6.3395∗∗
                                            [0.2620] [0.2631]
Father living?                              2.3692∗∗ 2.3712∗∗
                                            [0.2803] [0.2802]
Mother living?                              1.5826∗∗ 1.5802∗∗
                                            [0.2765] [0.2764]
Articulate?                                           0.7619∗∗
                                                      [0.3420]
Understood well?                                       0.0051
                                                      [0.3432]
R-squared               0.0456    0.0495     0.1108    0.1119
OLS point estimates are reported. Standard errors are reported in brackets
below point estimates and are corrected for multiple imputation. Single and
double asterisks denote significance at the 5% and 1% level, respectively.
36         OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

        Table 4. Self-reported health quality

                 Health quality is:
     Year Excellent Good Fair         Poor   Total
     1995  35.87     44.52 15.00      4.61   100.00
     1998  34.63     46.23 15.17      3.97   100.00
     2001  35.57     43.92 15.85      4.66   100.00
     Total 35.36     44.88 15.35      4.42   100.00
                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                            37

              Table 5. What does optimism measure?

                      Mean    Health % who Father                     Educ-
Economic conditions: Optimism Quality smoke living?                   ation
will improve           2.56    1.82    .21    .40                     13.79
will stay the same     0.80    1.94    .24    .40                     13.69
will get worse         1.19    1.87    .22    .40                     13.74

t-test                       6.61        5.44      -1.64     0.56       1.49
The final row reports a t-test for the null hypothesis that the mean within the
“economic conditions will improve” group for each column equals the mean of the
other two groups. The t-statistic is corrected for multiple imputation.
38                   OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

                Table 6. Optimism and self-employment

                         Dependent Variable is 1 if ever self-employed
 Explanatory variable:    (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)
                              ∗∗        ∗∗        ∗∗         ∗∗
 Optimism              0.0235    0.0161    0.0146     0.0130    0.0133∗∗
                       [0.0000] [0.0001] [0.0004] [0.0013] [0.0012]
 Risk tolerance        0.1103∗∗ 0.0579∗∗ 0.0588∗∗ 0.0535∗∗ 0.0593∗∗
                       [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]
 White?                          0.1450∗∗ 0.1387∗∗ 0.1354∗∗ 0.1285∗∗
                                 [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]
 Education                       0.0587∗∗ 0.0557∗∗ 0.0526∗∗ 0.0514∗∗
                                 [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]
 Male?                           0.1891∗∗ 0.1374∗∗ 0.1360∗∗ 0.1480∗∗
                                 [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]
 Married?                                  0.0872∗∗ 0.0796∗∗ 0.0586∗∗
                                           [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]
 Children?                                 0.0084∗ 0.0116∗∗ 0.0242∗∗
                                           [0.0103] [0.0007] [0.0000]
 Net worth                                            0.0015∗∗ 0.0013∗∗
                                                      [0.0000] [0.0000]
 Age                                                            0.0024∗∗
                                                                [0.0000]
 R-squared              0.0437    0.1159    0.1222     0.1323    0.1370
 Point estimates are expressed as marginal probabilities. A constant term is esti-
 mated in each model. p-values are reported in brackets below point estimates and
 are corrected for multiple imputation. Single and double asterisks denote signifi-
 cance at the 5% and 1% level, respectively.
                            Table 7. Work ethic, optimism, and entrepreneurship

                                                                 Dependent variable is:
Explanatory Variable:                 Hours   worked              Never stop working                Remaining Work
Optimism                          1.0858∗∗      0.7363∗∗          0.0135∗∗ 0.0099∗∗               0.6716∗∗ 0.6345∗∗
                                   [0.0000]     [0.0000]           [0.0004] [0.0051]               [0.0000] [0.0001]
Risk tolerance                    4.2399∗∗      2.4757∗∗          0.0275∗∗ 0.0106∗∗               -0.5812∗∗ -0.6902∗∗
                                   [0.0000]     [0.0000]           [0.0000] [0.0064]               [0.0017] [0.0003]
Age                               -0.6487∗∗    -0.6855∗∗          -0.0021∗∗ -0.0028∗∗             -0.7773∗∗ -0.7946∗∗
                                   [0.0000]     [0.0000]           [0.0000] [0.0000]               [0.0000] [0.0000]
Net worth                         0.0555∗∗      0.0193∗∗          0.0009∗∗ 0.0007∗∗               0.0434∗∗ 0.0400∗∗
                                   [0.0000]     [0.0003]           [0.0000] [0.0000]               [0.0000] [0.0000]
Self employed?                                 17.1340∗∗                    0.1724∗∗                        1.4763∗∗
                                                [0.0000]                     [0.0000]                        [0.0000]

R-squared                           0.2746       0.3757             0.0228       0.0574             0.1282       0.1293
The first two columns report OLS point estimates and p-values. Hours worked is the number of hours worked
in a typical year by the respondent in their current full-time job. The third and fourth columns report marginal
probabilities from a Probit estimation. Never stop working is a dummy variable equaling one if the respondent
                                                                                                                          OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE




answered that they never intended to retire. Coefficients in this column are reported as marginal probabilities. The
fifth and sixth columns report point estimates from a censored OLS regression. Remaining work is the number of
years the respondent expected to continue full-time work. Respondents who indicated they never intended to stop
working are right-censored. A constant term is estimated in each model. p-values are reported in brackets beneath
point estimates and control for multiple imputation. Single and double asterisks denote significance at the 5% and
1% level, respectively.
                                                                                                                          39
40                    OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE

       Table 8. Marriage, divorce, optimism and risk tolerance

                              Dependent variable is 1 if remarried
 Explanatory variable:    (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)
                              ∗∗        ∗∗        ∗∗         ∗∗
 Optimism              0.0485    0.0497    0.0454     0.0439    0.0437∗∗
                       [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0001]
 Education             0.0263∗∗ 0.0291∗∗ 0.0250∗∗ 0.0224∗∗ 0.0221∗∗
                       [0.0001] [0.0000] [0.0004] [0.0015] [0.0017]
 Male?                 0.7078∗∗ 0.7096∗∗ 0.7095∗∗ 0.7075∗∗ 0.7074∗∗
                       [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]
 White?                0.1613∗∗ 0.1661∗∗ 0.1549∗∗ 0.1501∗∗ 0.1491∗∗
                       [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]
 Risk tolerance                  -0.0189 -0.0118 -0.0156 -0.0175
                                 [0.0657] [0.1774] [0.1124] [0.0882]
 Age                                       0.0035∗∗ 0.0034∗∗ 0.0033∗∗
                                           [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]
 Self employed?                                       0.0478∗ 0.0428∗
                                                      [0.0247] [0.0415]
 Net worth                                                        0.0004
                                                                 [0.1005]

 R-squared                    0.3888      0.3894      0.3938       0.3946      0.3951
 Coefficients are expressed as marginal probabilities. A constant term is estimated in
 each model. p-values reported in brackets below point estimates and are corrected
 for multiple imputation. Single and double asterisks denote significance at the 5%
 and 1% level, respectively.
                     OPTIMISM AND ECONOMIC CHOICE                                   41

                Table 9. Optimism and portfolio choice

                                              Dependent Variable is:
                       Stock                Stock/  Equity/     Bond              Bond/
Explanatory variable: Dummy                  Fin.     Fin.    Dummy                Fin.
Optimism              0.0154∗∗            0.0144∗∗   0.0027    0.0009             0.0127
                      [0.0016]             [0.0069] [0.2521] [0.3541]            [0.0920]
Risk tolerance        0.1281∗∗            0.0779∗∗ 0.0645∗∗ 0.0137∗∗             0.0425∗∗
                      [0.0000]             [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]            [0.0000]
Net worth             0.0043∗∗            0.0014∗∗   0.0002 0.0006∗∗             0.0018∗∗
                      [0.0000]             [0.0000] [0.0516] [0.0000]            [0.0000]
Self employed?        0.0319∗∗            0.0391∗∗ -0.0208∗∗ 0.0197∗∗            0.0883∗∗
                      [0.0017]             [0.0001] [0.0037] [0.0000]            [0.0000]
Race=white?           0.1485∗∗            0.0987∗∗ 0.0387∗∗ 0.0491∗∗             0.3186∗∗
                      [0.0000]             [0.0000] [0.0086] [0.0000]            [0.0000]
Gender=male?          0.0540∗∗            0.0498∗∗ -0.0069     0.0072             0.0460
                      [0.0003]             [0.0034] [0.2992] [0.1621]            [0.0637]
Age                   0.0059∗∗            0.0068∗∗   0.0000 0.0029∗∗             0.0119∗∗
                      [0.0000]             [0.0000] [0.4420] [0.0000]            [0.0000]
Education             0.0491∗∗            0.0196∗∗ 0.0086∗∗ 0.0179∗∗             0.0664∗∗
                      [0.0000]             [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]            [0.0000]
Married?              0.0949∗∗            -0.0075∗∗ 0.0127 0.0223∗∗              0.0851∗∗
                      [0.0000]             [0.2898] [0.0981] [0.0000]            [0.0001]

R-squared                     0.2439       0.1351        0.1040       0.2349       0.2398
Stock (respectively, bond) dummy is a dummy for whether the respondent owned
individual shares of stock (respectively bonds), in their portfolio of financial assets.
This is distinct from ownership of equities through retirement accounts, mutual
funds, and other vehicles, which comprise total financial equity holdings. Coeffi-
cients in these columns are reported as marginal probabilities. Stock/Fin. is the
fraction of individual stock to total financial wealth. Equity/Fin. is the fraction of
total equity to total financial wealth. These models are estimated on the subsam-
ple of respondents reporting positive equity ownership to control for participation
effects. Bond/Fin. is the fraction of bond holdings to total financial wealth. A con-
stant term is estimated in each equation. p-values are reported in brackets and are
corrected for multiple imputation. Single and double asterisks denote significance
at the 5% and 1% level, respectively.
