                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                       BANK CREDIT CYCLES

                                               Gary Gorton
                                                Ping He

                                          Working Paper 11363
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11363


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




We thank Steve Davis, Armando Gomes, Charles Kahn, Anil Kashyap, Richard Kihlstrom, Narayana
Kocherlakota, George Mailath, Ben Polak, Eric Rosengren, Geert Rouwenhorst, Nick Souleles, Jeremy Stein
and seminar participants at Duke, Chicago, Moody’s Investors Services, Yale, and the NBER Conference
on Capital Markets and the Economy for their comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Gary Gorton and Ping He. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Bank Credit Cycles
Gary Gorton and Ping He
NBER Working Paper No. 11363
May 2005
JEL No. E3, G2

                                           ABSTRACT

Private information about prospective borrowers produced by a bank can affect rival lenders due
to a "winner’s curse" effect. Strategic interaction between banks with respect to the intensity of
costly information production results in endogenous credit cycles, periodic "credit crunches."
Empirical tests are constructed based on parameterizing public information about relative bank

performance that is at the root of banks’ beliefs about rival banks’ behavior. Consistent with the

theory, we find that the relative performance of rival banks has predictive power for subsequent

lending in the credit card market, where we can identify the main competitors. At the

macroeconomic level, we show that the relative bank performance of commercial and industrial

loans is an autonomous source of macroeconomic fluctuations. We also find that the relative bank

performance is a priced risk factor for both banks and nonfinancial firms. The factor-coefficients for

non-financial firms are decreasing with size.

Gary Gorton
Department of Finance
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
gorton@wharton.upenn.edu

Ping He
University of Illinois-Chicago
heping@uic.edu
1        Introduction
In this paper we show that periodic credit crunches, swings between high and low credit alloca-
tions, are an inherent part of banking due to the way banks compete for borrowers. The amount
of information that banks produce about potential borrowers, and the amount of credit banks
are willing to extend, varies through time due to strategic interaction between competing banks.
Credit cycles can occur without any change in the macroeconomic environment. We investigate this
amplification mechanism and provide empirical evidence that bank credit cycles are an important
autonomous part of business cycle dynamics. Extensive empirical tests of the model are presented,
based on parameterizing the public information that is the basis for banks’ beliefs about rivals’
strategies. These information measures concern rival banks’ relative performance, encapsulated in
a Performance Difference Index (PDI). The empirical behavior of U.S. bank credit card lending,
commercial and industrial lending, and bank profitability, are consistent with the model. Bank
credit cycles are a systematic risk. We find that, consistent with this, the PDI is a priced factor
in an asset pricing model of bank stock returns. Most importantly, the PDI is a priced factor for
non-financial firms as well, and increasingly so as firm size declines.
        Changes in bank credit allocation, sometimes called "credit crunches," appear to be an impor-
tant part of macroeconomic dynamics. Bank lending is procyclical.1 Rather than change the price
of loans, the interest rate, banks sometimes ration credit.2               A dramatic example in the U.S. is
the period shortly after the Basel Accord was agreed in 1988, during which time the share of U.S.
total bank assets composed of commercial and industrial loans fell from about 22.5 percent in 1989
to less than 16 percent in 1994.          At the same time, the share of assets invested in government
securities increased from just over 15 percent to almost 25 percent.3 More generally, it has been
noted that banks vary their lending standards or credit standards.
        Bank “lending standards” or “credit standards” are the criteria by which banks determine and
rank loan applicants’ risks of loss due to default, and according to which a bank then makes its
lending decisions.      While not observable, there is a variety of evidence showing that while lend-
ing rates are sticky, banks do, in fact, change their lending standards.4 The most direct evidence
    1
     See Lown, Morgan and Rohatgi (2000), Jordan, Peek, and Rosengren (2002), and Lown and Morgan (2002).
    2
     Bank loan rates are sticky. Berger and Udell (1992) regress loan rate premiums against open market rates
and control variables and find evidence of “stickiness.” (Also, see Berger and Udell (1992) for references to the
prior literature.) With respect to credit card rates, in particular, Ausubel (1991) has also argued that they are
“exceptionally sticky relative to the cost of funds” (p. 50).
   3
     See Keeton (1994) and Furfine (2001). This episode is the focus of the empirical literature on credit crunches.
See Bernanke and Lown (1991), Hall (1993), Berger and Udell (1994), Haubrich and Wachtel (1993), Hancock and
Wilcox (1994), Brinkman and Horvitz (1995), Peek and Rosengren (1995), and Beatty and Gron (2001). Gorton and
Winton (2002) provide a brief survey of the credit crunch literature.
   4
     In the absence of detailed information about banks’ internal workings, it is not exactly clear what is meant
by the term "lending standards." It can refer to all the elements that go into making a credit decision, including
credit scoring models, the lending culture, the number of loan officers and their seniortiy and experience, the banks’
heirarchy of decision-making, and so on.



                                                          1
comes from the Federal Reserve System’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending
Practices.5 Banks are asked whether their "credit standards" for approving loans (excluding merger
and acquisition-related loans) have “tightened considerably, tightened somewhat, remained basi-
cally unchanged, eased somewhat, or eased considerably.” Lown and Morgan (2001) examine this
survey evidence and note that, except for 1982, every recession was preceded by a sharp spike in the
percentage of banks reporting a tightening of lending standards. Other evidence that bank lending
standards change is econometric. Asea and Blomberg (1998) examined a large panel data set of
bank loan terms over the period 1977 to 1993 and “demonstrate that banks change their lending
standards - from tightness-to laxity-systematically over the cycle” (p. 89), and they conclude that
cycles in bank lending standards are important in explaining aggregate economic activity.
       In a macroeconomic context changes in the Fed Lending Standards Index (the percentage of
respondents reporting tightening) Granger-causes changes in output, loans, and the federal funds
rate, but the macroeconomic variables are not successful in explaining variation in the lending
standards index. The Lending Standards Index is exogenous with respect to the other variables
in the Vector Autoregression system. See Lown and Morgan (2001, 2002) and Lown, Morgan
and Rohatgi (2000).6 The analysis in this paper is aimed at explaining the forces that cause
lending standards to change and, in particular, to explaining how this can happen independently
of macroeconomic variables.
       When competing with each other to lend, banks produce information about potential borrowers
in an environment where they do not know how much information is being produced by rival bank
lenders.7     We study a model of bank competition in which banks collude to set high loan rates
(hence loan rates are sticky), and they implicitly agree not to (over-) invest in costly information
production about prospective borrowers.8 A bank can strategically produce more information than
its rivals and then select the better borrowers, leaving unknowing rivals with adversely selected loan
   5
      The survey is conducted quarterly and covers major banks from all parts of the U.S., accounting for between 60
and 70 percent of commercial and industrial loans in the U.S. The Federal Reserve System’s “Senior Loan Officer
Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices” was initiated in 1964, but results were only made public starting in 1967.
Between 1984:1 and 1990:1 the question concerning lending standards was dropped. See Schreft and Owens (1991).
Current survey results are available at <http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/SnLoanSurvey/>.
    6
      They also find that changes in bank lending standards matter much more for the volume of bank loans and
aggregate output than do commercial loan rates, consistent with the finding that loan rates do not move as much as
would be dictated by market rates.
    7
      Broecker (1990) observed that the information asymmetry also affects the banks themselves and means that
banks compete with each other in a special way. In Broecker’s (1990) model, banks use noisy, independent, credit
worthiness tests to assess the riskiness of potential borrowers. Because the tests are imperfect, banks may mistakenly
grant credit to high-risk borrowers who they would otherwise reject. As the number of banks increases, the likelihood
that an applicant will pass the test of at least one bank rises. Banks face an inherent winner’s curse problem in this
setting. In Broecker’s model banks do not behave strategically in a dynamic way.
    8
      Strategic interaction between banks seems natural because banking is highly concentrated. Entry into banking
is restricted by governments. In developed economies the share of the largest five banks in total bank deposits ranges
from a high of 81.7% in Holland to a low of 26.3% in the United States. See the Group of Ten (2001). In less
developed economies, bank concentration is typically much higher (see Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003)).



                                                          2
portfolios. Unlike standard models of imperfect competition, following Green and Porter (1984),
there are no price wars among banks since banks do not change their loan rates. However, as in
Green and Porter (1984), intertemporal incentives to maintain the collusive arrangement requires
periods of "punishment." Here these correspond to credit crunches. In a credit crunch all banks
increase their costly information production intensity, that is, they raise their "lending standards,"
and stop making loans to some borrowers who previously received loans. These swings in credit
availability are caused by banks’ changing beliefs, based on public information about rivals, about
the viability of the collusive arrangement.
   Empirically testing models of repeated strategic interaction of firms has focused on price wars.
See Reiss and Wolak (2003) and Bresnahan (1989) for surveys of the literature. However, our model
predicts there are "information production wars." Since information production is unobservable,
we can not follow the usual empirical strategy. We propose a new method for testing the model,
which we believe to be of independent interest. Our approach tests a general implication of any
equilibrium of the model with imperfect competition by identifying the relevant public information
and its relation with "information production wars"—credit crunches. In theory, to detect deviations
by rivals, banks must look at two sources of public information: the number of loans made in a
period by each rival and the default performance of each rivals’ loan portfolio.      We argue that
the relative performance of other banks is the public information relevant for each bank’s decisions
about the choice of the level of information production.      More importantly, the use of relative
bank performance empirically distinguishes our theory from a general learning story, which would
predict past bank performance matters for bank credit decisions.
   Broadly, the empirical analysis is in three parts. First, we examine a narrow category of loans,
U.S. credit card lending, where there are a small number of banks that appear to dominate the
market.    Since it is not clear which banks are rivals, we first analyze this lending market by
examining banks pairwise. If the PDI increases, banks should reduce their lending and increase
their information production resulting in fewer loan losses in the next quarter. We also examine
bank profitability, using stock returns. Second, we analyze macroeconomic time series, including
the Lending Standard Survey Index. We form an aggregate bank Performance Difference Index
(PDI) based on the absolute value of the differences on all commercial and industrial loans of
the largest 200 banks.   If beliefs are, in fact, based on this information, then we should be able
to explain (in the sense of Granger causality) the time series of Fed’s Lending Standard Survey
responses (the percentage of banks reporting "tightening" their standards) in Lown and Morgan
(2001). Thirdly, if credit crunches are endogenous, and a systematic risk, then they should be a
priced factor in an asset pricing model of stock returns. Therefore, our final test is to ask whether
the parameterization of banks’ relevant histories is a priced risk factor in a four factor Fama-French
asset pricing setting. We look at banks and nonfinancial firms by size, as credit crunches have
larger effects on smaller firms. We find all the evidence to be consistent with the theory.
   Other relevant work includes Rajan (1994). He argues that fluctuations in credit availability by


                                                  3
banks are driven by bank managers’ concerns for their reputations (due to bank managers having
short horizons), and that consequently bank managers are influenced by the credit policies of other
banks. Managers’ reputations suffer if they fail to expand credit while other banks are doing so,
implying that expansions lead to significant increases in losses on loans subsequently.9                      We test
Rajan’s idea in the empirical section. Two related theoretical models are provided by Dell’Ariccia
and Marquez (2004) and Ruckes (2003).                These papers show a link between lending standards
and information asymmetry among banks, driven by exogenous changes in the macroeconomy.
As distinct from these models, the fluctuation of banks’ lending behavior in our paper is purely
driven by the strategic interactions between banks instead of an exogenously changing economic
environment.
        We proceed in Section 2 to describe the stage game for bank lending competition, and we study
the existence of stage Nash equilibrium and the model’s implications for lending standards. The
stage game is a prelude to considering the infinitely repeated game, the subject of Section 3. In
Section 4, we carry out empirical tests. Section 5 concludes the paper.


2        The Lending Market Stage Game
In this section we set forth the model and analyze the lending market stage game.
        Suppose (without loss of generality) that there are two banks in the market competing to lend,
as follows. There are N potential borrowers in the credit market. Each of the potential borrowers
is one of two types, good or bad. Good types’ projects succeed with probability pg , and bad types’
projects succeed with probability pb , where pg > pb ≥ 0. Potential borrowers, sometimes also
referred to below as “applicants,” do not know their own type. At the beginning of the period
potential borrowers apply simultaneously to each bank for a loan. There is no application fee. The
probability of an applicant being a bad type is λ, which is common knowledge.10 Each applicant
can accept at most one loan offer, and if a loan is granted, the borrower invests in a one period
project which will yield a return of X < ∞ if the project succeeds and returns 0 otherwise. A
borrower whose project succeeds will use the return X to repay the loan, i.e., a borrower’s realized
cash flow is verifiable.
        Banks are risk-neutral. They can raise funds at some interest rate, assumed to be zero. After
receiving the loan applications, a bank can use a costly technology to produce information about
the applicant’s type. The credit worthiness testing results in determining the type of an applicant,
but there is a per applicant cost of c > 0. Banks can test any proportion of their applicants. Let
    9
     However, as pointed out by Weinberg (1995), the data on the growth rate of total loans and loan charge-offs in
the United States from 1950 to 1992 do not show the pattern of increases in the amount of lending being followed by
increases in loan losses.
  10
     We will hold λ fixed throughout the analysis, but this is to clarify the mechanism that is our focus. It is natural
to think of λ as being time-varying, representing other business cycle shocks outside the model, and we could easily
incorporate this. But it would obscure the cyclical effects that are purely due to bank competition.



                                                           4
ni denote the number of applicants that are tested by bank i. We say that the more applicants
that a bank tests, i.e., using the costly information production technology, the higher are its credit
or lending standards.11 If a bank switches from not using the credit worthiness test to using it, we
say that the bank has raised its lending or credit standards. We assume that neither bank observes
the other bank’s credit standards, i.e., each bank is unaware of how many applicants the other bank
tests. Results of the tests are the private information of the testing bank.
       Since the bank borrowing rate is zero, when a bank charges F (to be repaid at the end of
the period) for one unit of loan, the bank’s expected return from lending to an applicant will be
λpb F + (1 − λ)pg F − 1 in the case of no credit worthiness testing.

       • Assumption 1: pg X > 1, pb X < 1, and λpb X + (1 − λ)pg X > 1.

       Assumption 1 means that there exists some interest rate, X, that allows a bank to earn positive
profits from lending to a good type project ex ante, but there does not exist an interest rate at
which a bank can make positive profits from lending to a bad type project ex ante. (Given the
loan size being normalized to 1, the face value of the loan F uniquely determines the interest rate,
and later on we refer to F as the “loan interest rate.”) It is also possible for banks to profit from
lending to both types of applicants without discriminating between the types.
       Each bank first chooses some (could be zero, could be all) applicants to test, then, depending
on the test results, decides whether to make a loan offer for each applicant, and if yes, at what
interest rate. We formally define the stage strategy of each bank in Appendix 1.
       We assume that banks do not observe each other’s interest rates or the identities of applicants
offered loans. At the end of the period only final loan portfolio sizes and outcomes are publicly
observable. Banks cannot communicate with each other.
       Figure 1 shows the timing of moves in the one period game.

2.1      Stage Nash Equilibrium

We now turn to study Nash equilibrium, and the conditions for the existence of Nash equilibrium,
in the lending market stage game. We provide a condition under which the only Nash equilibrium
that exists is one in which neither bank conducts credit worthiness testing and both banks earn
zero profits.
       First we will study the Nash equilibrium in which no bank conducts credit worthiness testing.
We have the following results.

                                           g −pb )
Proposition 1 If and only if c ≥ λ(1−λ)(p
                                   λpb +(1−λ)pg , there exists a symmetric Nash equilibrium in which
no bank conducts credit worthiness testing and both banks earn zero profits.
  11
    Imagine that banks always produce some minimal amount of information about loan applicants. We ignore
this base amount of information, however, and focus only on the situation where banks choose to produce more
information than this base level. So, we interpret the credit worthiness test as the additional information produced,
beyond the normal information production.


                                                         5
                             Banks choose to test or not, and then make
  Nature decides the         loan and interest rate offers, contingent on
  types of the firms.        test results, if the test was used.                      Next period starts.




           Firms apply to      Applicants that receive       Successful                Borrowers with
           both banks for      loan offers choose to         borrowers invest in       successful projects
           loans.              accept or not.                their projects.           repay loans.



                                Figure 1: The Timing of the Stage Game

       The proof is in Appendix 2.
       Proposition 1 says that if the cost of testing each loan applicant is sufficiently high, i.e., c ≥
λ(1−λ)(pg −pb )
 λpb +(1−λ)pg ,   then the there exists a Nash equilibrium in which no bank conducts credit worthiness
testing and neither bank earns positive profits.

                             λ(1−λ)(pg −pb )
       • Assumption 2: c ≥    λpb +(1−λ)pg .


       Assumption 2 guarantees the existence of the stage symmetric Nash equilibrium. At the same
time, this assumption implies that the optimal payoffs for the banks are reached when no credit
worthiness testing are conducted (as we will show in a moment).
       Now consider the case where both banks test at least some applicants.

Proposition 2 There is no symmetric Nash equilibrium in which both banks test at least some of
the applicants.

       The proof is in Appendix 2.12 Intuitively, after the banks test some of the applicants, they will
compete with each other for the good type applicants, which will drive the post-test profit to zero.
However, since there is a test cost, ex-ante the banks’ profits will be negative.
       Our conclusion with regard to the stage game in the lending market is that, without mixed
strategies, the only Nash equilibrium that exists is the equilibrium in which neither bank conducts
credit worthiness testing, and both banks earn zero profits.
       It is straightforward to characterize the optimal payoffs that the two banks receive in the stage
game. If a bank does not conduct credit worthiness testing on an individual applicant and charges
  12
    Banks could play more general mixed strategies. For example, banks could mix between testing n1 applicants
and testing n2 applicants. We do not delve into these strategies.


                                                         6
F , then the expected payoff from a loan to that individual applicant is:

                                    π = λpb F + (1 − λ)pg F − 1,

which is maximized at F = X.        If a bank conducts credit worthiness testing on an individual
applicant and charges F , then the expected payoff from a loan to that individual applicant is:

                                     π′ = (1 − λ)(pg F − 1) − c,

which also is maximized at, say, F = X.        It is easy to check that π′ < π with F = X under
Assumption 2.


3    Repeated Competition
In the stage game, we have already shown that banks earn zero profits without testing, and the
optimal payoffs for banks are reached when there is no costly credit worthiness test being used.
Setting a (collusive) loan interest rate of F = X would be the most profitable case for both banks.
In repeated competition banks will try to collude to charge F = X without conducting credit
worthiness testing. When the banks collude by offering a profitable interest rate to the applicants
without testing, there is an incentive for each bank to undercut the interest rate in order to get more
applicants. In order to generate intertemporal incentives to support the collusion on a high interest
rate, banks need to punish each other to prevent deviation in undercutting interest rates, which
can be monitored by looking at the loan portfolio size of each bank. However, a high interest rate
generates incentives for banks to conduct credit worthiness testing and get higher quality applicants
while manipulating the loan portfolio size. To see this, let us look at the following example.
    By undercutting the interest rate offered to an applicant without credit worthiness testing, the
expected payoff from this loan to the bank is:

                                    π = λpb F + (1 − λ)pg F − 1.

Alternatively, the bank can test the applicant, undercut the interest rate if it is a good type, and
undercut the interest rate to another untested applicant if the tested one turns out to be a bad
type (this way the bank always gets one applicant for sure); the expected payoff to the bank is:

                      π′ = λ[λpb F + (1 − λ)pg F − 1] + (1 − λ)(pg F − 1) − c.

We can show:
                                  π′ − π = λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb )F − c,

which is increasing with F . Therefore, when F is high enough, banks will have incentive to produce
information while manipulating the loan portfolio size through interest rates.
    Formally, we consider sequential equilibria in which banks’ strategies will depend on public
information. In general, banks can base their strategies on all available information, both public

                                                  7
and private. However, if one bank’s strategy only depends on public information, the other bank
can not do better by making its strategy dependent on both public information and its private
information. The class of sequential equilibria (see Kreps and Wilson (1982)) that depends only
on public information is called “Perfect Public Equilibria” (PPE). See Fudenberg, Levine, and
Maskin (1994). The available public information at the end of each period is the number of loans
that each bank made (Dit ) and the number of those loans that defaulted (χit ).
       We formalize the game in Appendix 1, and we restrict attention to symmetric PPE (SPPE)
(defined below). Aside from seeing how the repeated game works, the main point is the demon-
stration that because banks have two actions that they can use to compete (i.e., changing lending
rates and increasing information production), banks’ beliefs must be based on the history of banks’
portfolio sizes as well as banks’ loan default performances.

3.1      Symmetric Perfect Public Equilibrium
We now examine symmetric PPE (SPPE) in which asymmetric play is allowed after the first period
stage game is played symmetrically.13            We focus on demonstrating that the banks’ continuation
play depends on the history of the number of loans made by each bank and on the number of loan
defaults in each bank’s portfolio. These results then motivate the empirical analysis.
       Any perfect public equilibrium payoff for bank i can, as discussed in Appendix 1, be factored into
a first-period stage payoff πi (depending on the stage strategies of both banks) and a continuation
payoff function ui (depending on the public history). Let si be the stage strategy for bank i, an
SPPE is defined as follows:
       Definition: A Symmetric Perfect Public Equilibrium (SPPE) is a Perfect Public Equilib-
rium that can be decomposed into the first period stage strategies and continuation value functions
(s1 , s2 , u1 , u2 ) such that:

                             s1 = s2 and u1 (D1 , D2 , χ1 , χ2 ) = u2 (D2 , D1 , χ2 , χ1 ).

       According to the definition, the stage game strategies are the same, but the continuation strate-
gies can differ. In particular, note that the continuation value functions for Bank 1 and Bank 2 are
symmetric in that if we exchange the loan portfolio sizes and loan performances, the continuation
values will also be exchanged. In such an SPPE, the expected payoff for the two banks are the
same, but asymmetric play is allowed after the first period, for asymmetric realizations of loan
portfolio size and loan performance.
       At a profitable interest rate, if a bank makes more loans than its rival, then the continuation
value of Bank 1 should be lower, to eliminate the incentive of the banks to deviate by undercutting
interest rates to get more loans.          However, when there is credit worthiness testing, it may not
  13
    We can prove that there does not exist any symmetric PPE in a strict sense (i.e., both banks behave the same
way in the stage game and in the continuation game) other than the one in which the stage Nash equilibrium is
played every period. The proof is available on request.


                                                           8
be true that making more loans is always better. A bank can deviate by testing, “raising credit
standards,” resulting in the other bank lending to the bad type applicants rejected by the first
bank. This is the strategic use of the winner’s curse by one bank against its rival. Due to that
possibility, we will show that loan performance (number of defaults in each bank portfolio) will also
affect the continuation value.

Proposition 3 In any SPPE, in which neither bank tests any applicant and both banks make loan
offers to all applicants at the same interest rate Fα , if c < λ(1−λ)(pg −pb )Fα , then the continuation
value functions cannot only depend on the number of loans made by each bank.

   The proof is in Appendix 2.       The proof involves finding a deviating strategy such that the
expected continuation payoffs are the same for both banks while there is a stage gain by conducting
credit worthiness testing. The proposition says that banks’ loan performances (i.e., number of
defaults) matters in an SPPE with banks charging the same interest rate (high enough) to all the
applicants and conducting no credit worthiness testing. With the possibility of credit worthiness
testing, variation in loan portfolio sizes is not enough to detect deviation through credit worthiness
testing. The case with both banks offering loans to only a subset of the applicants without using
the test is covered in the following corollary.

Corollary 1 In any SPPE, in which neither bank tests any applicant and in which each bank
makes loan offers to a subset 2 ≤ Nα < N of applicants at the same interest rate Fα , if c <
λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb )Fα , then the continuation value functions cannot only depend on the number of
loans made by each bank.

   The proof is in Appendix 2. The case with Nα = 1 is covered by the next corollary.

Corollary 2 In any SPPE, in which neither bank tests any applicant and in which each bank makes
loan offers to a subset Nα ≤ N of applicants at different interest rates, denoted by a vector Fα , if
c < 2N−1
      2N λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb ) min{Fα }, then the continuation value functions cannot only depend on
the number of loans made by each bank.

   The proof is in Appendix 2.
   The conclusion is that when the banks want to avoid costly credit worthiness testing on the
equilibrium path, then it is not possible for the two banks to collude on a high loan interest rate in
a SPPE without looking at each other’s loan performances. The possibility of deviating by using
credit worthiness testing while manipulating the loan size, and the resulting winner’s curse effect,
makes both banks’ strategies sensitive to each others’ past loan performances, even though there
is an i.i.d. distribution of borrower types over time.
   As we have shown, banks’ strategies depend on the public histories of banks’ loan portfolio
performance and size. However, the theory does not provide details on how the public histories are
linked to bank beliefs and strategies. To help understand this issue for later empirical tests, let us

                                                   9
consider a simple example with N = 2 applicants. Suppose Bank 1 deviates from the equilibrium
strategy s (test no applicants, and offer some high interest rate Fα to both of them) to s′ as follows:
test one applicant; if he is good, offer a loan at rate Fα− , and reject the other applicant; if the
applicant is bad, reject it, and offer a loan to the other applicant at loan rate Fα− . In this way, the
expected loan portfolio size is not changed, but loan performance will be improved; there is less
likely to be a default. Given the loan distribution (D1 = 1, D2 = 1), from Bank 2’s point of view,
without deviation by Bank 1, the probability of Bank 2 having a loan default is:

                                     q = λ(1 − pb ) + (1 − λ)(1 − pg ).

With Bank 1 deviating to s′ , Bank 2’s default probability becomes:

                         q′ = λ(1 − pb ) + (1 − λ)[λ(1 − pb ) + (1 − λ)(1 − pg )].

The likelihood of default is higher:

                                  ∆q = q ′ − q = λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb ) > 0.

To detect a deviation, however, banks should compare their results. That is, they should check
their loan performance difference. Given the loan distribution (D1 = 1, D2 = 1), without deviation
by Bank 1, the probability of Bank 2 having a worse performance than Bank 1 is:

               qr = λ(1 − pb )[λpb + (1 − λ)pg ] + (1 − λ)(1 − pg )[λpb + (1 − λ)pg ] < q.

With Bank 1 deviating to s′ , this probability becomes:

               qr′ = λ(1 − pb )[λpb + (1 − λ)pg ] + (1 − λ)[λ(1 − pb ) + (1 − λ)(1 − pg )]pg .

We have:
                                ∆qr = qr′ − qr = λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb ) = ∆q.

Therefore, compared with punishing each other after a bad performance, doing that after a relatively
bad performance incurs a smaller probability of a mistaken punishment (qr < q), while it generates
the same incentive to not to deviate (∆qr = ∆q). The measure of the "performance difference"
excludes the case where both banks perform poorly, and excluding this case is empirically important
because it can result from aggregate shocks, which we do not model.
   In Appendix 3, we construct a detailed example, using a Green-Porter (1984) type trigger
strategy, in which banks change their lending standards based on the history of their performance
differences.
   Before we start our empirical section, let us briefly discuss the link between information pro-
duction and credit crunches. When each bank tests a subset of the applicant pool, the winner’s
curse effect may lead the banks to reject all those non-tested applicants. To see this, assume the
banks randomly pick n < N applicants for testing, and offers loans to those that pass the test. To

                                                     10
simplify the argument, assume that the interest rates offered to non-tested applicants are higher
than the one offered to applicants that passed the test. For the non-tested applicants, it is possible
that there does not exist a profitable interest rate due to the winner’s curse. If a bank offers loans
to non-tested applicants, then given an offer is accepted by an applicant, the probability of this
non-tested applicant being a bad type is:
                                                                  n          n 1
                                 .                                N λ + (1 − N ) 2 λ
                               θ = Pr(bad type|not tested) =       n          n 1 .
                                                                  N λ + (1 − N ) 2

When n is close to N , θ can be very close to 1. When banks conduct credit worthiness testing,
lending standards (loosely defined) can affect lending in two ways. First, those applicants that were
tested can be rejected if banks find them to be bad types; second, those applicants that were not
tested can be rejected if the proportion of applicants that are tested is large. The second "rejected"
category might contain some good type applicants. Therefore, some non-tested applicants can not
get loans if both banks test a large portion of all applicants. This is a "credit crunch" in which
applicants not tested by either bank are denied loans, even if they are in fact good types.
         The above discussions lead to our empirical tests in the next section: banks’ relative performance
are important for the credit cycles, which have significant impact on the economy.


4         Empirical Tests
The model proposes that banks form beliefs based on public information. The empirical strategy
we adopt is to focus on one robust prediction that the theory puts forward, namely, that unlike a
perfectly competitive lending market, in the imperfectly competitive lending market that we have
described, public histories about rival banks should affect the decisions of any given bank.                     We
construct measures of the relative performance histories of banks, variables that are at the root
of beliefs and their formation. In particular, changes in beliefs about rival behavior should be a
function of bank public performance differences.
         In the U.S. the most important public information available about bank performance is the in-
formation collected by bank regulatory authorities (the Federal Reserve, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of Currency) in the quarterly Call Reports. While
publicly-traded banks also file with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Call Reports
provide the detail on specific loan category amounts outstanding, charge-offs, and losses.                       We
construct Performance Difference Indices based on the Call Reports that U.S. banks file quarterly
with. These reports are filed by banks within 30 days after the last business day of the quarter,
and become public roughly 25 to 30 days later.14 For that reason, when we analyze the predictive
    14
    Today banks submit their Call Reports electronically to Electronic Data Systems Corporation. It is then sent to
the Federal Reserve Board and to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which subsequently release the data.
This has of course changed over time. Nowadays, the information is available 25-30 days after it is filed on the web.
Earlier private information providers would obtain computer tapes of the information from the National Technical



                                                         11
power of certain variables to be constructed based on the Call Reports, we use the one period lag
when the contemporaneous variable is needed. Because the reports appear at a quarterly frequency,
we analyze data at that frequency.
    To parameterize the relative bank performance for our empirical studies, we use the absolute
value of performance differences.           Taking the absolute value is motivated by the theory.                 Even
if a bank is doing relatively better than its rivals, it knows that if rivals believe that it has devi-
ated then they will increase their information production, causing the better performing bank to
also raise its information production.           Banks, whether relatively better performing or relatively
worse performing, punish simultaneously, resulting in the credit crunch.                     If banks’ beliefs about
rivals’ actions change based on our parameterization of the public history, then when this measure
increases, i.e., when there is a greater dispersion of relative performance, then banks reduce their
lending and increase its quality, resulting in fewer loans, lower loss ratios, and reduced profitability
in the future. We construct indices of the absolute value of the difference in loan loss ratios and
test whether the histories of such variables have predictive power for future lending decisions, loan
losses, and bank stock returns.
    Another challenge for testing concerns identifying rival banks.                 We must identify banks that
are, in fact, rivals in a lending market. It is not clear whether banks compete with each other in
all lending activities or only in some specialized lending areas. It is also not clear whether bank
competition is a function of geography or possibly bank size. These are empirical issues.
    While the model suggests that there are two "regimes," normal times and punishment times,
this is an artifact of simplifying the model. There could be a range of punishments, making the
notion of a "regime" less discontinuous. This too is an empirical issue.

4.1    The Credit Card Loan Market

We first examine a specific, but important category of loans, credit card loans.15 In the U.S. credit
card lending market potential rival banks are identifiable because credit card lending is highly
concentrated and this concentration has been persistent. The Federal Reserve has collected data
on credit card lending and related charge-offs since the first quarter of 1991 in the Call Reports.
The data we use is at the bank holding company level, as aggregated by the Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago. Thus, we are thinking of banks competing at the holding company level rather than at
the individual bank level. For each bank holding company, we collect quarterly data from 1991.I
through 2000.IV for “Credit Cards and Related Plans,” as well as some other variables discussed
Information Service of the Department of Commerce. The information was then provided in published formats. We
thank Mary West of the Federal Reserve Board for information on the timing of the reports.
  15
     Despite the public availability of credit scores on individual consumers, banks retain important private information
about credit card borrowers. Gross and Souleles (2002) show the additional explanatory power of private internal
bank information in predicting consumer defaults on credit card accounts, using a sample where they were able to
procure the private information.




                                                           12
                       1200




                        900




                        600




                        300
                              1991.I                                                    2000.IV




                                              Figure 2: Herfindahl Index

below.16
      The high concentration is shown by the Herfindahl Index for banks that are active in the credit
card loan market pictured in Figure 2.17               Figure 3 shows the proportion of credit card loans for
the top 10, 30, and 50 bank holding companies. We can see from Figures 2 and 3 that over time
the credit card loan market has become increasingly concentrated, and the market shares of the
top bank holding companies have become increasingly larger.

4.1.1      Data Description

The basic idea of the first set of tests is to regress an individual bank’s credit card loans outstanding,
normalized by total loans or total assets, or the bank’s (normalized) credit card loss rate, on lagged
variables that we hypothesize predict the bank’s decision to make more credit card loans or to reduce
losses on credit card loans (by making fewer loans or more high quality loans). Macroeconomic
variables that characterize the state of the business cycle are one set of predictors. Lagged measures
of the bank’s own performance in the credit card market are another set of predictors. The key
variables are measures of rival banks’ relative histories that we hypothesize are the basis for each
bank’s beliefs about whether rivals have deviated. Our hypothesis is that these measures of bank
histories will be significantly negative, even conditional on all the other variables.
      In addition to collecting the quarterly bank holding company data from 1991.I to 2000.IV for
“Credit Cards and Related Plans(CLS),” we also use “Charge-offs on Loans to Individuals for
Household, Family, and Other Personal Expenditure — Credit Cards and Related Plans (CCO),”
 16
      The data are not reported more frequently than quarterly.
 17                                        irm i credit card loan size
      A Herfindahl Index is constructed as i ( ftotal credit card loan size
                                                                            × 100)2 .



                                                             13
                    100%

                                    Top 50


                     80%

                                             Top 30

                                                                Top 10
                     60%




                     40%
                           1991.I                                                      2000.IV



            Figure 3: Shares of Top Bank Holding Companies in Credit Card Loan Market

“Recoveries on Loans to Individuals for Household, Family, and Other Personal Expenditures —
Credit Cards and Related Plans (CRV ),” and “Total Loans and Leases, Net (T LS).” We construct
the following variables:
                                                                CCO − CRV
                               Credit Card Loan Loss Rate (CLL) =
                                                                    CLS
                                                                CLS
                 Credit Card Loans to Total Loans Ratio (CRL) =      .
                                                                T LS
Each variable is constructed for each bank holding company for each quarter.18
       With respect to macroeconomic data we use quarterly macroeconomic data from the Federal
Reserve Bank of St.Louis for the period 1991.I to 2000.IV : “Civilian Unemployment Rate, Percent,
Seasonally Adjusted (U M P ),” “Real Disposable Personal Income, Billions of Chained 1996 Dollars,
Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rate (DP I),” “Federal Funds Rate, Averages of Daily Figures, Percent
(F F R).”19

4.1.2      Pairwise Tests of Rival Banks

We first look at banks pairwise. We do this for two reasons. First, it is not known which banks are
rivals, and maybe not all banks are rivals. Second, we have only 40 quarterly observations for each
bank, so examining several banks jointly quickly uses up the degrees of freedom. We focus on the
  18
     We also collect data for “Total Assets (ASSET ),” and costruct the variable: Credit Card Loans to Total Assets
                   CLS
Ratio (CRA) = ASSET      . The main regression results using CRA are similar to those using CRL. Thus we ommit
the results for the sake of space.
  19
     We collected the monthly data for the Unemployment Rate (U M P ), Disposable Income (DP I), Federal Funds
Rate (F F R), and calculated the three-month averages to get the quarterly data. Also, DP I is normalized by GDP.



                                                        14
largest six bank holding companies, which constantly remain within the top 20 in credit card loan
portfolio size during the period 1991.I to 2000.IV . These six banks are: Citicorp, New York, NY
(CITI); Bank One Corp., Chicago, IL (BONE); MBNA Corp., Wilmington, DE (MBNA); Bank of
America, Charlotte, NC (BOAM); Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, NY (CHAS); and Wachovia
Corp.,Winston-Salem, NC (WACH).
       In general, we run the following regression for each bank holding company i:


                                  yit = αij xt + β ij wit + γ ij zijt + εit , for j = i                               (1)

where

                     yit = CLLit or CRLit ,                                                                           (2)
                     xt = (C, T, S1 , S2 , S3 , DP It , F F Rt , U MPt ),
                    wit = (CLLit−1 , CLLit−2 , CLLit−3 , CLLit−4 ),
                    zijt = (|∆CLLijt−1 | , |∆CLLijt−2 | , |∆CLLijt−3 | , |∆CLLijt−4 |),

and αij , β ij , and γ ij are the coefficients for x, w, and z, respectively. C is the constant term, T
is the time trend, S1 is the seasonal dummy for first quarter, S2 is the seasonal dummy for second
quarter, and S3 is the seasonal dummy for third quarter. We do not include lags of DP It , F F Rt ,
or U MPt because the main results are not affected by adding them.                        Since some bank holding
companies might have systematically higher (or lower) loan loss rates than another bank holding
companies, we first take out the mean from each CLLi , and then take the difference to get ∆CLLji .
In this way, |∆CLLji | reflects the relative performance of the two banks.
       |∆CLLji | is the key variable. It is a particular parametrization of the relevant public infor-
mation: the performance difference. This variable is lagged to be consistent with the fact the
Call Report information is publicly available with a lag. For the current quarter, the most recent
public information would be about last quarter. Conditional on the state of the macroeconomy
and bank holding company i’s own past performance, we ask whether bank holding company i’s
lending decisions depend on the observed absolute value of the differences between it’s own past
performance and that of its rival, bank holding company j. For each measure of the relative dif-
ference in loan performance, we test whether γ = 0, using a Wald test (chi-squared distribution).
The results are shown in Table 1.20
       In Table 1, we report the average value of the coefficients of zij , and the p-value (in parenthesis)
of the Wald test (χ2 (4)). Significant negative coefficients are marked by ‘∗,’ and significant positive
coefficients are marked by ‘#.’            Most coefficients are negative, which matches the theoretical
prediction.      When the difference between the loan performance history is large, it leads to (an
increase in lending standards and, consequently) a subsequent decrease in (lower quality) loans
  20
    The result in entry (i, j) in the table comes from the regression of bank i’s loan loss ratio (or asset allocation) as
the dependent variable.



                                                           15
  CLL         CITI          BONE        MBNA         BOAM             CHAS       WACH
                            -0.1896     -0.3115      0.1160       -0.0597        -0.2686
  CITI         __
                           (0.104)*     (0.068)*     (0.726)      (0.983)       (0.001)**
             -0.3339                    -0.4543      -0.3385      -0.4876        -0.2546
 BONE                         __
            (0.001)***                 (0.000)***    (0.239)      (0.066)*       (0.199)
             -0.0025        -0.0114                  0.0089           0.0790     -0.0724
 MBNA                                     __
             (0.910)        (0.800)                  (0.676)     (0.087)#        (0.375)
             -0.1310        -0.1666     -0.3834                       0.4371     -0.4024
 BOAM                                                 __
             (0.929)        (0.381)    (0.000)***               (0.000)###       (0.451)
             -0.1328        -0.0170      0.0603      0.0784                      -0.1906
 CHAS                                                                  __
             (0.777)        (0.869)     (0.481)      (0.221)                     (0.590)
             -0.1278        -0.0809     -0.2117      0.0236       -0.0198
 WACH                                                                             __
            (0.000)***      (0.312)    (0.006)***    (0.947)     (0.018)**
CRL        CITI           BONE          MBNA         BOAM             CHAS        WACH
                          -0.4807       0.1403       -0.2671          1.2131      -0.5353
CITI        __
                         (0.004)***     (0.671)      (0.093)*     (0.087)#      (0.000)***
          -1.2008                       -2.4739      -1.6719          -1.4095     -1.9717
BONE                        __
         (0.000)***                   (0.000)***    (0.0609)*         (0.518)    (0.029)**
          0.2569          0.8216                     -0.6914          -0.5540     1.1749
MBNA                                     __
          (0.839)        (0.049)##                   (0.3577)         (0.413)   (0.000)###
          -0.2932         -0.2859       -0.2608                       0.2274      -0.2283
BOAM                                                   __
         (0.000)***      (0.027)**      (0.254)                  (0.013)##        (0.550)
          -0.2586         -0.1209       -0.1075      -0.1433                      -0.4296
CHAS                                                                   __
          (0.903)         (0.227)       (0.981)      (0.6790)                    (-0.077)*
          -0.3865         -0.8394       -0.6496       0.0345          0.7314
WACH                                                                                __
         (0.010)***      (0.000)***   (0.006)***     (0.8199)     (0.091)#

                          Table 1: Results for Pairwise Regressions




                                              16
and a consequent reduction in loan losses. Many negative coefficients are significant (indicated by
*** for the 1% level, by ** for the 5% level, and by * for the 10% level, and similarly for positive
coefficients). Also, we can observe a systematic pattern of competition between Citicorp, Bank
One, and Wachovia; the credit card loan loss and credit card loan size (relative to total loans or
total assets) for these banks significantly depend on the relative performance of each other.
       The above results have a problem that we do not know how many significant chi-squared
statistics would be expected to be significant in a small sample. We address this issue using a
bootstrap (see Horowitz (2001) for a survey). We bootstrap to test if the results in Table 1 can
verify our conjecture that the measures of bank holding companies’ loan performance affect each
other’s loan decisions. The Null hypothesis is that a bank holding company’s loan decision only
depends on the aggregate economic variables and its own past loan performance, i.e.:

                                       H0 : yit = αi xt + β i wit + uit .

       The alternative hypothesis comes from the pairwise regression for each bank holding company
i and bank holding company j = i:

                         H1 : yit = αij xit + β ij wit + γ ij zijt + εit , with γ ij < 0.

       In order to test the Null hypothesis, we use the bootstrap to obtain an approximation to the
distribution of a Significance Index, SI, defined below, and then find the p-value of SI ∗ (the
Significance Index from the pairwise regressions using the original data). For each round of the
bootstrap, the Significance Index is constructed as follows. For each of the 30 pairwise regressions,
when the average coefficient of zijt is negative, if the chi—squared-statistic is significant at the 99%
confidence level, add a value of 4 to SI, if it is significant at the 95% confidence level , add a value
of 3 to SI, if it is only significant at the 90% confidence level, add a value of 2 to SI, and add
a value of 1 otherwise; when the average coefficient of zijt is negative, if the chi—squared-statistic
is significant at the 99% confidence level, add a value of −4 to SI, if it is significant at the 95%
confidence level , add a value of −3 to SI, if it is only significant at the 90% confidence level, add
a value of −2 to SI, and add a value of −1 otherwise.21               The index SI takes care of both the
significance and the sign of the coefficients of zijt . If the p-value of SI ∗ is small enough, we can
reject the Null hypothesis.
       The bootstrap algorithm is as follows:
   Step 1: Run the OLS regression yit = αi xt + β i wit + uit , for the three cases where yit = CLLit
                                                          OLS , to generate the residuals u∗ .
                                                OLS and β
or CRLit , and use the estimated coefficients, α                                              it
   Step 2: By hypothesis, the residuals u∗it are i.i.d. so we can sample from u∗CLLit to generate
new CLL∗it using CLL∗it = α           CLLi wit + u∗
                           CLLi xt + β                                      ∗       ∗
                                                   CLLit . This creates new wit and zijt , which are
necessary since zijt and some of the wit variables are lags of CLLi and CLLj .
  21
    Admittedly there is some arbitrariness in how the Significance Index is constructed. However, we tried con-
structing the Signficance Index in a number of ways, and found that the results are robust.


                                                       17
                                                                  p-value
                                                       SICLL      0.0197
                                                       SICRL      0.0005

                                                 Table 2: Bootstrap Results

    Step 3: Use u∗it , for yit = CRLit , to generate new CRL∗it using CRL∗it = α           
                                                                                CRLi xt + β       ∗
                                                                                             CRLi wit +
u∗CRLit .
                 ∗ , x∗ , w ∗ , and z ∗ to run the pairwise regression y∗ = αx∗ + βw∗ + γz ∗ + ε∗ ,
    Step 4: Use yit   it   it        jit                                it    it    it    jit   it
and calculate the Significant Index SI.
    Step 5: Repeat Step 2 to Step 4 10, 000 times, and obtain the distribution of SI.
    Step 6: Calculate the p-value of SI ∗ , i.e. Pr(SI ≥ SI ∗ ).
    The results are reported in Table 2.                                                         ∗
                                                          The sample Significance Indices are: SICLL = 34 and
  ∗
SICRL = 36. The p-values are presented in Table 2.
    We conclude that the Null hypothesis is rejected.

4.1.3       Threshold Effects

A literal interpretation of the model would mean that there are two "regimes," rather than a
possible large number of levels of intensity of information production. Perhaps there is a threshold
effect, in that only if the absolute performance differences reach a certain critical level does (mutual)
punishment occur. We investigate this by specifying a different measure of the absolute difference
                                                      1 = CLL , and y2 = CRL , and write
as shown in the model below. For each bank i, define yit     it      it     it
the model specification as follows:

                          k
                         yit = αkij xit + β kij wit + γ kij zijt + εkijt , εkijt ∼ N (0, σkij ) for j = i,
                  and zijt = max{0, |CLLit − CLLjt | − T Hij }.

The new zijt measures the value of performance difference, measured by |CLLit − CLLjt |, in
excess of certain threshold, T Hij , which does not change over time or across k, and which is to be
estimated. For each pair of banks, (i, j), we estimate the parameters using maximum likelihood:

                                                                                        k − αk x + β k w + γ k z )2
                                                                                        (yit
   {α  
     k ,β k     k            k                                         [− ln σ kij −
                                                                                               ij it      ij it ij ijt
     ij   ij , γ ij , T Hij , σ ij } =         max                                                       k )2
                                                                                                                       ].
                                          k     k     k            k
                                         αij ,β ij ,γ ij ,T Hij ,σ ij
                                                                      k t
                                                                                                     2(σ ij

    We proceed as above by for each pair of banks (omitted here) and then bootstrapping. The
final p-value results are shown in Table 3.
    The threshold effects are significant with the newly constructed beliefs variables, zijt , though
the results are not uniformly different than those using the absolute difference variables directly.




                                                                18
                                                       p-value
                                            SICLL      0.0096
                                            SICRL      0.0018

                          Table 3: Bootstrap Results for Threshold Effects

                                                       p-value
                                            SICLL      0.0138
                                            SICRL      0.0024

                    Table 4: Boostrap Results in the Presence of Learning Effects

4.1.4    Learning as an Alternative Hypothesis

Could the above results be explained by some sort of learning? That is, an alternative explanation
is that banks learn about underlying the economic conditions from other banks’ loan performance.
Perhaps this learning effect is also captured by the |∆CLLji | variable that we constructed.         It
would seem that learning should not be based on absolute differences in bank performance, but on
the level of other banks’ performances as well as the bank’s own performance history. To examine
this possibility we add lags of CLLj in the regression of Bank i.          Therefore, in the regression
equation (1), we replace wit with wijt :

        wijt = (CLLit−1 , CLLit−2 , CLLit−3 , CLLit−4 , CLLjt−1 , CLLjt−2 , CLLjt−3 , CLLjt−4 ).

The tables showing the estimated coefficient on the absolute performance difference coefficients
are omitted for the sake of space.      The main results are similar to Table 1.     The same pattern
of competition between Citicorp, Bank One, and Wachovia appears, as in Table 1. The results
involving other banks are mixed.
                                         ∗ = αx∗ + βw ∗ + γz ∗ + ε∗ , , i.e., with the lags of LL
   For the bootstrap the regression is: yit    it    ijt    jit   it                             j
included in the regression in credit card loan part. The null hypothesis is still:

                                      H0 : yit = αi xt + β i wit + uit .

with yit , xt and wit defined in 2.
                                         ∗
   The sample Significant Indices are: SICLL            ∗
                                             = 36 and SICRL = 28. The p-values are presented
in Table 4.
   The information contained in the absolute difference variables remain significant, in the presence
of the most general specification of learning.

4.1.5    An Aggregate Performance Difference Index

Based on the success of the pairwise tests, we move next to analyzing the histories of all relevant
rival credit card lenders jointly. We construct an aggregate Performance Difference Index (P DI):

                                                     19
                                                 yit = CLLit          yit = CRLit
                                                    −0.7895             −2.1500
                                     CITI
                                                    (0.2927)          (0.0073)***
                                                    −1.5211             −6.1892
                                    BONE
                                                   (0.1038)*          (0.0003)***
                                                     0.0631              1.3084
                                   MBNA
                                                    (0.6693)            (0.3235)
                                                   −0.5212              −0.5189
                                   BOAM
                                                  (0.0354)**          (0.0050)***
                                                    −0.3860             −0.0521
                                    CHAS
                                                   (0.0873)*            (0.3381)
                                                   −0.4333             −1.4574
                                   WACH
                                                 (0.0003)***          (0.0330)**

                           Table 5: Results for the Performance Difference Index

                                                   
                                             |CLLit − CLLjt |
                                                      i>j
                                        P DIt =               .
                                                 15
This Performance Difference Index measures the average difference of the competing banks’ loan
performances.22 (The denominator comes from having six banks, leading to fifteen different pairs
in total.) For each bank i, we run the following regression:


                                         yit = αi xt + β i wit + γ i zit + uit ,

where yit , xt and wit defined in 2, and zit = (P DIt−1 , P DIt−2 , P DIt−3 , P DIt−4 ). The results are
reported in Table 5.
      Table 5 presents the average value of the coefficients of zij and the p-value (in parentheses) of
the Wald test (χ2 (4)). Table 5 shows that, aside from MBNA, all the banks have negative and
significant coefficients for P DI, confirming the conjecture from the theory. When there is a large
performance difference across all the rival banks, banks raise their lending standards to punish each
other, and consequently future loan losses go down. The standard deviation of P DI is 0.00444,
the average coefficients on PDI for CLL and CRL are −0.598 and −1.510, and the mean of CLL
and CRL are 0.0246 and 0.242. When P DI changes by one standard deviation, CLL decreases
by 0.00266 (10% of the mean), and CRL decreases by 0.00671 (3% of the mean). Therefore, the
effects of P DI are also economically important.
 22
      Again, we first take out the mean from each CLLi , and then take the difference.




                                                            20
4.1.6      Rajan’s Reputation Hypothesis

Rajan (1994) argues that reputation considerations of bank managers cause banks to simultaneously
raise their lending standards when there is an aggregate shock to the economy causing the loan
performance of all banks to deteriorate. Banks tend to neglect their own loan performance history
in order to herd or pool with other banks. Rajan’s empirical work focuses on seven New England
banks over the period 1986-1991. His main finding is that a bank’s loan charge-offs-to-assets ratio
is significantly related not only to its own loan loss provisions-to-total assets ratio, but also to
the average charge-offs-to-assets ratio for other banks (instrumented for by the previous quarter’s
charge-offs-to-assets ratio).
       In the context here the question is whether our measure of banks’ beliefs about rivals’ credit
standards, the performance difference index, remains significant in the presence of an average or
aggregate credit card loss measure.23 We construct:
                                                                                  
                                                                                  i (CCO   − CRVi )
                Aggregate Credit Card Loan Loss Rate(AGLL) =                           i           ,
                                                                                        i CLSi
and we examine the coefficient on AGLLt−1 in our regressions:


                                         yit = αi xt + β i wit + γ i zt + uit ,
where with yit , xt and wit defined in 2, and zt = AGLLt−1 .
       The coefficients on AGLLt−1 and the associated p-values of t-statistics are reported in Table
6.24
       Rajan’s (1994) hypothesis is that an aggregate bad shock leads banks to raise their standards,
so we would expect the coefficients on AGLLt−1 to be significantly negative.                        However, as the
table shows, conditional on other macroeconomic variables, the coefficients of the aggregate loan
loss rate are all positive, with a few exceptions. If we remove the other macroeconomic variables
from the regression, i.e. xt = (C, T, S1 , S2 , S3 ), the results are basically the same.

4.1.7      Bank Stock Returns and Performance Differences

In a credit crunch banks make fewer loans and spend more on information production, so their
profitability declines. In this section, we test that implication of the model. Specifically, we ask
whether the Performance Difference Index has predictive power for the stock returns of each top
bank holding company in credit card loans. We collect the stock return from CRSP from 1991.I
to 2000.IV. During this period, Citicorp, Bank of America, and Chase Manhattan are involved
in mergers.25     We carry out the tests for all six bank holding companies and for the three bank
  23
     There are several interpretations of Rajan’s result. For example, the charge-offs of other banks may be informative
about the state of the economy, so their significance in the regression is not necessarily evidence in favor of Rajan’s
theory.
  24
     Adding more lags of AGLL basically gives the same results.
  25
     The dates of the M&A activity are: Citigroup,1998.10; Bank of America, 1998.10; and Chase Manhattan in
1996.4.


                                                          21
                                                 yit = CLLit      yit = CRLit
                                                    0.6620           1.6366
                                     CITI
                                                   (0.0167)         (0.0108)
                                                    1.3343           4.3686
                                    BONE
                                                   (0.0049)         (0.0020)
                                                    0.0726          −1.9956
                                    MBNA
                                                   (0.3395)        (0.0028)**
                                                    0.4734           0.3611
                                    BOAM
                                                   (0.3306)         (0.3016)
                                                    0.0597          −0.5579
                                    CHAS
                                                   (0.7445)         (0.3238)
                                                    0.3151           1.7023
                                    WACH
                                                   (0.1974)         (0.0126)

                                Table 6: Test of the Reputation Hypothesis

holding companies (Bank One, MBNA, and Wachovia) without merger activity. According to our
theory, after observing large performance differences between banks, banks will raise their lending
standards (which is costly), and cut lending. Consequently, their profit margins will be lower.
Therefore, we expect to see negative loadings on the lags of the PDI. Note that this is not an asset
pricing model, but a test concerning bank profits, as measured by stock returns. The regression
equations are:

 rit = αi + β i1 P DIt−1 + β i2 P DIt−2 + β i3 P DIt−3 + β i4 P DIt−4 + εit , i = 1, 2, ..., 6 (or i = 2, 3, 6).

We use Seemingly Unrelated Regression to estimate the system of equations, with the restriction
that the β i s be the same across banks (we allow for different intercepts).26
       Table 7 shows the Seemingly Unrelated Regression results about the predictive power (on stock
returns) of the PDI for the two cases: six and three bank holding companies. From Table 7, we see
that the PDI from the previous year significantly predicts the stock return for the current period.
For the case with six banks, the Wald test of the hypothesis that β 1 = β 2 = β 3 = β 4 = 0 gives
χ2 = 20.6229, with p-value 0.0004. For the case with three banks, the Wald test of the hypothesis
that β 1 = β 2 = β 3 = β 4 = 0 gives: χ2 = 10.2850, with p-value 0.0359.                     Therefore, the PDI
that we constructed does have predictive power for the stock return.                  Even though we are only
looking at credit cards, keep in mind that these six banks dominate this market, so their profits
are significantly affected by this sector.27
  26
    In the regressions, we take out the mean and the seasonal effects from the Performance Difference Index (P DI).
  27
    Since the dividend yield is well known to be a predictor of future stock returns (see, e.g., Cochrane (1999)), we
also include dividend yields in the regressions (using the dividends of each bank from CRSP). The results on the
predictive power of PDI are unchanged with the inclusion of the dividend yield. These results are omitted for the
sake of space.


                                                         22
      Six Banks          β1         β2           β3            β4
        coef f.        3.4311    -2.4101      -5.9428        -13.665
      (t − stat)      (0.9155)   (-0.6376)    (-1.5715)   (-3.6136)***
                         α1         α2           α3            α4             α5          α6
        coef f.        0.1138     0.0247       0.0944        0.0450         0.0842      0.0296
      (t − stat)      (3.5323)   (1.0237)     (3.6143)      (2.1519)       (2.7509)     (2.2020)
                   Three Banks     β1           β2           β3              β4
                      coef f.     1.9495      -0.4509      -7.7452         -11.990
                    (t − stat)   (0.4902)    (-0.1124)    (-1.9304)*     (-2.9885)***
                                   α2           α3           α6
                      coef f.     0.0248      0.0944       0.0297
                    (t − stat)   (1.0519)    (3.7058)      (2.1434)

      Table 7: Results for Stock Return Prediction Using Seemingly Unrelated Regressions

4.2   VAR Analysis of the Fed’s Lending Standards Index

In this section we extend the empirical analysis in two important ways. First, we go beyond credit
card lending at six banks to examine commercial and industrial loan market at an aggregate level.
Second, we probe the implications of the theory for macroeconomic dynamics.
   If banks increase their information production, that is, they raise their lending standards, then
some borrowers are cut off from credit — a credit crunch that should have macroeconomic implica-
tions. In this section, we use Vector Autoregressions (VARs) to analyze the aggregate implications
of banks’ loan performance differences. In contrast to the single equations estimated above, a VAR
system of equations lets us control for the feedback between current and past levels of performance
differences, the lending standard survey results, and macroeconomic variables. Given estimates of
these interactions, we can identify the impact that unpredictable shocks in performance difference
public histories have on other variables in the system.     We first ask whether the performance
difference histories predict, in the sense of Granger causality, the index of lending standards based
on the Federal Reserve System’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices.
   We follow Lown and Morgan (2001, 2002) in analyzing the time series of survey responses, the
percentage of banks reporting tightening in the survey. As above, we use quarterly bank loan data
from the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank’s Commercial Bank and Bank Holding Company Database,
which is from the Call Reports. For the period from 1976.1 to 2002.2, we collected Total Loans,
Net of Unearned Income (TL); Loan Loss Allowances (LA). For each bank (holding company) we
constructed the Loan Loss Allowance Ratio (LAR):

                                                LA
                                             LAR = .
                                                TL
We construct the Performance Difference Index to measure the dispersion of performance across


                                                 23
                        STAND LAGS               PDI LAGS           FFR LAGS           LOGLOAN LAGS
                               0.1981               498.82             −1.2523                  30.464
          STAND
                            (0.0020)***          (0.0077)***          (0.0010)**               (0.1673)
                              −4.1E-6               0.1309             −0.0001                  0.0076
            PDI
                              (0.7414)            (0.0411)**           (0.3452)                (0.7480)
                              −0.0066              −101.60              0.0414                  7.6086
            FFR
                             (0.0127)**          (0.0006)***         (0.0000)***              (0.0032)**
                              −9.3E-6               0.3515              0.0012                  0.2051
        LOGLOAN
                             (0.0172)**           (0.0267)**         (0.0000)***              (0.0000)**

                                      Table 8: Results for VAR Analysis

the U.S. banking industry as a whole. To do this, we use the top 200 commercial banks ranked by
total loans, and for each period, we construct the Performance Difference Index as follows:28
                                                  
                                                     i>j   |LARi − LARj |
                                        P DI =                            .
                                                             19, 900
Besides the data on the Lending Standards and the Performance Difference Index, we also collected
data on Total Loans and Leases at Commercial Banks and Federal Funds Rate.29
       As before, we conjecture that this PDI captures the relevant history that is at the basis of
banks’ beliefs about whether other banks are deviating to using the credit worthiness tests.30

4.2.1      VAR Results

The VAR includes four lags of the four endogenous variables: bank lending standards (ST AN D)
(i.e., the percentage of survey respondents reporting tightening), the Performance Difference Index
(P DI), the federal funds rates (F F R), and the log of commercial bank loans (LOGLOAN ). Bank
lending standards are a loan supply side factor and the federal funds rate affects loan demand;
commercial bank loans are the equilibrium outcomes. The PDI is hypothesized to capture banks’
beliefs, which affect all the other variables. The exogenous variables are a constant, a time trend,
and seasonal dummies for the first three quarters of a year.                We run the VAR for the period of
1990.II—2001.IV , which is the longest continuous of period where both ST AN D and P DI have
data.
       Table 8 presents the average value of the coefficients and p-values (in parenthesis) of the Wald
test (χ2 (4)) of the VAR with four lags of the lending standards, the PDI, log commercial bank loans,
and federal funds rate. Table 8 shows that the PDI Granger-causes all the other three endogenous
  28
     Some banks report the loan loss or loan allowance semi-annually instead of quarterly, so we drop these zero values
in the calculation below. Therefore, the denominator is not necessarily 19,900.
  29
     We first collected monthly data, then took the three-month average to obtain quarterly data.
  30
     We also constructed a PDI using loan charge-off ratios. The empirical results are similar and are omitted to save
space.



                                                           24
                                                                                            Response to One S.D. Innovations

              Response of STAND to STAND                               Response of STAND to PDI                             Response of STAND to FFR                    Response of STAND to LOGLOAN
         6                                                     6                                                    6                                                   6


         4                                                     4                                                    4                                                   4


         2                                                     2                                                    2                                                   2


         0                                                     0                                                    0                                                   0


         -2                                                   -2                                                   -2                                                  -2


         -4                                                   -4                                                   -4                                                  -4
              1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10              1    2   3   4   5   6    7   8   9   10             1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10             1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10



                  Response of PDI to STAND                              Response of PDI to PDI                               Response of PDI to FFR                         Response of PDI to LOGLOAN
  0.0006                                                 0.0006                                               0.0006                                              0.0006


  0.0004                                                 0.0004                                               0.0004                                              0.0004


  0.0002                                                 0.0002                                               0.0002                                              0.0002


  0.0000                                                 0.0000                                               0.0000                                              0.0000


  -0.0002                                                -0.0002                                              -0.0002                                             -0.0002


  -0.0004                                                -0.0004                                              -0.0004                                             -0.0004
              1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10              1    2   3   4   5   6    7   8   9   10             1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10             1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10


                  Response of FFR to STAND                              Response of FFR to PDI                               Response of FFR to FFR                         Response of FFR to LOGLOAN
       0.4                                                   0.4                                                  0.4                                                 0.4


       0.2                                                   0.2                                                  0.2                                                 0.2


       0.0                                                   0.0                                                  0.0                                                 0.0


       -0.2                                                 -0.2                                                 -0.2                                                -0.2


       -0.4                                                 -0.4                                                 -0.4                                                -0.4


       -0.6                                                 -0.6                                                 -0.6                                                -0.6
              1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10              1    2   3   4   5   6    7   8   9   10             1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10             1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10


         Response of LOGLOAN to STAND                              Response of LOGLOAN to PDI                           Response of LOGLOAN to FFR                   Response of LOGLOAN to LOGLOAN
   0.008                                                  0.008                                                0.008                                               0.008


   0.004                                                  0.004                                                0.004                                               0.004


   0.000                                                  0.000                                                0.000                                               0.000


   -0.004                                                 -0.004                                               -0.004                                              -0.004


   -0.008                                                 -0.008                                               -0.008                                              -0.008


   -0.012                                                 -0.012                                               -0.012                                              -0.012
              1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10              1    2   3   4   5   6    7   8   9   10             1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10             1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10




                                                        Figure 4: Impulse Responses in the Macroeconomy

variables, but not vice versa. An increase in P DI immediately causes a rise in ST AN D, which
triggers a "recession," and thus leads to a future decrease in the F F R, and a future decrease of
in LOGLOAN (even though the average value of coefficients of P DI for equation LOGLOAN is
positive, the only significant one is negative).                                                              We observe this pattern in the graph of impulse
responses in Figure                            4.31
  31
     The ordering of the variables in a VAR matters for the impulse response functions since the Cholesky decompo-
sitions of the variance-covariance matrix are different with different orderings (see Hamilton (1994) for more details).
Placing P DI as the second variable in the VAR is a relatively conservative way (in comparison with placing it as the
first one) of displaying the effects of P DI.




                                                                                                              25
4.3       Asset Pricing and Credit Crunches
Strategic competition between banks results in periodic credit crunches, a systematic risk. Con-
sequently, if the stock market is efficient, then the stock returns of both banks and non-financial
firms, which, at least partially, rely on banks for external financing, should reflect the competition
between banks. In this section we turn to a different empirical approach, namely, we look for the
hypothesized systematic effects in an asset pricing context. If strategic behavior between banks
causes credit cycles, then it causes variation in the profitability of non-financial firms, which are
affected by credit crunches. At the same time, credit crunches are not profitable for banks. The
credit cycle is a systematic risk, and therefore should be a priced factor in stock returns, to the
extent that this factor is not already spanned by other factors. We conjecture that the constructed
PDI should be a priced risk factor for both banks and non-financial firms. That is, in the context
of an asset pricing model of stock returns, there should be an additional factor, namely, the Per-
formance Difference Index. Moreover, since relatively smaller firms are more dependent on bank
loans (see, e.g., Hancock and Wilcox (1998)), we expect that the coefficients on PDI are larger for
smaller firms.
       We adopt the widely-used Fama-French three factor empirical asset pricing model, augmented
with a momentum factor (as has become common practice).32 The models says that the sensitivity
of a firm’s expected stock return depends on four factors: the excess return on a broad based market
portfolio, rm − rf ; the difference between the return on a portfolio of small stocks and the return
on a portfolio of large stocks (small minus large), SMB; the difference between the return on a
portfolio of high book-to-market stocks and the return on a portfolio of low book-to-market stocks
(high minus low), HML; the momentum factor, MOM, is the difference between the return on a
portfolio of past winners and the return on a portfolio of past losers. To this we add last quarter’s
P DI; the model is estimated using quarterly data, as PDI can only be calculated quarterly.33
       We hypothesize that bank stock returns will be sensitive to PDI and that PDI is not spanned
by the other factors. Further, non-financial firms’ stock returns will also be sensitive, increasingly
so for smaller firms. The monthly firm returns are collected from CRSP (then transformed into
quarterly data).      We separate out commercial banks and non-financial firms based on their SIC
codes, and then divide the non-financial firms into ten deciles based on the capitalizations. The
data cover the period 1976.I to 2001.IV.
       Table 9 reports the coefficients and t-statistics of the four factor regression with rm − rf , SMB,
HML, MOM and P DI as the risk factors.                    The results in Table 9 show that the Performance
Difference Index (P DI) is a significant risk factor for both banks and all non-financial firms with
  32
     See Fama and French (1993, 1996). Carhart (1997) introduced an additional factor, the momentum factor. We
collect the quarterly Fama-French three factors and monthly momentum factor (then transformed into quarterly
data) from French website (the construction method can also be found there). The risk free rates are three-month
T-Bill rates from FRED II (we use the rate of the first month in each quarter) at Federal Reserve Bank at St. Louis.
  33
     We use the lag of P DI since there is a lag in the Call Reports becoming publicly available, as we discussed earlier.
We take out the mean from P DI, which does not affect the estimation of β.


                                                           26
               α         rm − rf        SMB         HML              MOM        P DI        R2
                                         Commercial Banks
   β         -3.482        0.961         0.088        -0.092         0.011      360.7
                                                                                           0.924
(t-stat)   (-11.07)***   (23.72)***     (1.69)*      (-1.81)*        (0.25)    (4.63)***
                                         Non-Financial Firms
 Dec1        -13.32        0.506         1.547         0.137         0.126      876.0
                                                                                           0.587
(small)    (-11.25)***   (3.32)***     (7.88)***      (0.71)         (0.72)    (2.99)***
              -8.18        0.716         1.650         0.108         0.117      836.6
 Dec2                                                                                      0.752
           (-8.68)***    (5.90)***    (10.55)***      (0.71)         (0.85)    (3.59)***
             -6.159        0.870         1.729         0.177         0.160      835.4
 Dec3                                                                                      0.825
           (-7.45)***    (8.18)***    (12.61)***      (1.32)         (1.32)    (4.09)***
             -4.933        0.856         1.599         0.026         0.103      753.1
 Dec4                                                                                      0.870
           (-7.29)***    (9.83)***    (14.25)***      (0.23)         (1.04)    (4.50)***
              -4.00        0.924         1.536         0.016         0.081      698.85
 Dec5                                                                                      0.909
           (-7.13)***    (12.80)***   (16.52)***      (0.17)         (0.99)    (5.04)***
             -3.093        0.993         1.373        -0.109         -0.061     540.4
 Dec6                                                                                      0.947
           (-7.35)***    (18.32)***   (19.66)***      (-1.59)        (-0.99)   (5.19)***
             -2.110        1.007         1.205        -0.152         -0.093     421.0
 Dec7                                                                                      0.946
           (-5.17)***    (19.18)***   (17.81)***     (-2.30)**       (-1.55)   (4.17)***
             -1.864        1.039         0.919        -0.164         -0.092     438.7
 Dec8                                                                                      0.935
           (-4.45)***    (19.27)***   (13.22)***     (-2.41)**       (-1.50)   (4.23)***
             -1.945        0.974         0.598        -0.150         -0.071     450.3
 Dec9                                                                                      0.906
           (-4.44)***    (17.28)***    (8.23)***     (-2.12)**       (-1.10)   (4.15)***
Dec10        -2.239        0.889        -0.059        -0.264         -0.051     383.7
                                                                                           0.893
(large)    (-6.04)***    (18.64)***     (-0.96)     (-4.39)***       (-0.94)   (4.19)***

                         Table 9: Results for Risk-Factor Analysis




                                            27
different sizes. Note that the coefficients on P DI for smaller firms are larger, thus confirming our
conjectures.   The standard deviation of P DI is 0.00133. Therefore, when PDI changes by one
standard deviation, the excess return for banks and large non-financial firms changes by about
50 basis points, while the excess return for small non-financial firms changes by about 100 basis
points. We conclude that the competition and collusion among banks is an important risk factor
for stock returns. The size effect further demonstrates that the Performance Difference Index we
constructed is not capturing some sort of learning effect about macroeconomic condition, which
would be spanned by the other risk factors, or at least would have been priced approximately
equally for both large firms and small firms (as rm − rf is).


5    Conclusion
An important message of Green and Porter (1984) is that collusion can be very subtle. The
subsequent empirical work focused on price wars as possible dramatic examples of such imperfect
competition. We studied banking, an industry in which there have not been price wars. Banking
is an industry with limited entry; it is a highly concentrated industry, and it is an industry that
is informationally opaque and hence regulated. The information opaqueness affects competition
for borrowers in that rivals can produce information with different precision.      This causes the
imperfect competition in banking to take a different form from other industries. In particular, we
showed that the intertemporal incentive constraints implementing the collusive arrangement (of
high interest rates and low cost information production) required periodic credit crunches.
    Our empirical approach to testing proceeds at the level of the public information that is the
basis for banks’ beliefs, changes in which cause credit cycles.      Empirically we showed that a
simple parameterization of relative bank performance differences has predictive power for rival
banks in the credit card market. Moreover, introducing the performance difference histories into
a vector autoregression-type macroeconomic model confirms that this is an autonomous source of
macroeconomic fluctuations. Since changes in bank beliefs based on public information cause credit
cycles, this should be an important independent risk factor for bank stock returns.      We showed
that this is indeed the case.




                                                 28
                              Appendix 1: The Formal Game
   Formalization of the Stage Strategy
   Bank i randomly chooses ni applicants to test. For those applicants that bank i does not test,
it will decide to approve applications to Nαi ≤ N − ni of the applicants, and offer the approved
applicants a loan at interest rate Fαi . The bank rejects the rest of the non-tested applicants. For
those applicants that are tested by bank i, the bank will observe a number of good type applicants,
Ngi ≤ ni , and will then decide to approve applications to Nβi ≤ Ngi of the applicants that passed
the test, and offer the approved applicants a loan at interest rate Fβi . Bank i can also decide to
approve applications to Nγi ≤ ni −Ngi of the applicants that failed the test, and offer these approved
applicants a loan at interest rate Fγi . The bank rejects the remaining applicants. In general, Fαi ,
Fβi and Fγi could vary among the corresponding category of applicants, i.e., different applicants
in the same category could possibly get offers of loans at different interest rates.                           Therefore,
we interpret Fαi , Fβi and Fγi as vectors of interest rates charged to those approved non-tested
applicants.
   The stage strategy of a bank is:



      si = {ni , Nα (ni , Ngi ), Nβ (ni , Ngi ), Nγi (ni , Ngi ), Fαi (ni , Ngi ), Fβi (ni , Ngi ), Fγi (ni , Ngi )},   (3)

where:

     ni : the number of applicants that bank i tests;
   Ngi : the number of good applicants found by bank i with the test;
   Nαi : the number of applicants that bank i offers loans to without test;
   Nβi : the number of applicants that pass the test and get a loan from bank i;
   Nγi : the number of applicants that fail the test and get a loan from bank i;
   Fαi : the interest rate on the loan that bank i offers to the applicants without a test;
   Fβi : the interest rate on the loan that bank i offers to the applicants that pass the test;
   Fγi : the interest rate on the loan that bank i offers to the applicants that fail the test.


   Formalization of the Repeated Game
   Assume that the two banks play the lending market stage game period after period, each with
the objective of maximizing its expected discounted stream of profits. Upon entering a period of
play, a bank observes only the history of:
   (i) its own use of the credit worthiness test and the results;
   (ii) its own interest rate on the loan offered to applicants;
   (iii) its own choice of applicants that it lent to;


                                                            29
   (iv) its own and its competitor’s loan portfolio size (number of loans made);
   (v) its own and its competitor’s number of successful loans.
   For bank i, a full path play is an infinite sequence of stage strategies as in (3). The infinite
sequence {sit }∞
               t=0 , i = 1, 2, together with nature’s realization of the number of good type applicants
and the applicants’ rational choice of bank, implies a realized sequence of loans from bank i, as well
as a quality of the borrowers who received loans from bank i. That is:


                                     Kit = (Dαit , Dβit , Dγit , χαit , χβit , χγit ),

where D denotes the number of applicants that accepted the offer, and χ denotes the number of
successful borrowers; α, β, and γ denote the corresponding category, as defined earlier (α ≡untested,
approved, applicants; β ≡tested, good types, approved; γ ≡tested, bad types, approved). Define:

                                            Dit = Dαit + Dβit + Dγit
                                             χit = χαit + χβit + χγit .

Let the public information at the start of period t + 1, be κt = (κ1t , κ2t ), where κit = {Dit , χit },
i=1,2 (for each bank). So, the information set includes the realization of the number of loans made
by bank i and the number of borrowers that repaid their loans in period t.
   At the beginning of period T bank i has an information set: hTi −1 = {ait , Kit , κt }Tt=0
                                                                                           −1
                                                                                              ∈ HiT −1 ,
where ait = {nit , Nαit , Nβit , Nγit , Fαit , Fβit , Fγit } is the action of bank i (by convention h−1
                                                                                                     i = ∅).
A (pure) strategy for bank i associates a schedule σ iT (hTi −1 ) with each T = 0, 1, ... and σ iT :
HiT −1 → S, where S is the stage strategy space with element sit , defined earlier.                     Denote the
public information as        hT −1   =   {κt }Tt=0
                                                −1
                                                     ∈   H T −1 ,   and a (pure) strategy for bank i associates a
schedule σiT   (hT −1 )   with each T = 0, 1, ... and σ iT : H T −1 → S.
   Given λ, pg , and pb (i.e., nature’s uncertainty), a strategy profile (σ1 , σ2 ), with σi = {σit (.)}∞
                                                                                                        t=0 ,
i = 1, 2, recursively determines a stochastic process of credit standards ({nit }∞
                                                                                 t=0 , i = 1, 2), interest
rates ({Fit }∞                                                              ∞
             t=0 , i = 1, 2), bank portfolio sizes and loan outcomes ({κit }t=0 , i = 1, 2). The expected
pathwise payoff for bank i is:

                                                              ∞
                                                              
                                          vi (σ1 , σ2 ) = E         δ t πi (s1t , s2t ),
                                                              i=0

   where

             πi (s1t , s2t ) = (χαit Fit − Dαit ) + (χβit Fβit − Dβit ) + (χγit Fit − Dγit ) − nit c.


   A Perfect Public Equilibrium (PPE) is a profile of public strategies that, starting at any date
t and given any public history ht−1
                                i , forms a Nash equilibrium from that point on (see Fudenberg,
Levine, and Maskin (1994)). As noted earlier, a bank cannot do better by playing a non-public
strategy, if the other bank is using a public strategy (i.e., one based on public information). Private

                                                              30
information about past actions, use of the credit worthiness tests or loan interest rates, do not affect
behavior because such information is not public. We will show that a PPE induces a PPE in every
continuation game.34 We now turn to characterizing the PPEs.
       Let ht = κt be the history of realized public information, namely the number of loans made
(loan portfolio size) and the number of defaults (loan performance) for each bank at the end of
each period t. Let V ≡ {v(σ) | σ is an P P E} be the set of PPE payoffs.                        Note that, by the
existence of the stage game Nash equilibrium, V is not empty.                  To characterize the set of PPE
payoffs we will follow Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti (APS) (1986, 1990). The basic idea of APS
is that each stage of the repeated lending game can be represented as a static game with payoffs
equal to the stage game payoffs augmented by continuation payoffs, i.e., the present value of the
future payoffs. The continuation payoffs depend on the current play of the stage game. Because
the loan portfolio sizes and the number of defaults are publicly observed at the end of the period,
the continuation strategy profile is induced by this public information (i.e., a PPE). Therefore, this
profile is common knowledge, and is itself a PPE. The value of the continuation profile is therefore
always in V .
       APS define the notion of “self-generation” to “factor” a PPE into the first period payoff and
the continuation payoff, depending on the first period outcome. The key to finding the subgame
perfect sequential equilibrium is the construction of self-generating sets.               Intuitively, for a game
with N players, a set W contained in RN is “self-generating” if each value in W can be supported by
continuation values which themselves have values in W . The concept of self-generation is formalized
by the construction of an operator or map T (V ). Suppose that V is the set of all possible payoffs
tomorrow. Let T denote the set of payoffs today using pure strategies and consistent with Nash
play in the game for some u in V . Define the operator T (V ) which yields the set of P P E values,
V ∗ , as the largest invariant, or “self-generating” set. Denote N as the set of non-negative integers,
and for any V containing (0, 0) (the stage Nash payoffs), which is the expected payoff from stage
Nash equilibrium, the operator is defined as follows:


               T (V ) ≡ {(v1 , v2 ) : ∃(s1 , s2 ) ∈ S × S and (u1 , u2 ) with (u1 , u2 ) : N 4 → co(V )
           such that   :   vi = E[πi (s1 , s2 ) + δui (κt )] for i = 1, 2
                and    :   vi ≥ E[πi (s′i , s−i ) + δui (κ′t )] for any s′i ∈ S and i = 1, 2.

       This operator factors the supergame into two components: current-period strategies (s1 , s2 ) ∈
S × S and the continuation value (u1 , u2 ) drawn from the convex hull of the set V .35

Lemma 1 The operator T maps compact sets to compact sets.
  34
     A PPE together with any beliefs consistent with Bayes’ rule constitutes a Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium (PBE),
but a PBE need not be a PPE. See Fudenberg, Levine, and Maskin (1994) for an example.
  35
     By using the convex hull of V , we are allowing public randomization. Implicitly, we assume that in each period,
there is a lottery that determines which Nash equilibrium will be played next period, as a function of the actions
chosen by the banks this period. The randomization (i.e., the lottery) is public, so this is like having a “sunspot”


                                                         31
    Proof. This follows because the constraints entail weak inequalities, the feasible set is compact,
and the utility and constraint functions are real-valued, continuous and bounded.
    This property of T is crucial for applying the methodology of Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti
(1986, 1990). In particular, let V0 be compact and contain all feasible, individually rational payoffs
(for example, V0 = [0, 1δ N [λpb X + (1 − λ)pg X − 1]] × [0, 1δ N [λpb X + (1 − λ)pg X − 1]]), and define
Vn+1 = T (Vn ), n ≥ 0.       Then the definition of T implies that T (Vn ) ⊆ Vn .          Using this and the
fact that Vn is nonempty for each n (since repeating stage Nash payoff is always in every Vn ),
V ∗ = limn→∞ Vn is a nonempty, compact set.              Following the arguments in Abreu, Pearce, and
                       ∗
Stacchetti (1990), V is the largest invariant set of T , and thus is equal to the set of public perfect
equilibrium values of this game.
determine the continuation values. This convexifies the set of equilibrium continuation values. This is a standard
assumption. E.g., see Cronshaw and Luenberger (1994).




                                                       32
                                         Appendix 2: Proofs
   Proof of Proposition 1
   We first prove the following lemma.

Lemma 2 If it exists, in any symmetric stage Nash equilibrium in which neither bank conducts
credit worthiness testing, each bank offers loans to all the loan applicants at the same interest rate.

   Proof. It is easy to check that if bank i is playing si = (ni = 0, Nαi < N, Fαi ), then bank −i
can strictly increase its profits by playing s′−i = (n−i = 0, Nα−i
                                                               ′         ′ ), where the strategy
                                                                   = N, Fα−i
s′−i is to offer Fα−i
                  ′   = Fαi to Nαi applicants (although these Nαi applicants might not be the same
applicants that bank i is offering loans to), and offer X to the rest of them.
   Let F ∗ be the interest rate corresponding to zero profits in the loan market when there is no
testing. Then:
                                        N
                             Eπi =        [λpb F ∗ + (1 − λ)pg F ∗ − 1] = 0,
                                        2
                                                1
                         and F ∗      =                  < X (by Assumption 1).
                                        λpb + (1 − λ)pg
Assume bank i is playing si = (ni = 0, Nαi = N, Fαi ), with Fαi = (F1 , F2 , ..., FN ).                   Suppose
Fj ≥   F∗   for j = 1, 2, ..., N and assume there exist j and k, such that Fj = Fk , and, without loss
of generality, Fk > F ∗ .     Bank −i can strictly increase its profitability by playing s′−i = (n−i =
              ′ ), where F ′                       −                         −
0, Nα−i = N, Fα−i         α−i = (F1 , ..., Fk−1 , Fk , Fk+1 , ..., FN ) and Fk is smaller than Fk by an
infinitely small amount. Therefore, interest rates are bid down until each bank offers F ∗ to all the
applicants.

   Proof. (Proposition 1) From Lemmas 2, we see that in a symmetric equilibrium with no
                                                                                                 1
bank testing applicants, both banks offer loans to all the applicants at F ∗ =             λpb +(1−λ)pg   < X (by
Assumption 1).
                (1−λ)λ(pg −pb )
   With c <      λpb +(1−λ)pg ,   a bank will have an incentive to conduct credit worthiness testing on at
least one loan applicant and to offer loans to those applicants that pass the test, offering an interest
rate F ∗− , which is lower than F ∗ by an infinitely small amount. To see this consider a bank that
deviates by conducting credit worthiness testing on one applicant. The expected profit from this
deviation is:
                                         Eπdi = (1 − λ)(pg F ∗ − 1) − c.
We have:
                                                                    (1 − λ)λ(pg − pb )
                         Eπdi > 0 iff c < (1 − λ)(pg F ∗ − 1) =                        .
                                                                     λpb + (1 − λ)pg
                                  (1−λ)λ(pg −pb )
   We can see that if c ≥          λpb +(1−λ)pg ,   then F ∗ will be a Nash equilibrium interest rate on the
loan, and no bank will conduct credit worthiness testing.

   Proof of Proposition 2
   We first prove the following three lemmas.

                                                          33
Lemma 3 In any symmetric stage Nash equilibrium in which both banks test all the applicants,
each bank offers loans to all the applicants that pass the test at the same interest rate.

       The proof is similar to Lemma 2 and is omitted.


Lemma 4 If it exists, in any symmetric stage Nash equilibrium in which both banks test n < N
applicants, each bank offers loans to all applicants that pass the test (good types) at F ∗∗ = p1g .

       The proof is similar to Lemma 2 and is omitted.


Lemma 5 If it exits, in any symmetric stage Nash equilibrium in which both banks test n < N
applicants, each bank either offers loans to all non-tested applicants at the same interest rate or
offers loans to none of them.

       Proof. If there exists a feasible F ≤ X such that the banks can make a strictly positive profit
by lending to non-tested applicants at F , following a similar argument as in the proof of Lemma
2, we conclude that each bank offers loans to all non-tested applicants at the same interest rate.
       If there does not exist a feasible F such that the banks can make a non-negative profit by
lending to non-tested applicants at F , we conclude that each bank offers loans to none of those
non-tested applicants.36

       Proof. (Proposition 2) The proof is by contradiction. If in equilibrium both banks conducting
credit worthiness testing on all the applicants, from Lemmas 3, both banks offer loans to all the
applicants that pass the test, i.e., Nβ = Ng , where Ng denotes the number of applicants passing
the test. Banks will make no loans to bad types found by testing, i.e., Nγ = 0. Both banks use
the credit worthiness test at a cost c per applicant. Assume the loan interest rate they charge to
approved applicants is Fβ (N, Ng ), depending on Ng . Each bank must earn non-negative expected
profits Eπ ≥ 0, i.e., the participation constraints. For each realization of Ng , each bank expects
to make loans to 12 Ng applicants. Let pk denote the probability of finding k good type applicants.
Then:

                                           N
                                            1
                                Eπ i = E             kpk [pg Fβ (N, k) − 1] − N c ≥ 0.
                                                 2
                                           k=0

Assume now, if bank i cuts Fβ by an infinitely small amount, i.e. Fβd (Ng ) = Fβ− (Ng ), then it will
loan to Ng applicants for any realization of Ng . We have:
  36
    Here we neglect a non-generic case in which there exists an F such that the banks can earn zero profit by offering
loans to a non-tested applicant, and there does NOT exist an F such that the banks can earn strictly positive profit
by offering loans to a non-tested applicant. In this case, each bank can possibly offer to a subset of the non-tested
applicants. However, including this case will not affect the results in Proposition 2.



                                                            34
                                                N
                                                
                                    Eπdi   =E         kpk [pg Fβ− (N, k) − 1] − N c > Eπi .
                                                k=0
          For the case in which both banks conducting credit worthiness testing on a subset of the
applicants, if the banks offer loans all non-tested applicants, we have Fβ = F ∗∗ and Fα = F (n),
which are the interest rate that results in zero expected profit from offering loans to tested good
type applicants and non-tested applicants when banks test n applicants. It is easy to check that
F (n) > F ∗∗ . The argument for Fα = F (n) is similar to the argument for Fβ = F ∗∗ . However,
at Fα = F (n) and Fβ = F ∗∗ , banks will earn negative expected profit due to the test cost.                        If
the banks offer loans to none of the non-tested applicants, the banks will only offer loans to those
applicants that passed the test at F ∗∗ . The argument is similar.

          Proof of Proposition 3
          Proof. (Proposition 3) The proof is by contradiction.                 Assume that there exists a SPPE
with s = (n = 0, Nα = N , Fα ) played on the equilibrium path, where Fα is a constant larger
                        1
than F ∗ =        λpb +(1−λ)pg ,   and the continuation value function does not depend on (χ1 , χ2 ), i.e., the
number of defaulted loans in each bank’s loan portfolio.
          To eliminate the incentive for a bank to deviate to strategy s′ (D) = (n = 0, Nα = D, Fα− ), for
some 0 ≤ D ≤ N , we must have:

           E[π1 (s′ (D), s) + δu1 (D, N − D)] = E[π1 (s′ (D′ ), s) + δu1 (D′ , N − D′ )], for any D = D′ .
37

          Moreover, due to symmetry, it is easy to see that:

            δE[u1 (D, N − D)] − δE[u1 (D + 1, N − D − 1)] = [λpb + (1 − λ)pg ]Fα − 1, for any D.                  (4)

          Let us first take a look at an example with two loan applicants and consider a deviation to
strategy s′′ in which a bank tests one applicant. If the tested applicant is a bad type the bank
rejects it and, without testing the other applicant, undercuts the interest rate to Fα− for the loans
to the other applicant. If the tested applicant is of good type then the bank offers a loan to the
applicant at Fα− and raises the interest rate to Fα+ for the loan to (or rejects) another untested
applicant. In this way the expected loan portfolio size for both banks will remain the same while
the distribution of the loan portfolio size changes a little. It is easy to check that the improvement
in the stage profit for the deviating bank is:

                                           ∆E[π] = −c + λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb )Fα ,

and and ∆E[π] > 0 iff c < λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb )Fα .38
     37
     The expected payoff with no deviation is a linear combination of the expected payoffs with deviations in the form
of s′ (D), D = 0, 1, ..., N . Therefore, the expected payoff for each deviation with s′ (D) must be the same.
  38                               (1−λ)λ(pg −pb )
     Recall Assumption 2: c ≥ λpb +(1−λ)p      g
                                                   . Therefore, the parameter space is not empty as long as Fα > F ∗ =
       1
λpb +(1−λ)pg
             .


                                                                35
   In our example with two loan applicants, if one bank deviates in the way we described above,
then the loan allocation is (1, 1) with probability 1, while without a deviation, the loan allocation
is (2, 0) with probability 14 , (1, 1) with probability 1, and (0, 2) with probability 14 . We know by
(4):
                              Eu1 (0, 2) − Eu1 (1, 1) = Eu1 (1, 1) − Eu1 (2, 0),

which implies:
                       1              1             1
                         Eu1 (0, 2) + Eu1 (1, 1) + Eu1 (2, 0) = Eu1 (1, 1).
                       4              2             4
Thus with the deviation s′′ , the expected continuation payoff remains unchanged.
   For more general case with more than two loan applicants, suppose that one bank deviate in
the way above. Let pk,N−k denote the probability of (k, N − k) for the two banks’ loan portfolio
sizes when no bank deviates, and p′k,N−k as the probability of (k, N − k) for the two banks’ loan
portfolio size with the deviation. By symmetry, it is easy to check that:
                                              
                   pk,N−k E[ui (k, N − k)] =         p′k,N−k E[ui (k, N − k)], for bank i = 1, 2.
              k                                  k

   There is a stage profit improvement, while the expected continuation value remains the same,
a contradiction.

   Proof of Corollary 1
   Proof. (Corollary 1) The proof is similar to that of Proposition 3.                     First consider the case
N − 2 ≥ Nα .       Assume that there exists a SPPE with s = (n = 0, Nα < N , Fα ) played on
                                                                                     1
the equilibrium path, where Fα is a constant larger than F ∗ =                 λpb +(1−λ)pg ,   and the continuation
value function does not depend on (χ1 , χ2 ), i.e., the number of defaulted loans in each bank’s loan
portfolio.
   Denote s′ (D) = (n = 0, Nα = D, Fα− ) as a feasible deviation strategy, for some 0 ≤ D ≤ Nα .
Let N (D)/N (D) be the maximum/minimum possible number of applicants that accept loans offered
by bank 2 when bank 1 deviates to s′ (D), and let pk (D) be the probability of bank 2 getting k
applicants given bank 1 getting D applicants. We must have:
                                                N(D)
                                                 
                                 ′
                         E[π1 (s (D), s) + δ              pk (D)u1 (D, k)]
                                               k=N(D)
                                                 N(D′ )
                                                  
                                 ′    ′
                     = E[π1 (s (D ), s) + δ                pk (D′ )u1 (D′ , k)] for any D = D′ ,
                                               k=N(D′ )

which implies:
                              N(D)                              N(D−1)
                                                                
                        δE            pk (D)u1 (D, k) − δ                 pk (D − 1)u1 (D − 1, k)]               (5)
                             k=N(D)                            k=N(D−1)
                    = [λpb + (1 − λ)pg ]Fα − 1 for any D.

                                                          36
     Consider the following deviation in which one bank tests one applicant. If the tested applicant
is good, then it offers loan to this tested applicant at Fα− , offers loan to a randomly picked non-
tested applicant at Fα+ , and offers loans to other randomly picked Nα − 2 applicants at Fα .       If
the tested applicant is bad, it rejects the applicant, and offers loan to other randomly picked Nα
applicants at Fα . We denote the above deviating strategy as s′′ . We can check that given (5), s′′
gives the same expected continuation payoff as s.
     The improvement in the stage profit for the deviating bank can be written as:

                                  ∆E[π] = −c + λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb )Fα ,

and the result comes out immediately.
     The proof for the case Nα = N − 1 is similar, thus omitted.

     Proof of Corollary 2
     Proof. (Corollary 2) For the case with N = Nα , consider the deviation in which one bank tests
                                                                                      2N−1
one applicant and offers loan to that applicant at min{Fα }− > F ∗ with probability    2N when   it is
good and rejects the applicant when it is bad. We can check this keep the distribution (D1 , D2 )
the same, and thus the continuation payoff is the same with the deviation.         The stage gain is
     2N−1
c−    2N λ(1    − λ)(pg − pb ) min{Fα }.
     For the case with N < Nα , consider the deviation in which one bank tests one applicant and
offers loan to that applicant at min{Fα } when it is good, when it is bad, rejects the applicant and
picks another un-tested applicant to keep the total number of applicants it approves the same. We
denote the above deviating strategy as s′ . Denote π(s, s) as π(N, Nα ), and it is easy to understand
what π(N − 1, Nα − 1) means; we also denote π(N − 1, Nα − 1, Nα ) as the expected payoff of one
bank offering loans to Nα − 1 applicants out of N − 1, while the other banks offers to Nα of them.
It is easy to check that with the deviation to s′ , the deviating bank’s expected payoff is:
                            1 1 Nα − 1                           Nα
          π′ = (1 − λ){(        +         )(pg min{Fα } − 1) +      π(N − 1, Nα − 1)
                            N2       N                            N
                     N − Nα
                  +         [(pg min{Fα } − 1) + π(N − 1, Nα − 1, Nα )]} + λπ(N, Nα ) − c.
                       N
We can also write π(N, Nα ) as follows:
                     1 1 Nα − 1                                               Nα
  π(N, Nα ) = (          +         )[(1 − λ)pg min{Fα } + λpb min{Fα } − 1] +    π(N − 1, Nα − 1)
                     N2      N                                                N
                          Nα
                    +(1 −    ){[(1 − λ)pg min{Fα } + λpb min{Fα } − 1] + π(N − 1, Nα − 1, Nα )}.
                          N
     We have:
                                 1 1 Nα − 1                               Nα
π′ − π(N, Nα ) = (1 − λ){(          +       )λ(pg − pb ) min{Fα }] + (1 −    )λ(pg − pb ) min{Fα }} − c
                                 N2    N                                  N
                       2N − 1
                   =          λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb ) min{Fα } − c > 0
                        2N
                       2N − 1
           iff c <            λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb ) min{Fα }.
                        2N



                                                   37
       Appendix 3: An Example of a PPE with Trigger Strategies
      In this example, for simplification, banks start with asymmetric strategies to reach a symmetric
loan distribution. Assume that each period there are two loan applicants (N = 2). Banks want
to keep the loan interest rate at F = X. The loan portfolio size distribution for the two banks
is determined as follows. When there is no credit worthiness testing, Bank 1 offers loans to both
applicants at interest rate X, while Bank 2 offers a loan to only one applicant at interest rate X − ,
and rejects the other applicant. Each bank will get exactly one loan in equilibrium. They punish
any other loan distribution by playing stage Nash equilibrium forever.
      Formally, the period one strategy for Bank 1 is s1 = (n = 0, Nα1 = 2, Fα1 = X); Bank 2’s
strategy is s2 = (n = 0, Nα2 = 1, Fα2 = X − ). For a discount rate, δ, close enough to 1, Bank 1 does
not have an incentive to deviate by conducting credit worthiness testing, since if Bank 1 rejects one
bad-type applicant, while Bank 2 offers loans to the other one, there will be a positive possibility
that the loan distribution will be different from (1, 1).39 However, with the above strategy Bank
2 might have an incentive to carry out testing while keeping the loan distribution equal to (1, 1)
with probability 1. With δ close enough to 1, the only possible deviation, without changing the
loan portfolio distribution, is as follows. Bank 2 deviates to high credit standards by testing one
of the applicants. After carrying out the test, if the tested applicant is of bad type, then Bank 2
offer a loan to the non-tested applicant at X − while rejecting the other one; if the tested applicant
is of good type, Bank 2 offers a loan to it at X − while rejecting the other one. Formally Bank 2’s
deviation strategy can be written as s′2 = (n = 1, Nα2 (Ng ), Nβ2 (Ng ), Fα2 = Fβ2 = X − ), where:

                                            Nα2 (Ng ) = 1, if Ng = 0
                                            Nβ2 (Ng ) = 1, if Ng = 1.

      We claim that if X is big enough, then Bank 2 will be strictly better off by deviating for some
level of test cost c. When Bank 2 does not deviate, the expected stage payoff is:



                                     Eπ2 = λ(pb X − 1) + (1 − λ)(pg X − 1).

      When Bank 2 deviates as described above, the expected stage payoff is:



                     Eπ′2 = (1 − λ)(pg X − 1) + λ[(1 − λ)(pg X − 1) + λ(pb X − 1)] − c.

      We have:
 39
      It can be verified that other forms of deviation are also not incentive compatible for Bank 1.




                                                           38
                                    Eπ′2 − Eπ2 = λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb )X − c
                                                      > 0
                                          if f   c < λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb )X

                                                                              (1−λ)λ(pg −pb )
      Compare this condition with that of Assumption 2: c ≥                    λpb +(1−λ)pg .   As long as X > F ∗ =
      1
λpb +(1−λ)pg ,   the parameter space is not empty.
      However, with a trigger punishment, we can eliminate the incentive of Bank 2 to deviate through
credit worthiness testing. The idea is for both banks to test all applicants for T periods whenever
Bank 1’s borrower defaults while Bank 2’s borrower does not. When both banks test, if there is
no bad-type applicant, Bank 1 offers loans to both applicants at X, and Bank 2 offers a loan to
one applicant at X − . If there is one good-type applicant, only Bank 1 offers a loan to the good
type applicant at X, while Bank 2 rejects all the applicants.                      Finally, if there are two bad-type
applicants, both banks reject all the applicants.
      Now, we are ready to describe a trigger strategy that will support the PPE. At period t = 0,
Bank 1’s strategy is s1 = (n = 0, Nα1 = 2, Fα1 = X), and Bank 2’s strategy is s2 = (n = 0,
Nα2 = 1, Fα2 = X − ). At t > 0, they will continue to play (s1 , s1 ) unless one of the following two
cases occurred at t − 1:
      (1) If they observe (D1t−1 , D2t−1 ) = (1, 1), then they play (sd , sd ) for the rest of the periods,
where sd = (n = 0, Nα = 2,Fα = F ∗ ).
      (2) Else, if they observe χ1t−1 = 0 and χ2t−1 = 1, then they play (sr1 , sr1 ) at period t, where
sr1 = (n = 2, Nβ1 (Ngt ), Nγ1 (Ngt ) = 0, Fβ1 = Fγ1 = X), sr2 = (n = 2, Nβ2 (Ngt ),Nγ2 (Ngt ) = 0,
Fβ2 = Fγ2 = X − ) and

                                            Nβ1 (Ngt ) = 2 if Ngt = 2
                                                           = 1 if Ngt = 1
                                                           = 0 if Ngt = 0
                                            Nβ2 (Ngt ) = 1 if Ngt = 2
                                                           = 0 if Ngt = 1
                                                           = 0 if Ngt = 0.

They will continue to play (sr1 , sr2 ) unless one of the following two cases occurs at τ > t:
      (2.1) If banks do not observe (1, 1), (1, 0), or (0, 0),40 then they will play (sd , sd ) for the rest of
 40
      In fact, (D1 , D2 ) depends on Ngτ −1 , which is not public information, we have, on the equilibrium path,

                                                     (D1 (Ngτ−1 ), D2 (Ngτ −1 ))
                                                 =   (1, 1) if Ngτ−1 = 2
                                                 =   (1, 0) if Ngτ−1 = 1
                                                 =   (0, 0) if Ngτ−1 = 0.


                                                             39
the time, where sd = (n = 0, Nα = 2,Fα = F ∗ ).
    (2.2) Else, if τ ≥ t+T , i.e. T periods have elapsed, then the banks go back to normal by playing
(s1 , s2 ) as defined above.
    Formally, the trigger strategy is defined as follows. Define period t to be normal if (a) t = 0;
or (b), t − 1 was normal, Dt−1 = (1, 1) and χ1t−1 = 1; or (c), t − T − 1 was normal, Dt−1 =
(D1 (Ngt−1 ), D2 (Ngt−1 )), and t − 1 was reversionary (as we will define in a moment). Define period
t to be reversionary if (a) t−1 was normal, Dt−1 = (1, 1) and χ1t−1 = 0; or (b), t−1 is reversionary,
and t < T or else t − T is normal, and Dt−1 = (D1 (Ngt−1 ), D2 (Ngt−1 )).               Define period t to be
devastating otherwise. Let st be the strategy for banks, and the trigger strategy is given by:
                                    
                                    
                                         (s1 , s2 ) if t is normal
                                    
                               st =    (s1 , sr2 ) if t is reversionary
                                         r
                                    
                                    
                                     (sd , sd ) if t is devastating.

    Each bank faces a stationary Markov dynamic programming problem. Its optimal strategy is
to play (s1 , s2 ) in normal periods, play (sr1 , sr2 ) in reversionary periods, and play (sd , sd ) in deviating
periods. The play (sd , sd ) is a threatening play, which will never occur on the equilibrium path,
while both (s1 , s2 ) and (sr1 , sr2 ) will occur.
    If t is a normal period, and banks play (s1 , s2 ), then the probability of switching to a reversionary
period at time t + 1 is:

                    q = λ(1 − pb )[λpb + (1 − λ)pg ] + (1 − λ)(1 − pg )[λpb + (1 − λ)pg ].

With bank 2 deviating to s′2 , We have:

                                       q = (1 − λ) (1 − pg ) + λ(1 − pb ).

    However, if one Bank 2 plays s′2 = (n = 1, Nα2 (Ng ), Nβ2 (Ng ), Fα2 = Fβ2 = X − ) where:

                                          Nα2 (Ng ) = 1, if Ng = 0
                                          Nβ2 (Ng ) = 1, if Ng = 1,

this probability becomes:

                q ′ = λ(1 − pb )[λpb + (1 − λ)pg ] + (1 − λ)[λ(1 − pb ) + (1 − λ)(1 − pg )]pg .

We can see that:
                                       ∆q = q′ − q = λ(1 − λ)(pg − pb ).

    In words, the above condition says that when Bank 2 deviates to s′2 , the probability of switching
to a reversionary period increases. By hypothesis Bank 2 is deviating. Now, having defined the
trigger strategies, we check the incentive constraint for Bank 2. In the normal period, Bank 2’s
In PPE, however, banks’ strategies can not depend on non-public information.


                                                       40
expected stage payoff from playing s2 = (n = 0, Nα2 = 1, Fα2 = X − ) given s1 = (n = 0, Nα1 = 2,
Fα1 = X) is:
                                      Eπn2 = λ(pb X − 1) + (1 − λ)(pg X − 1).

In the reversionary period, Bank 2’s expected stage payoff from playing sr2 = (n = 2, Nβ2 (Ngt ),
Nγ2 = 0, Fβ2 = Fγ2 = X − ) given sr1 = (n = 2, Nβ1 (Ngt ), Nγ1 = 0, Fβ1 = Fγ1 = X) is:

                                           Eπr2 = (1 − λ)2 (pg X − 1) − 2c.

       We can see:

                          Eπn2 − Eπr2 = λ (pb X − 1) + λ(1 − λ)(pg X − 1) + 2c
                                                > 0
                                               1
                                      iff c > − [λ (pb X − 1) + λ(1 − λ)(pg X − 1)]
                                               2
       It is easy to check this condition is implied by Assumptions 1 and 2.41
       Let W2n (s) denote the expected payoff in a normal period when Bank 2 plays s2 . Given the
other bank is playing the trigger strategy, Bank 2’s expected discounted present value from playing
s2 is:

                                   Win (s2 ) = Eπn2 + δ(1 − q)Win (s2 )
                                                    T
                                                    
                                               +δq[    δ t−1 Eπr2 + δT Win (s2 )].
                                                            t=1

       We have:
                                                                       T
                                                          Eπn2 + δq 1−δ     r
                                                                     1−δ Eπ 2
                                    Win (s2 )     =
                                                      1 − δ(1 − q) − δ T +1 q
                                                                     T +1
                                                      Eπn2 + q δ−δ      r
                                                                 1−δ Eπ 2
                                                  =
                                                      1 − δ + (δ − δ T +1 )q
                                                          Eπn2 − Eπr2          Eπr2
                                                  =                          +      .
                                                      1 − δ + (δ − δ T +1 )q 1 − δ
  41                          (1−λ)λ(pg −pb )
       By Assumption 2, c ≥    λpb +(1−λ)pg ,   we have

                          (1 − λ)λ(pg − pb )      1
                                             − {− [λ(pb X − 1) + λ(1 − λ)(pg X − 1)]}
                           λpb + (1 − λ)pg        2
                                 λ
                      =                   {2(1 − λ)(pg − pb ) + {[λpb + (1 − λ)pg ]X − λ}pb
                          λpb + (1 − λ)pg
                          −(1 − λ)pg + (1 − λ)(pg X − 1)[λpb + (1 − λ)pg ]}
                                 λ
                      ≥                   {(1 − λ)(pg − pb ) + (1 − λ)(pg X − 1)[λpb + (1 − λ)pg ]}
                          λpb + (1 − λ)pg
                      >   0,

  where we use Assumption 1:
  [λpb + (1 − λ)pg ]X > 1.


                                                               41
   In the normal period, Bank 2 can deviate from the equilibrium strategy by playing s′2 as defined
earlier. The short-run payoff to Bank 2 is:

                 Eπ′2 = (1 − λ)(pg X − 1) + λ[(1 − λ)(pg X − 1) + λ(pb X − 1)] − c

and we have the expected one-shot deviation discounted present value of Bank i:

                           Win (s′2 ) = Eπ′2 + δ(1 − q′ )Win (s2 )
                                                T
                                                
                                        +δq ′ [   δ t−1 Eπr2 + δ T Win (s2 )]
                                                t=1

   In order to make the trigger strategy the best response to each other in normal periods, we
need:
                                         Win (s2 ) > Win (s′2 ).

   It is easily verified that there is no incentive for either bank to deviate in a reversionary period
as long as δ is close enough to 1 and T is large enough.




                                                   42
References
 [1] Abreu, Dilip, David Pearce, and Ennio Stacchetti (1986): “Optimal Cartel Equilibria with
    Imperfect Monitoring,” Journal of Economic Theory 39 (1), 251-69.

 [2] Abreu, Dilip, David Pearce, and Ennio Stacchetti (1990), “Toward a Theory of Discounted
    Repeated Games with Imperfect Monitoring,” Econometrica 58 (5), 1041-63.

 [3] Asea, Patrick K., and S. Brock Blomberg (1998), “Lending Cycles,” Journal of Econometrics
    83: 89-128.

 [4] Ausubel, Lawrence M. (1991), “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market,”
    American Economic Review 81 (1), 50-81.

 [5] Beatty, Anne L and Anne Gron (2001), “Capital, Portfolio, and Growth: Bank Behavior Under
    Risk-Based Capital Guidelines,” Journal of Financial Services Research 20 (1), 5-31.

 [6] Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-kunt, and Ross Levine (2003), “Bank Concentration and
    Crises,” World Bank Working Paper.

 [7] Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell (1992), “Some Evidence on the Empirical Significance
    of Credit Rationing,” Journal of Political Economy 100 (5), 1047—1077.

 [8] Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell (1994), “Do Risk-Based Capital Allocate Bank Credit
    and Cause a ‘Credit Crunch’ in the United States?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
    26 (3), 585-628.

 [9] Bernanke, Ben S. and Cara S. Lown (1991), “The Credit Crunch,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
    nomic Activity 2, 204-39.

[10] Bresnahan, Timothy (1989), “Empirical Studies of Industries with Market Power,” in R.
    Schmalensee and R.D. Willing, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 2, p. 1011-
    57 (New York: North Holland).

[11] Brinkmann, Emile J. and Paul M. Horvitz (1995), “Risk-Based Capital Standards and the
    Credit Crunch,” Journal of Money, Credit & Banking 27 (3), 848-63.

[12] Broecker, Thorsten (1990), “Credit-Worthiness Tests and Interbank Competition,” Economet-
    rica 58 (2), 429-52.

[13] Carhart, Mark (1997), “Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance 52,
    57-82.

[14] Cochrane, John (1999), “New Facts in Finance,” Economic Perspectives XXIII (3) (Federal
    Reserve Bank of Chicago).

                                              43
[15] Cronshaw, Mark and David G. Luenberger (1994), “Strongly Symmetric Subgame Perfect
    Equilibrium in Infinitely Repeated Games with Perfect Monitoring and Discounting,” Games
    and Economic Behavior 6, 220-237.

[16] Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni and Robert Marquez (2004), “Lending Booms and Lending Standards,”
    University of Maryland, working paper.

[17] Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French (1993), “Common Risk Factors in the Returns of Stocks
    and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

[18] Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French (1996), “Multifactor Explanations for Asset Pricing
    Anomalies,” Journal of Finance 51, 55-94.

[19] Fudenberg, Drew, David I. Levine, and Eric Maskin (1994), “The Folk Theorem with Imperfect
    Public Information,” Econometrica, 62 (5), 997-1039.

[20] Furfine, Craig (2001), “Bank Portfolio Allocation: The Impact of Capital Requirements, Reg-
    ulatory Monitoring, and Economic Conditions,” Journal of Financial Services Research 20 (1),
    33-56.

[21] Gorton, Gary and Andrew Winton (2003), “Financial Intermediation,” in The Handbook of the
    Economics of Finance: Corporate Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris,
    and Rene Stulz, (Elsevier Science; 2003) (NBER Working Paper # 8928).

[22] Green, Edward J. and Robert H. Porter (1984), “Noncooperative Collusion under Imperfect
    Price Information,” Econometrica 52 (1), 87-100.

[23] Gross, David and Nicholas Souleles (2002), "An Empirical Analysis of Personal Bankruptcy
    and Delinquency," Review of Financial Studies 15, 319-347.

[24] Group of Ten, “Report on Consolidation in the Financial Sector,” January 25, 2001.

[25] Hall, Brian J. (1993), "How Has the Basle Accord Affected Bank Portfolios?” Journal of the
    Japanese and International Economics 7, 408-440.

[26] Hamilton, James D. (1994), “Time Series Analysis,” Princeton University Express.

[27] Hancock, Diana and James A. Wilcox (1994), “Bank Capital and the Credit Crunch: The
    Roles of Risk-Weighted and Unweighted Capital Regulations,” Journal of the American Real
    Estate & Urban Economics Association, 22 (1), 59-94.

[28] Hancock, Diana and James A. Wilcox (1998), "The "Credit Crunch" and the Availability of
    Credit to Small Business," Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 983-1014.

[29] Haubrich, Joseph and Paul Wachtel (1993), “Capital Requirements and Shifts in Commercial
    Bank Portfolios,” Economic Review (Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland), 29, 2-15.

                                                44
[30] Horowitz, Joel L. (2001), “The Bootstrap,” Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 5, J.J. Heckman
    and E.E. Leamer, eds., Elsevier Science B.V., Ch. 52, 3159-3228.

[31] Jordan, John, Joe Peek, and Eric Rosengren (2002), “Credit Risk Modeling and the Cyclicality
    of Capital,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, working paper.

[32] Kreps, David M. and Robert Wilson (1982), “Sequential Equilibria,” Econometrica, 50 (4),
    863-94.

[33] Keeton, William R. (1994), “Causes of the Recent Increase in Bank Security Holdings,” Eco-
    nomic Review (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), 79 (2), 45-57.

[34] Lown, Cara and Donald P. Morgan (2001), “The Credit Cycle and the Business Cycles: New
    Findings Using the Survey of Senior Loan Officers,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Working
    Paper.

[35] Lown, Cara and Donald Morgan (2002), “Credit Effects in the Monetary Mechanism,” Eco-
    nomic Policy Review, 8(1) (May 2002), Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

[36] Lown, Cara, Donald Morgan, and Sonali Rohatgi (2000), “Listening to Loan Officers: The
    Impact of Commercial Credit Standards on Lending and Output,” Economic Policy Review,
    6 (July 2002), 1-16.

[37] Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren (1995), “The Capital Crunch: Neither an Applicant Nor a
    Lender Be,” Journal of Money, Credit & Banking, 27 (3), 625-38.

[38] Rajan, Raghuram G. (1994), “Why Bank Credit Policies Fluctuate: A Theory and Some
    Evidence,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109 (2), 399-441.

[39] Reiss, Peter and Frank Wolak (2003), “Structural Econometric Modeling,” Handbook of Econo-
    metrics, forthcoming.

[40] Ruckes, Martin (2004), “Bank Competition and Credit Standards,” Review of Financial Stud-
    ies, forthcoming.

[41] Schreft, Stacey L. and Raymond E. Owens (1991), “Survey Evidence of Tighter Credit Con-
    ditions: What Does It Mean?” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, 77 (2),
    29-34.

[42] Weinberg, John A. (1995), “Cycles in Lending Standards?” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
    Economic Quarterly, 81 (3), 1-18.




                                               45
