NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL FLOWS AND EXCHANGE RATE VOLATILITY:
SINGAPORE’S EXPERIENCE
Basant K. Kapur
Working Paper 11369
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11369
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005

A previous version of this paper was presented at the NBER'
s International Capital Flows Conference, Santa
Barbara, CA, Dec. 16-18 2004. I wish to thank Sebastian Edwards, Martin Feldstein, Anusha Chari (the
discussant), and other participants for their most helpful comments. The usual disclaimer applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Basant K. Kapur. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Flows and Exchange Rate Volatility: Singapore’s Experience
Basant K. Kapur
NBER Working Paper No. 11369
May 2005
JEL No. F4, F3
ABSTRACT
Singapore’s experience with international capital flows over the past two decades or so has been a
rather – although not completely – benign one, owing to strong fundamentals and generally wellconceived macro-economic policies. We begin by briefly discussing the experience in 1998 of Hong
Kong, another city-state with a well-developed banking system and equities market, and operating
on a Currency Board (CB) system (although with some differences from Singapore’s CB system).
The discussion serves to identify some ‘areas of vulnerability’ in the Hong Kong set-up at that time.
We next discuss Singapore’s policy background and early experience, and in the light of Hong
Kong’s experience are better able to appreciate how Singapore’s policy framework served to
circumvent or minimize important vulnerabilities. Particular attention is paid to Singapore’s
exchange-rate policy and its policy of non-internationalization of the Singapore dollar. Equity- and
currency- market interactions are also considered. We next show how Singapore emerged relatively
unscathed from the 1997 Asian Crisis. Lastly, we discuss Singapore’s debt markets, and show how
under the imperative of promoting the development of its bond markets the non-internationalization
policy has been progressively relaxed, while retaining key safeguards.
Basant K. Kapur
Department of Economics
National University of Singapore
Kent Ridge
S (117570) Singapore
ecskapur@nus.edu.sg

I Introduction
Singapore’s experience with international capital flows over the past two decades or
so has been a rather – although not completely – benign one, owing to strong
fundamentals and generally well-conceived macro-economic policies. At the same time,
useful lessons can be learnt, regarding issues such as exchange rate policy, the policy of
non-internationalization of the Singapore dollar, and unavoidable fallout effects of capital
flow volatility even in generally sound environments and how these may best be dealt
with.
A feature of Singapore’s economy that sets it apart from various of the other countries
discussed in this Conference is its well-developed banking system and equities market,
and the fact that it is on a – modified – currency board (CB) system. Its bond market is,
however, less developed, although in recent years as discussed below measures have been
taken to foster its growth. It may be useful, therefore, to begin by comparing Singapore’s
experience with that of another state with a well-developed financial system, namely
Hong Kong: the latter, in addition, operates what may be termed a ‘pure’ CB system.
Notwithstanding the economic similarities, Singapore and Hong Kong have had rather
different experiences with capital flows, and an examination of why this has been so
turns out to be rather instructive. In Section II, therefore, we briefly examine Hong
Kong’s experience during the Asian Crisis of 1997-98, and identify its ‘areas of
vulnerability’. In Section III, we discuss Singapore’s policy background and how it
responded to a significant speculative attack in 1985, and draw lessons from this. Further
lessons are drawn in Section IV, when we consider Singapore’s experience during the
Asian Crisis of 1997-98. Section V discusses Singapore’s debt markets, an interesting
feature being that both Singapore and Hong Kong have in recent years encouraged
foreign enterprises to float bond issues in S$ and HK$ respectively, and Section VI
concludes.

An Annex provides a chronology of the evolution of capital controls

(specifically, the evolution of the non-internationalization policy) in Singapore.

1

II Hong Kong – the 1997-98 experience
As indicated above, our discussion here will be fairly brief, given that our main focus
is on Singapore, and is designed primarily to provide a comparative perspective on
Singapore’s experience.1 A minimalist definition of a pure CB system is that it is one in
which (a) domestic currency is issued or redeemed only in exchange for foreign currency,
and (b) at a fixed exchange rate, usually vis-a-vis a single foreign currency, termed the
reserve currency. A modified CB system, discussed further below, is then one in which
(a) holds, but not (b). A pure system aptly describes the Hong Kong situation, with the
exchange rate fixed at HK$7.8:US$1 since October 1983. Moreover, the monetary base
in Hong Kong was rather small, given that it does not impose reserve requirements on
banks and has an efficient, real-time interbank payment system so that ‘the aggregate
balance that banks maintain in their clearing accounts held with the currency board’
(Yam 1998b) is low.

This rendered Hong Kong vulnerable to speculative capital

outflows, of which there were a number in mid-1997 through mid-1998: these did not
succeed, in part because the resulting high interest rates adversely affected the
speculators too, who had borrowed Hong Kong dollars in the interbank market to launch
their attacks. The high interest rates (the overnight interest rate actually rose to 280% on
October 23 1997) and their adverse effects on the stock market and economic activity in
general were however a source of concern.2
The really major attack, however, occurred in August 1998, and Yam (1998b)
describes the so-called ‘double-play’ thus:
‘In August [after an announcement that ‘first-quarter GDP growth had been
negative’] the speculators adopted a more sophisticated ploy. They introduced a
We draw here mainly on Rzepkowski (2000), Yam (1998 a, b), and Corsetti, Pesenti,
and Roubini (2001).
2
The attacks reflected contagion from crises elsewhere in the region (Rzepkowski,
Hashimoto and Ito (2004)), and uncertainties associated with Hong Kong’s accession to
China. While Yam (1998b) refers to the interest rate increases as an ‘autopilot
mechanism’ – an inevitable concomitant of the CB system – Rzepkowski contends (p.
15) that they were partly induced, on occasions, by discretionary increases in the Hong
Kong Monetary Authority’s (HKMA’s) discount rate.
1

2

form of double play aimed at playing off the currency board system against the
stock and futures markets. First, to avoid being squeezed by high interest rates, they
prefunded themselves in Hong Kong dollars in the debt market, swapping US
dollars for Hong Kong dollars with multilateral institutions that have raised Hong
Kong dollars through the issue of debt. At the same time, they accumulated large
short positions in the stock index futures market. They then sought to engineer
extreme conditions in the money market by dumping huge amounts of Hong Kong
dollars. This sell-off was intended to cause [either a devaluation or] a sharp interest
rate hike, which in turn would have sent the stock market plummeting. The collapse
of the stock market would have enabled them to reap a handsome profit from the
futures contracts they had taken out.’
Presumably, a double play facilitates a stronger currency attack, since the higher
interest cost resulting from an attack of a given size is at least partly offset by the possible
gains from short-selling in the stock index futures market. Rzepkowski points out (p. 17)
that speculators also engaged in short-selling of stocks, and that ‘the hedge funds
involved in the speculation were identified as being the Quantum Fund of George Soros,
the Tiger Fund, the Moore Global Investment, and the Long Term Capital Management’.
Their prefunding activities had driven the Hong Kong interest rate premium over the US
dollar to about 5 percentage points (Yam, 1998a). It was estimated (Yam, 1998b) that
‘the hedge funds involved had amassed in excess of HK$30 billion in currency
borrowings, at an interest cost of around HK$4 million a day. They also held an
estimated 80,000 short contracts, which translated into the following calculation: for
every fall of 1,000 points in the Hang Seng index they stood to make a profit of HK$4
billion.’ Owing to the marking-to-market of their margin accounts with the Futures
Exchange, they stood to gain daily from incremental falls in the Hang Seng index
(Rzepkowski, pp. 17-8).
In the event, the attack proved unsuccessful. Like Singapore, Hong Kong has very
substantial nonmonetary foreign reserves – reserves in excess of that required to back the
monetary base. At the time, it was unexpectedly confronted with a fiscal deficit, and had
to convert part of these reserves into Hong Kong dollars to meet its fiscal obligations.
3

‘The immediate impact of this sale [of foreign currency], of an amount exceeding the
HK$30 billion accumulated by the hedge funds, was the non-trigger of high interest rate’
(Rzepkowski, p. 19). In addition, and quite unconventionally, ‘between the 14th and 28th
August 1998, the HKMA intervened via the Exchange Fund on the stock and futures
markets. It acquired a portfolio of equities and HSI futures for an amount of about
US$15 billion, that is 7% of the capitalization and around 30% of the current [1998]
Hang Seng Index value…About 13% of its nonmonetary reserves..were allocated to these
interventions, inducing an important injection of liquidity into the money market’ (ibid.).
By November, the portfolio had risen to US$19 billion in value, and during the interim
speculators ‘were forced to close out their short positions, in many cases with heavy
losses’ (Yam, 1998b). The portfolio was subsequently placed under the management of a
separate company at arms-length from the HKMA, with the aim of divesting it gradually.
After August 1998, systemic improvements were introduced, with the intention of
minimizing the occurrence of future attacks. The Exchange Fund, which manages Hong
Kong’s monetary and nonmonetary reserves had since 1990 issued bills to promote the
development of the local bond market, and in September 1998 virtually unrestricted
discounting of Exchange Fund bills by commercial banks at the discount window of the
HKMA, at non-penal rates, was introduced. Effectively, this almost doubled the size of
the monetary base, and serves to significantly reduce the interest rate response to a capital
outflow of a given magnitude (Rzepkowski, pp. 18-20). In addition, the government has
‘brought in a 30-Point package tightening the regulation of the securities and future
markets. Measures in the package include the strict enforcement of the T+2 settlement
process, imposing a super margin on brokers with highly concentrated positions,
introducing the client identity rule, increasing the penalty for naked short selling, creating
a new offence for unreported short sales, and introducing new requirements for stock
lenders to keep proper records of their lending activities. In parallel, SEHK re-introduced
the up-tick rule (no short selling below the current best ask price) for covered short
selling and HKFE tightened the large open position reporting requirements and imposed

4

position limits for HSI 33 Futures and Option Contracts’ (Dickens (2002), p. 33).
Subsequently, ‘relaxation measures applicable to certain market neutral transactions have
been introduced’ (ibid.).
While the Hong Kong authorities have taken the view that the hedge funds were
engaged in predatory market manipulation, Corsetti et. al. adopt a more agnostic position:
‘the hypothesis of rational investors taking short positions in two markets (based on an
assessment of economic fundamentals) and the hypothesis of a double play (suggesting
market manipulation) are observationally equivalent’ (p. 44). One could hypothesize,
alternatively, that the weakening fundamentals, due to both domestic and regional
developments, had ‘pushed’ the economy into a zone in which multiple equilibria
(discussed further below) existed. Speculators then endeavoured to drive the economy to
the unfavourable equilibrium (possibly by hoping that their actions would serve as a
signal to others), seeking to reap large profits in the process, and were not averse to
resorting to questionable means (such as naked short selling) to do so. One would then
interpret the HKMA’s actions as seeking to maintain the economy at the favourable
equilibrium – successfully, as it turned out. In this framework, the equilibria themselves
– in particular the equilibrium level of stock prices – depend inter alia on the extent of
policy intervention by the authorities.4

Prior to launching their attack in August, the hedge funds had borrowed Hong Kong
stocks, to a large extent in the more efficient offshore market, from international fund
managers and custodians (Rzepkowski, fn. 20), and in addition, owing to ‘lax settlement
requirements’ (Yam, 1998a, quoted in Rzepkowski, fn. 22) naked short selling was also
practiced, even though it was against the law. Corsetti et. al. also quote (p. 43) a study by
the Financial Stability Forum (2000): ‘Aggressive trading practices by HLIs (highly
leveraged institutions) reportedly included concentrated selling intended to move market
prices, large sales in illiquid offshore trading hours, and “spoofing” of the electronic
brokering services to give the impression that the exchange rate had moved beyond the
HKMA’s intervention level. There were frequent market rumours, often in offshore
Friday trading, that a devaluation of the Hong Kong dollar or Chinese renminbi would
occur over the weekend’.
4
In their theoretical discussion, Corsetti et. al. recognize that large players can influence
market outcomes, but appear reluctant to hypothesize that this occurred in Hong Kong’s
case. Their formal analyses deal with speculative attacks in a single market, and they
then informally extrapolate their results to the HK case. However, in a double-play
situation, if a devaluation does not occur, speculators can either lose or gain (Corsetti et.
3

5

The foregoing account permits (preliminary) identification of areas of vulnerability to
speculative attack, or fault lines, in the Hong Kong environment of 1997-98. The first is
the commitment to a fixed exchange rate. The Hong Kong authorities probably felt that
they had no alternative in the matter, since any devaluation so soon after the accession to
China could, it was felt, trigger a massive loss of confidence – a multiple-equilibria
scenario analogous to Diamond-Dybvig-style bank panics, but affecting asset (including
stock) prices in Hong Kong’s case.5 (Instead, real GDP grew by 3% in 1999 and 10.2%
in 2000.) In more ‘normal’ situations, however, an adjustable peg (a) provides, as is
well-known, speculators with a one-way bet (especially if the band around the peg is
fairly narrow), and (b) does not permit gradual exchange rate adjustments in the light of
slowly changing fundamentals. Second, is the ease with which speculators could borrow
Hong Kong dollars, either in the interbank market or from multilateral institutions.
Third, is the unrestricted ease of short-selling, in stock spot and index futures markets,
and the laxity in the enforcement of settlement requirements. Last is the initial small size
of the monetary base, coupled with reliance on the autopilot mechanism of the CB

al. simply assume that they will lose), depending on the actions of other speculators and
of the authorities, which affect interest rates and present and future stock prices. It is also
entirely conceivable that in the Hong Kong case speculators failed to fully anticipate the
extent and nature of the authorities’ reaction. Rzepkowski (p. 28) adopts a somewhat
similar view of the underlying process to ours, arguing that ‘the logic underlying the
several attacks against the HK dollar rests essentially on self-fulfilling expectations and
on a pure contagion’. Next, Chakravorti and Lall (2000) formally model a speculative
double-play, and conclude (p. 23) that ‘government intervention in the equity market may
either reduce interest rate or reduce the downward price pressure in equity markets but
not both’, owing to countervailing actions by speculators. They very peculiarly assume,
however, that such intervention has no monetary effects, contrary to Rzepkowski’s
observation earlier, and they also overlook that in Hong Kong, as indicated above, a
fairly large sum of nonmonetary reserves was converted into Hong Kong dollars to meet
fiscal obligations. A useful policy lesson here is that, if intervention is to be undertaken
in response to a double-play, it should also be targeted at both equities and money
markets.
5
This is a possibility which Devereux (2003) does not address, in his comparison of the
implications of the differing exchange rate regimes of Hong Kong and Singapore for
longer run trends in inflation and real exchange rates, and for short-run macroeconomic
and real exchange rate volatility. It is also not clear whether his short-run simulation
analysis imposes expectational rationality with regards to the exchange rate (equal, in his
model, to the expected rate of inflation of traded-goods prices) and the price of land.
6

system.6 We turn now to a discussion of some of Singapore’s experiences with capital
flow volatility, and we should also recognize that not infrequently a tension exists
between the desire for short-run stability, and the desire to foster deeper and more open
financial and capital markets for purposes of long-run growth and development of the
economy.
III Singapore – policy background and early experience
Any discussion of Singapore’s experience must assign a prominent place to a major,
long-standing (but recently relaxed, as discussed below) cornerstone of its monetary
policy – the policy of non-internationalization of the Singapore dollar.7 In MAS Notice
621 of November 1, 1983, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) stated:
‘Banks

should

observe

the

Authority’s

policy

of

discouraging

the

internationalization of the Singapore dollar. Specifically, banks should consult
with the Authority before considering Singapore dollar credit facilities
exceeding S$5 million (per entity) to nonresidents, or to residents where the
Singapore dollars are to be used outside Singapore. Banks managing syndicated
loans, bond issues, or other financial papers exceeding S$5 million should do

In his empirical work, Rzepkowski utilizes the information in currency option prices to
infer the expected intensity of an HK dollar devaluation, and then, in a VAR framework,
demonstrates the existence of a speculative double-play: ‘A circular scheme characterized
the formation of self-fulfilling expectations. The (expected) intensity of a HK dollar
devaluation induced a sharp decrease in the index futures prices, which contributed to
make the volatility of the HSI (Hang Seng Index) soar, in turn exacerbating the
speculative pressures against the HK dollar’ (p. 27). However, he then argues that the
HKMA’s stock market interventions in August 1998 were ineffective, since they
‘achieved to push up temporarily the index futures price, but induced a significant rise in
the market volatility’ (ibid.). Instead, it was the technical measures introduced in
September 1998 to strengthen the CB system (p. 4 above) which, he claims, dampened
the pressures against the currency. Rzepkowski acknowledges that his options analysis
abstracts from the possibility of a time-varying risk premium, and imposes ‘strong
assumptions on the underlying dynamics’ (p. 29), and so the robustness of his findings
remains an open issue.
7
We draw here mainly on Chan and Ngiam (1996, 1998), but critique their formal
analysis below, as well as on Lee (2001).
6

7

likewise. The terms “residents” or “nonresidents” include bank and nonbank
customers.’8
Chan and Ngiam (1996, p. 6) point out that, ‘To ensure that its regulations are not
being circumvented through financial derivatives, the MAS has defined Singapore dollar
credit facilities to cover a wide range of financial instruments, including loans, foreign
exchange swaps, currency swaps, interest rate swaps, facilities incorporating options, and
forward rate agreements in Singapore dollars’.9 Subsequently, on July 18 1992, the MAS
issued a circular amending the policy. Consultation with the MAS was not required for
credit facilities extended in Singapore dollars, in any amount, to residents or nonresidents
to facilitate direct exports from and imports to Singapore, and for payment bonds in
favour of Singapore parties, or payment guarantees, in respect of ‘economic activities’ in
Singapore, where the latter specifically excluded financial and portfolio investments.
Forward sales of Singapore dollars earned from exports to Singapore were also permitted.
At the same time, banks were told that they should not finance in Singapore dollars
‘activities which have no bearing on Singapore’ (op. cit., p. 5), including direct or
portfolio investments outside Singapore by nonresidents, third-country trade by
nonresident-controlled companies, and nonresident subscription to equity in a Singapore
company where the proceeds are used for takeovers or financial investments.

‘In

addition, banks have been advised against granting Singapore-dollar credit facilities to
nonresidents for speculating in the local financial and property markets’ (ibid.). For all
other activities – which are quite wide-ranging, and include third-country trade as well as
direct and portfolio investments overseas by residents, and direct investment and housing

Quoted in Chan and Ngiam (1996, p. 5). Singapore also has a very active offshore
Asian Currency market (in non-Singapore currencies), and banks are required to maintain
separate accounts for Asian Currency Units or ACU’s (op. cit., p. 4). ‘Nonresidents
include Singapore-incorporated companies, which are majority-owned or otherwise
controlled by nonresidents’ (Lee, p. 34).
9
‘Without any restrictions, a firm or individual can borrow Singapore dollars indirectly
by first borrowing US dollars and then doing a foreign exchange swap (which involves
the buying of the Singapore dollar spot with the simultaneous selling of the Singapore
dollar forward). This effectively replicates, or synthesizes, a Singapore dollar money
market loan with a “lock-in” Singapore dollar interest rate’ (ibid.).
8

8

development in Singapore by nonresidents – the 1983 ruling calling for consultation with
the MAS continued to apply.
It perhaps bears noting that there are no restrictions against nonresidents building up
Singapore dollar holdings by converting their own foreign-currency resources (or
resources borrowed abroad) into Singapore dollars, and placing them with the DBUs
(domestic banking units).

Moreover, by 1994 ‘the ACUs and the banks outside

Singapore have amassed some S$51.6 billion worth of Singapore-dollar deposits (or 25
percent of total liabilities) in the DBUs’ (op. cit., p. 7). Such S$ holdings could be
converted into foreign currencies if sentiment regarding the S$ turns adverse: however,
any further pressure through nonresidents borrowing domestic currency and converting
it, as occurred in Hong Kong, is obviated.10 ‘Further pressure’ here refers not to any
increased likelihood of the country’s reserves being unable to support capital outflows –
which obviously cannot occur under a CB system – but to heightened short-term interest
rates, and their effects on the economy, as well as the enhanced complexity of monetary
management.
Commencing in August 1998, a series of steps was undertaken to gradually liberalize
the non-internationalization policy, in conjunction with moves to promote the
development of the S$ bond market. These are discussed in greater detail below (Section
V). Throughout, however, the MAS has made it clear that ‘banks shall not extend S$
credit facilities [exceeding S$5 million] to non-resident financial institutions if there is
reason to believe that the S$ proceeds may be used for S$ currency speculation’ (MAS
(Revised) Notice 757 of 28 May 2004).

In the Frequently Asked Questions

accompanying this Notice, it was stated that banks ‘are expected to institute appropriate
Chan and Ngiam (1996, p. 8) also suggest that ‘(a)s the forward market involving the
Singapore dollar is rather thin, it cannot provide an effective vehicle for speculation’:
moreover, the MAS monitors forward transactions with a view to ensuring that these are
used for hedging and not for speculation. They further suggest that borrowing by
residents for speculative purposes does ‘not seem to be a major concern as the
Government can bring them to task if they bring down the Singapore dollar’ (fn. 27): the
point being made here probably relates to the greater ease of monitoring, and if necessary
regulating, the activities of residents, and perhaps also the greater sophistication and
speed of action of foreign hedge funds and the like.

10

9

internal controls and processes to comply with this restriction’: these may include
‘written confirmation from the non-resident financial institution specifying the purpose of
funding’, and a ‘formal evaluation process of the client profile, which provides a clear
basis for assessing that the client is unlikely to use the S$ proceeds for currency
speculation’.

Banks are also required to report to MAS monthly their aggregate

outstanding S$ lending to non-resident financial institutions. Clearly, there is an element
of judgment involved in assessing that a client is ‘unlikely’ to engage in speculation, but
to date this does not appear to have created difficulties for banks.
The non-internationalization policy has thus rather effectively blocked one of the
channels of vulnerability that existed in Hong Kong. What about another channel, that of
short-selling of shares11? This, too, is circumscribed in Singapore: Poitras (2002, p. 147)
points out that ‘sales for same day delivery’ are permitted, and in its Report on
Transparency of Short Selling (June 2003, p. 10) the Technical Committee of the
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) states that the Stock
Exchange of Singapore (SES) ‘may suspend individual securities if speculative activity is
excessive or abuse is suspected’.12 We thus observe a role being assigned to discretion in
decision-making, and both this and the same-day covering rule are in all likelihood
reflective of the fact that the literature is not unambiguous regarding the net benefit of
short-selling, especially in the presence of large players.

As discussed below, stock index futures were only introduced in 1998.
There appears to be some confusion of interpretation about the issue. Bris et. al. (2003,
p. 33) say that in Singapore short-selling is ‘not allowed’ but is ‘practiced’, while Morgan
Stanley (2003, p. 4) say, ‘There are no by-laws under the SGX (Singapore Exchange Ltd)
that forbid short-selling, however the present CDP (Central Depository) system actively
works against it. This is because short sellers must cover their positions within the same
day or face a buy-in by the SGX’. Poitras (op. cit.) says that ‘Except in very restrictive
circumstances, short selling of stock on the SES is prohibited’, while the Technical
Committee of IOSCO states (op. cit.) that short-selling is ‘unrestricted’, except for the
caveat mentioned above. Market practitioners confirm, however, that short-sellers are
expected to cover their positions by the end of the same day, after which a buy-in by the
SGX can occur; as mentioned, suspension of individual securities can also be instituted.
11
12

10

Discussion of the other two channels of vulnerability – the fixity of the exchange rate,
and the narrowness of the monetary base – is best carried out in the light of Singapore’s
exchange rate experience in the 1980’s. As Teh (1988) points out,
‘The Singapore dollar exchange rate is managed and set against a tradeweighted basket of currencies of its major trading partners. The trade-weighted
Singapore dollar is allowed to float within a target band. The MAS keeps the
trade-weighted dollar within the band through foreign exchange interventions
[in US$]…The level at which the trade-weighted dollar is set is determined by
what world inflation and domestic inflation are expected to be. Generally, the
aim is to reduce imported inflation in domestic prices by appreciating the tradeweighted dollar.’13
Departures from the foregoing general objective have occurred under recessionary
conditions, during which the S$ has been permitted to depreciate to a certain extent. The
first post-1965 recession in Singapore occurred in 1985, when real GDP fell by 1.6%,
followed by slow growth of 2.3% in 1986 (Peebles and Wilson (2002)). In response, as
Figure 1 shows, the S$ depreciated gradually from 1985 to the beginning of 1987. The
depreciation was not an entirely smooth affair, however, as we now discuss.
It appears that speculators overestimated the extent to which the authorities were
prepared to permit the exchange rate to depreciate.

By August 1985, the S$ had

depreciated to about S$2.20:US$1 (from about S$2.10:US$1 earlier), and it then came
under speculative pressure, primarily through spot conversions of S$ into foreign
currencies (Chan and Ngiam (1996), pp. 7-8) By Thursday September 12, it had fallen
to almost $2.31:US$1 (Starr (1985)). The following Monday, the MAS intervened, by
spending US$100 million (amounting to less than 0.1% of its foreign reserves, according
to Chan and Ngiam) to purchase S$. The consequence was an immediate rise in the
overnight interbank rate, which reached 120% on September 18, and the S$ strengthened

As MAS (2000, p. 24) points out, under a pure CB system the rate used by the CB
determines the market exchange rate, whereas in Singapore the exchange rates used by
the CB ‘depend on the current rates in the foreign exchange market’.
13

11

to S$2.20:US$1 – an appreciation of about 5% in just 4 days. ‘Substantial losses have
almost certainly been incurred by foreign banks as a result of speculating against the
Singapore dollar’ (Textline, 1985). Thereafter, liquidity was gradually restored to the
money market, but it was also made clear that the MAS would not hesitate to act again if
necessary.
Clearly, in addition to the non-internationalization policy and the discouragement of
speculative short-selling of shares, the exchange-rate policy played a significant role in
defusing the speculative attack. Initially permitting the exchange rate to depreciate to
S$2.20:US$1, in line with weakening fundamentals, took some of the edge off
speculative pressure. It would appear that the authorities then permitted, for some time, a
further depreciation owing to uncertainty regarding the path of fundamentals. When it
was determined that this depreciation was excessive, they were in a position to inflict
substantial losses on speculators. Like Hong Kong, Singapore’s very healthy reserve
position is a valuable asset in this regard. Unlike Hong Kong, however, non-adherence to
a fixed peg implied that speculators faced a ‘two-way bet’: this may have constrained the
intensity of the attack then, and by strengthening the MAS’ reputation for toughness
reduced their willingness to attack in the future as well. Finally, the flexibility with
which the MAS generally permits short-term uncollateralized borrowing by banks, in
support of its exchange rate policy (MAS, n.d., p. 6), meant that the speculative pressure
prior to the MAS intervention did not appreciably raise short-term interest rates (Textline,
ibid.). We proceed next to examine lessons learnt during the Asian Crisis of 1997-98.14

Chan and Ngiam’s (1998) formal analysis of the 1985 episode appears, however, to be
flawed. They erroneously assume that the exchange rate was appreciated from a preexisting disequilibrium level, but that interest rates nonetheless fell because, by
underscoring the authorities’ determination not to allow the currency to weaken, it
reduced the perceived probability of a devaluation. In fact, however, interest rates did as
indicated above rise after the appreciation, owing to the liquidity squeeze, and only fell
subsequently. The key element of losses imposed on speculators by the appreciation is
not included in their analysis, and neither do they recognize that the appreciation was
intended to bring the exchange rate to an (equilibrium?) level that was lower than the
S$2.10 level originally. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine the perceived devaluation
probability, and the interest rate, falling, for good, if the exchange rate did indeed remain
overvalued.
14

12

IV Singapore – the 1997 experience
We begin with a succinct statement by Chan and Ngiam (1998, p. 259):
‘During the recent Asian currency crisis, which began when Thailand allowed
its baht to float on July 2, 1997, the Singapore dollar, along with all the regional
currencies, showed a significant fall against the US dollar for six months. From
a high of $1.43 per US dollar on the day before the float of the baht, the
Singapore dollar went all the way down to S$1.75 per US dollar on January 7,
1998, a decline of 18.3 percent over the period…Although the Singapore dollar
depreciated against the US dollar, it appreciated sharply against the regional
currencies. Hence, on a trade-weighted basis, the Singapore dollar actually
showed a slight appreciation since July 1, 1997. The Singapore dollar has
withstood the currency storm lashing the region because of its extremely strong
economic fundamentals..(including) low foreign debt, huge foreign exchange
reserves, large current account surpluses, substantial budget surpluses, high
savings rates, strong inflow of foreign direct investment, a sound financial
system and prudent government policies.’
We thus observe a significant difference between Singapore’s exchange rate
experience in 1997 and its experience in 1985.

The greater depreciation in 1997,

compared to the initial depreciation of only about 5% from S$2.10 to S$2.20 per US$ in
1985, might have reflected a judgment that the economic situation was more serious in
1997: at the same time, a larger depreciation might have been more in line with
speculators’ priors, and the latter might also still have had memories of the 1985
experience.15

In both years, the non-internationalization policy and the short-sale

restrictions would also have helped. Singapore’s experience also exemplifies the point
Hashimoto (2003, p. 256) obtains ‘puzzling’ results in seeking to identify speculative
pressure against the S$ in 1997, including the fact that a large depreciation occurred
when her estimated depreciation likelihood was lowest. Methodologically, her
assumption that speculators condition only on the M2/foreign exchange reserves ratio in
deciding when to launch an attack appears rather restrictive, and it is also not clear what
her estimated critical level of 0.25 for this ratio for Singapore signifies, since the actual
ratio was above this throughout her sample period (1986-97).
15

13

made earlier (p. 6) regarding the merits of gradual rather than discrete adjustments in
situations that are not too extreme.
Notwithstanding the fairly smooth exchange rate adjustment, Singapore was not
spared from volatility in other asset markets, particularly equities and property. From a
high of 2055.44 in January 1997, the Straits Times Index of stock prices dropped by 60%
to 856.43 in September 1998 before recovering (Ngiam, 2000, p. 6, and his Figure 2).
The private property price index dropped monotonically by about 40% from 270.0 in the
first quarter of 1997 to 163.7 in the fourth quarter of 1998 (ibid., and his Figure 3). Real
GDP in fact declined by 0.9% in 1998 (Table 1 below). It would not be correct to ascribe
these developments solely to contagion effects, and trade and banking exposure to the
region. Other factors, such as the global electronics slowdown, the downturn in the
domestic real estate cycle, and (over time) the gradually increasing competition from
China and India, also played a significant part. However, Singapore’s experience in
1997-98 underscores the fact that countries that ‘plug into’ the global economic grid will
tend to experience not only higher mean growth rates, but also greater variability of those
growth rates. As has often been noted, capital can flow out of a country, as well as into
it. Selective measures aimed at particular sectors can mitigate the degree of volatility, but
are unlikely to be capable of effectively eliminating it. Of course, economic agents will
in due course learn to make improved risk-return calculations, and at the same time
governments would be well-advised to develop various coping mechanisms, such as a
reasonable degree of social insurance, and provision of skills upgrading and re-training
facilities, to help those who are severely affected by shorter-term cyclical, as well as
longer-term structural, changes.
V Debt Markets in Singapore
We begin with some figures, for the 1990’s. Table 2, from Ong (1998), provides
information on the debt-to-asset ratio (DAR) of nonfinancial corporations in Singapore,
Canada, and the U.S. The ratio in Singapore has declined somewhat in the 1990’s, and is
fairly modest at 0.31, of which 0.21 is due to short-term debt (defined as ‘the sum of bank
loans and overdrafts, short-term commercial papers and other short-term loans’ (op. cit.,

14

p. 9)), and 0.10 to long-term debt (‘the sum of preference shares, bonds and debentures,
and other long-term loans’ (ibid.)).
With regards to external debt, the Singapore Department of Statistics (SDOS)
distinguishes between external debt per se – defined as ‘all overseas loans drawn by our
corporate, government and household sectors, but excludes our banks’ overseas interbank loans’ (2000, p. 1; we discuss bank borrowing below) – and ‘secondary forms of
external debt’, comprising negotiable ‘debt securities’ (SDOS, 1998, p. 2) such as bonds,
debentures, and treasury bills, and trade credits (‘direct extension of credit by suppliers
and buyers for goods and services transactions and advance payments for work that is in
progress’ (ibid.)).

Tables 3-8 provide information on these, during the 1990’s.

‘Singapore has had no public external debt since 1995’ (SDOS (1998), p. 2), owing to its
regular budget surpluses. Its debt sustainability ratios have been much more favourable
than those of other countries in the region. About three-quarters of the external corporate
debt was contracted by foreign-owned companies.16
Turning to secondary forms of external debt, SDOS (2000) observes, in regards to
Table 7, ‘Singapore’s external liability in debt securities nearly doubled from $2.0 billion
at end-95 to $3.7 billion at end-98…It was dominated by 4 foreign (3 Japanese and 1
U.S.) companies. The debt securities are mostly short and medium term notes issued to
provide additional funds for the companies’ operation’.

Regarding FDI non-equity

liabilities, and excluding debt securities, a significant portion comprised loans from
parent companies.

After 1995, Singapore was a net creditor in all trade credit

transactions (FDI and non-FDI). As Table 8 shows, it was also a net creditor in all the
other categories covered in the preceding tables, namely debt securities, FDI-related
loans, and Loans to Other Non-Residents, with the exception of borrowing from external
banks (Table 3): the figure of almost S$12 billion here is modest relative to other figures
below, and has not been netted against lending by Singapore banks to external nonbank
entities, on which data is not provided.
The figure for nonbank loans at end-97, $4.518 billion, is the same in Tables 3 and 6,
but the figure for bank loans is larger in the former, since it includes loans to households
as well: nonbank lending to households is not significant.

16

15

The overall picture that emerges is that of a comfortable external debt position, as far
as nonbank entities are concerned. Turning to banks,17 as of December 1997 the DBU’s
owed S$94.7 billion to banks outside Singapore (including to the head offices of foreignowned banks): however, they had also lent S$69.7 billion to banks outside Singapore
(both figures are inclusive of DBU transactions with ACU’s, and all figures are from the
Monthly Digest of Statistics, Singapore, July 1998). The total asset base of DBU’s at that
time (after deducting interbank lending between DBU’s, but inclusive of dealings with
ACU’s and other foreign banks) was S$163.7 billion, and their total deposits from nonbank customers amounted to S$124.1 billion, with a further S$25.8 billion of deposits
with the Post Office Savings Bank (ibid.). Also by way of comparison, Singapore’s stock
market capitalization was about S$180 billion in 1997 (Thiam, 2002, Table 1),
notwithstanding the depressed state of security prices then. Finally, with regards to bond
issuance specifically, total outstanding corporate bonds at that time, sold to both domestic
and foreign asset-holders, amounted to S$8.4 billion (S$6.7 billion being S$ issuance,
and S$1.7 billion being non-S$ issuance), and total outstanding governmental debt
(secondary debt according to the DOS classification) comprised S$15.0 billion worth of
bonds, and S$6.9 billion worth of Treasury Bills (all figures from the MAS website,
sections on Singapore’s bond markets).
Given Singapore’s modest overall external debt position, its large foreign exchange
reserves (amounting to about six times the size of the monetary base18), and its small

We focus here on DBU’s, since the offshore market or the ACU’s transact virtually
entirely in foreign currencies.
18
These very large reserves are to a not insignificant degree a reflection of Singapore’s
fairly low domestic absorption capacity (given its small size), juxtaposed against its large
savings rate over many years. Nor does it appear that such large reserve holdings impose
a significant opportunity cost on the economy: a Straits Times (Singapore) report of July
22 2004 by Audrey Tan quotes the Assistant Managing Director of the MAS, Ong Chong
Tee, as saying ‘we are invested across a diversified range of markets and currencies’, and
that, owing to ‘the better performance of global equity markets’ MAS’ profits in the year
ended March 31 2004 jumped to S$4.99 billion (from just S$623 million the previous
year). The bulk of these profits arose from investing its foreign reserves, which totaled
US$96.3 billion at the beginning of the year. The report adds that ‘MAS does not
disclose the rate of return on its investments’, but that, according to Mr Ong, ‘on average,
MAS’ performance would place it in the top 25th percentile of its peer group of fund
17

16

exchange rate depreciation relative to that of other countries in the region, it is not
surprising that its external indebtedness was not a noticeable aggravating factor in the
1997-98 downturn. It is, however, of interest to examine the reasons for the historical
underdevelopment of Singapore’s bond markets (as seen above, its banking system and
equities market are much more developed), and to review the measures taken since 1998
to foster their growth, with particular reference to their implications for the S$ noninternationalization policy.19
We may divide the reasons for the historical underdevelopment into supply and
demand factors, while recognizing that there is some interaction between the two.
Perhaps the most important supply factor has been the healthy fiscal position of the
government, which has resulted in a limited need for it to issue bonds. Moreover, the
bonds that were issued were of low maturity (not more than 7 years, prior to 1998), and
the bulk of them, and of Treasury Bills, were held by banks and finance companies (to a
significant extent to meet minimum liquidity requirements), as well as insurance
companies, resulting in a very limited secondary bond market. (It should, however, be
noted that we exclude here ‘specially-issued, non-tradable, long-term government bonds
which are held by the CPF (Central Provident Fund) until maturity’ (Ngiam and Loh, p.
6). The CPF is Singapore’s compulsory saving scheme, and its holdings of these special
bonds substantially exceeds the outstanding amount of other, tradable government
securities: Ngiam and Loh add, ‘Most of the proceeds from such (CPF-purchased) bonds
are probably channeled to the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation (GSIC)
for investment in foreign assets’ (ibid.).)
An important consequence of the underdevelopment of the governmental bond
market, particularly the secondary market, was the absence of a benchmark yield curve to
facilitate corporate issuance, and active trading, of bonds. At the same time, it may be
managers’. Substantial sums are also invested by the Government of Singapore
Investment Corporation (in financial and real assets abroad) and Temasek Holdings
(mostly in government-linked-companies domestically), but the precise amounts are not
known, and neither is the former’s rate of return on its investments.
19
Valuable references here are Ngiam and Loh (2002), Lee (2001), and US Embassy,
Singapore (2001).
17

hypothesized that Singaporeans’ ‘appetite’ for a secure, long-term asset has to a large
extent been met, albeit compulsorily, by their CPF savings, notwithstanding the
somewhat low return on such savings (Asher (2004)). They may thus wish to channel
most if not all of their remaining, discretionary savings (beyond that used to finance
home ownership) to more liquid bank deposits and to higher-yielding but risky equity
investments, which helps to account for the more advanced state of development of
Singapore’s banking system and equities market – which in turn makes it easier for
Singapore corporations to raise funds from these sources.
With a largely captive market for government securities, the government could afford
to pay low yields on these, and in addition ‘Singapore investors have to pay tax on
interest income whereas they do not have to pay tax on capital gains obtained from
investing in equities and properties’ (Ngiam and Loh, p. 11).

Lastly, much of

Singapore’s economic growth has historically been driven by large inflows of FDI, with
foreign-owned companies receiving major infusions of equity and loans from their parent
companies.
The Asian Crisis of 1997-98 provided a major impetus to a shift in policy thinking
regarding bond market development in Singapore.

The Crisis had highlighted the

dangers of currency and maturity mismatches in corporate borrowing, and Singapore
banks had also suffered losses due to exposure to the region, although none was in danger
of collapsing. It therefore appeared prudent to diversify the sources of, particularly longterm, borrowing on the part of Singapore corporations, and encourage them to borrow in
S$.

Also, with economic growth the pool of discretionary saving was growing

substantially, notwithstanding the high CPF contribution rate, and fund management
companies had become increasingly active in the economy. One may surmise that
concomitantly the demand for market determination of bond yields, and of greater market
liquidity, was also growing. This was underscored by the severe fall in equity and
property prices during the Crisis.

From a longer-term, developmental perspective,

fostering of a further pillar of Singapore’s dynamic financial sector was also deemed
desirable.

The intention was to encourage not only Singaporean but also foreign

corporations, and multilateral institutions, to float bond issues in Singapore.
18

Accordingly, since 1999 the MAS has issued, on a regular basis, more Singapore
Government Securities (SGS), with larger issuances and longer maturities (up to 15
years). The healthy fiscal position of the government has enabled it to offer lower yields
on such securities, and yet ensure their acceptance by investors.20 Statutory boards and
government-linked corporations (GLC’s) have also become active in bond issuance,
relying less on bank borrowing: for example, the Jurong Town Corporation launched a
S$200 million 12-year issue in 2000, and Singapore Telecommunications launched a S$1
billion 5-year issue in February 2001. The intention has been ‘to stimulate the emergence
of a debt market, and to establish benchmark rates’ (US Embassy, p. 2). Secondary
market are still fairly small (Ngiam and Loh), although growing. Tax exemption for fee
income earned by financial institutions arranging debt securities in Singapore (in S$ as
well as foreign currencies) was also granted, interest income earned by non-residents was
exempted from withholding tax, and a concessionary tax rate of 10% was introduced on
interest income earned by financial institutions and corporations from holding debt
securities. Interest rate futures contracts were introduced, and restrictions on S$ OTC
(over the counter) interest rate derivatives such as interest rate swaps, forward rate
agreements, and interest rate and swap options lifted (Ngiam and Loh, p. 13).21 Primary
and secondary market liquidity has also been sought to be fostered through measures
such as the introduction of an SGS (Singapore Government Securities) repo facility for
primary dealers, and of a 5-year SGS bond futures contract.

See Figures 2 and 3 below (from Wong (2004)), in respect of Singapore and US
Government 10-year bond yields in the recent past. The former has almost invariably
been below the latter, while tracking its movement fairly closely, except in recent
months, which Wong attributes to expectations of continued weakening of the US$.
The IMF Country Report No. 01/177 of October 2001 on Singapore also points out ( p.
24) that SGS offer lower yields than US Treasury bonds, but have nonetheless been
included in J.P. Morgan’s GBI (Government Bond Index) Broad since April 2001 (with a
weight of 1/3 percent), on account of their low cross-correlations with returns from most
other government bonds, and their very low volatility of returns, ‘which help to expand
the efficient portfolio frontier for bonds’. McCauley and Jiang (2004) provide a detailed
analysis of the diversification benefits from holding a range of Asian-currency bonds, in
addition to those from other areas.
21
‘However, banks are required to submit monthly reports on details of interest rate
derivative transactions exceeding S$5 million with counter-parties outside Singapore’
(ibid.).
20

19

Of particular interest for our purpose is ‘the opening up of the S$ bond market to
foreign issuers..accomplished through MAS Notice 757, introduced in August 1998 and
amended in November 1999’ (Ngiam and Loh, p. 8).22 The proceeds from such issues
could be retained in the form of S$ deposits with banks in Singapore pending use:
however, if and when the proceeds were to be used outside Singapore, they had to be
converted or swapped into foreign currency before remitting abroad (ibid.). Funds raised
for use in Singapore by nonbank nonresidents for designated economic activities
(excluding, for example, ‘speculating in the S$ currency and interest rate markets’ (Lee,
p. 36)) did not require prior MAS approval. Prior approval was also not required for
transacting in several derivative products (fuller details are provided in the Annex
below).

‘Moreover, Notice 757 (of August 1998) fully liberalized the extension of S$

credit facilities to residents’ (ibid., p. 35). Interestingly, in the revised Notice 757 of May
28 2004, the MAS has stated that, with effect from that date, nonresident nonfinancial
issuers of S$ bonds and equities were no longer required to swap or convert their S$
proceeds into foreign currencies before remitting abroad, adding that this ‘would allow
the issuers greater flexibility in managing their S$ funds’. For nonresident financial
institutions, however, the requirement was retained.
‘Shortly after this policy [of August 1998] was announced, the International Finance
Corporation became the first foreign entity to issue S$ bonds, with a S$300 million threeyear issue. GE Capital followed in Q1 1999 as the first foreign private issuer, with a
S$300 million issue, followed by the Nordic Investment Bank and the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development. A wide range of foreign financial institutions and
other corporates have launched issues since early 1999 (including US issuers such as
Ford Motor Credit, JP Morgan, UPS, Morgan Stanley, John Hancock, General Motors
Acceptance, and Goldman Sachs, as well as a wide range of European entities and some
Asian entities)’ (US Embassy, p. 3). By the first quarter of 2002, total S$ bond issue by
foreign entities amounted to S$7.2 billion (Ngiam and Loh, p. 8), and the market

Foreign entities have also been permitted to list S$-denominated shares since late 1998,
but similar restrictions to those discussed immediately below in regards to the use of the
proceeds outside Singapore applied (Shook Lin and Bok, 2001).
22

20

continues to grow, thereby helping to meet the demand of both domestic and foreign
investors (including fund managers) for such instruments.
Ngiam and Loh further mention (p. 20) that ‘from December 2000 onwards, nonresidents have been allowed to borrow Singapore dollars (from banks) to buy SGS and
SDCB (Singapore Dollar Corporate Bonds)’, as well as S$ equities and real estate (US
Embassy). Banks were also permitted to ‘extend S$ credit facilities exceeding S$5
million to nonresidents to fund offshore activities, as long as the S$ proceeds are
swapped into foreign currency’ (Lee, p. 37), to transact in S$ currency options with other
banks and financial institutions in Singapore, and to transact with nonresidents in a broad
range of derivative products (op. cit.; the Annex below provides further details). Foreign
securities intermediaries were permitted to freely obtain S$ financing domestically, and,
effective March 1 2001, offshore banks were permitted to freely engage in S$ swap
activity with nonbanks (US Embassy). In March 2002, S$ credit facilities to nonresident
nonfinancial entities (such as corporate treasury centers) were liberalized, so that only
credit in excess of S$5 million to nonresident financial entities for speculating against the
S$ was prohibited, and even the latter were permitted to engage in a wider range of
derivative transactions (such as S$ currency options) with financial institutions. The
intention was to promote the deepening of such markets.

We discuss the overall

implications of measures to promote financial market development in the Conclusion.
VI Conclusion
Singapore clearly has strong defenses against what it deems to be excessive exchange
rate volatility triggered by ‘destabilizing’ capital flows.

These include its strong

fundamentals (discussed by Chan and Ngiam above (p. 13)), the adoption of a CB
system, and the non-adherence to a fixed currency peg when the economic situation
changes. (Indeed, an important lesson is that it is the package of policies in totality that
can meaningfully be evaluated, rather than individual policies in isolation from the
overall policy context.) Under the imperative of promoting the continued growth and
diversification of its financial sector – an important pillar of the economy, accounting for
about 12% of its GDP – quite a number of administrative restrictions have been relaxed

21

since 1997. This was heralded in a key address on November 4 1997 by then Deputy
Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong. ‘In order to meet the upcoming challenges, DPM Lee
proposed a fundamental change in Singapore’s attitude towards risk management…In
contrast to Hong Kong, “where anything not expressly forbidden is permitted”, Lee noted
that in Singapore “anything not expressly permitted is forbidden”.

At this stage,

however, the government needed to regulate the financial sector “with a lighter touch,
accept more calculated risks, and give the industry more room to innovate and stretch the
envelope” in order to promote a more competitive, dynamic and innovative environment.
Lee argued for a disclosure-based regulatory system to protect investors, rather
than..extensive regulations’ (US Embassy, Singapore, 1999).
The progressive relaxations of the S$ non-internationalization policy, which in any
event was a rather limited form of capital control,23 may be viewed in this light. Such
relaxations, including those on a wide variety of derivative transactions, were necessary
to foster bond market development in Singapore, and the evidence provided above
indicates that this objective (including the attraction of foreign bond-issuers) is well on
the way to being achieved. Since May 2004, the only remaining restriction of any
significance is the onus placed on banks to determine, as far as possible, that the S$ credit
facilities they extend to non-resident financial institutions will not be used for currency
speculation. This would appear to be a reasonable restriction, especially in the light of
the very high interest rate volatility experienced by Hong Kong, which does not impose
such a restriction, during speculative periods (pp. 2-3 above). Given the MAS’ reputation
for toughness, one would expect that banks will err on the side of caution in
implementing this policy. Financial market development is thereby facilitated, and at the
same time the risk of heightened currency speculation during turbulent periods, and the
associated macro-economic instability, is reduced.

It is also quite conceivable that

restrictions, for example on swap transactions, would be re-introduced if it was felt that
the situation so warranted.
A study by the MAS (2000) found that during the 1990’s, and prior to the Asian crisis,
covered and uncovered interest parity tended to hold between Singapore and US 1- and 3month interbank rates respectively, indicating, as one might expect, a high degree of
financial integration.
23

22

A similar policy orientation may be seen in the securities market. In 1998, Morgan
Stanley launched the MSCI Singapore stock index futures contract, and in 2000 the
Straits Times Singapore stock index futures contract was launched, both on SIMEX
(Singapore International Monetary Exchange). However, SIMEX is authorized by the
MAS to ‘establish position and trading limits to diminish or prevent excessive
speculation’ (Lawton, 1999, Section 3), and also maintains a large trader reporting
system. Somewhat ironically, in the light of DPM Lee’s observations, while Singapore
has moved to a more relaxed regulatory regime, Hong Kong has ‘tightened up’
somewhat, and the two systems are closer than they previously were. This perhaps is
where the golden mean lies – a fairly, although not completely, unrestrictive, rule-based
system in general, but with provision for discretionary intervention when the situation
warrants. Do such discretionary provisions create uncertainty for business, and can they
be abused? If they are intelligently employed, they can be very valuable in times of
stress, and perhaps the best safeguard against abuse is public analysis and discussion
whenever they are employed.
Annex: Chronology of Capital Controls in Singapore
June 1 1978
Exchange controls were completely liberalized, in line with efforts to develop Singapore
as a banking and financial centre (including offshore banking). From then on, ‘residents
are allowed to borrow, lend and invest freely in foreign currencies. Banks in Singapore
that are licensed to deal in Asian Currency Units can freely accept deposits in foreign
currencies. Residents may deal freely in spot and forward foreign exchange transactions.
Non-residents are freely allowed to make direct and portfolio investments in the country’
(MAS (1999), p. 2).
November 1 1983
MAS Notice 621, setting out the policy of non-internationalization of the Singapore
dollar, issued (pp. 7-8 above).
July 18 1992
The MAS amends the policy by distinguishing three categories of activities:

23

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

The approved category: consultation with the MAS was not required for credit
facilities extended in S$, in any amount, to residents or nonresidents to
facilitate direct exports from and imports to Singapore, and for payment bonds
in favour of Singapore parties, or payment guarantees (including guarantees
for tax payments), in respect of ‘economic activities’ in Singapore, where the
latter specifically excluded financial and portfolio investments. Forward sales
of Singapore dollars earned from exports to Singapore were also permitted.
The banned category: banks were not to finance in S$ ‘activities which have
no bearing on Singapore’, including direct or portfolio investments outside
Singapore by nonresidents, third-country trade by nonresident-controlled
companies, and nonresident subscription to equity in a Singapore company
where the proceeds are used for takeovers or financial investments. Banks
were also not to extend S$ credit facilities, in any amounts, to nonresidents for
speculating in the local financial and property markets.
The unlisted category: for all other activities – which are quite wide-ranging,
and include third-country trade as well as direct and portfolio investments
overseas by residents, and direct investment and housing development in
Singapore by nonresidents – the 1983 ruling calling for consultation with the
MAS continued to apply.

August 1998
In conjunction with an ‘extensive program of financial sector liberalization’ (Lee, p. 35),
the MAS issues the first version of Notice 757, which replaced Notice 621: this and
subsequent versions sought to successively relax restrictions against various financial
transactions. While concluding that ‘the basic policy remains sound’, the MAS stated
that ‘some judicious relaxation of specific restrictions would foster the development of
capital markets with minimal incremental risks’ (quoted in Lee, op. cit.).
The Notice fully liberalized the extension of S$ credit facilities to residents. In addition,
banks could now engage in the following activities without prior consultation with the
MAS (ibid.):
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

Extension of S$ credit facilities to, and arranging S$ equity listings or bond
issues for, nonbank nonresidents if the S$ proceeds are used for designated
economic activities in Singapore.
Extension of S$ credit facilities to nonbank nonresidents for financial
investments – shares, bonds, deposits, and commercial properties in Singapore
– up to S$ 5 million.
Extension of S$ credit facilities up to S$20 million to nonresidents, via
repurchase agreements of Singapore Government Securities (SGS).
Engaging in a limited list of derivative transactions, including hedging of
currency or interest rates from the activities listed in (i) above, and transacting
in S$ interest rate futures with nonresidents.

24

For other activities, consultation with the MAS continued to be required, and in addition
the S$ proceeds from credit facilities and bond and equity listings arranged for nonbank
nonresidents had to be converted or swapped into foreign currency if they were to be
used outside Singapore. Also, the extension of S$ credit facilities to nonresidents for
certain purposes – including speculating in the S$ currency and interest rate markets,
financing third-country trades, and financing acquisition of shares of companies not listed
on the Stock Exchange or Central Limit Order Book – was explicitly prohibited.
November 1999
Banks were permitted to engage in an expanded range of activities without prior
consultation with the MAS, including extension of S$ credit facilities to, and transacting
in S$ interest rate products with, other banks, merchant banks, finance companies, and
insurance companies in Singapore; extension of S$ credit facilities of any amount to
nonresidents via repos of SGS or other S$ bonds; arranging S$ equity listings for
nonresident companies as long as the S$ proceeds were converted into foreign currency
before being used outside Singapore; and all S$ derivative transactions with residents, as
well as an expanded range of derivative transactions with nonresidents, including optionrelated products with nonfinancial counterparts. However, banks were still required to
consult with the MAS before transacting in S$ currency options or option-related
products with nonbank financial institutions, and before extending S$ credit facilities
exceeding S$5 million to banks and other financial institutions outside Singapore, and
were not permitted to transact in S$ currency options or option-related products with
other banks.
December 2000
Nonresidents were permitted to borrow Singapore dollars (from banks) to buy SGS and
SDCB (Singapore Dollar Corporate Bonds), as well as S$ equities and real estate. Banks
were also permitted to extend S$ credit facilities exceeding S$5 million to nonresidents to
fund offshore activities, as long as the S$ proceeds are swapped into foreign currency, to
transact in S$ currency options with other banks and financial institutions in Singapore,
and to transact with nonresidents in a broad range of derivative products, including crosscurrency swaps and currency options for hedging purposes, S$ interest rate derivatives,
and equity derivatives. Foreign securities intermediaries were permitted to freely obtain
S$ financing domestically, and, effective March 1 2001, offshore banks were permitted to
engage freely in S$ swap activity with nonbanks.
March 2002
S$ credit facilities to nonresident nonfinancial entities (such as corporate treasury
centers) were liberalized, so that only credit in excess of S$5 million to nonresident
financial entities, including banks, finance companies, insurance companies, hedge funds,
and securities dealers and brokers, for speculating against the S$ was prohibited. Even
the latter entities were permitted to engage in a wider range of derivative transactions
(such as S$ currency options) with financial institutions, except that foreign exchange

25

swaps involving a spot sale of S$ to the nonresident in the first leg remained under the
rubric of S$ credit facilities. Apart from this, transactions involving asset swaps, crosscurrency swaps and cross-currency repos were fully liberalized. The intention was to
promote the deepening of such markets, and make it easier for S$ equities and debts to be
swapped into foreign currencies for overseas use. Financial institutions were also no
longer required to ensure that S$ credit facilities extended to finance investments be
withdrawn when the investments were liquidated, thereby lessening the burden of
tracking fund use.
May 28 2004
Nonresident nonfinancial issuers of S$ bonds and equities were no longer required to
swap or convert their S$ proceeds into foreign currencies before remitting abroad, so as
to ‘allow the issuers greater flexibility in managing their S$ funds’. For nonresident
financial institutions, however, the requirement was retained, in respect of S$ proceeds
from equity and bond listings, as well as from borrowing from banks. Banks are also
required to report to MAS monthly their aggregate outstanding S$ lending to non-resident
financial institutions. It was reiterated that ‘banks shall not extend S$ credit facilities
[exceeding S$5 million] to non-resident financial institutions if there is reason to believe
that the S$ proceeds may be used for S$ currency speculation’.

26

References
Asher, M., ‘Retirement Financing in Singapore’, mimeo., School of Public Policy,
National University of Singapore, June 2004
Bris, A., Goetzmann, W. N., and Zhu, N., ‘Efficiency and the Bear: Short Sales and
Markets around the World’, NBER Working Paper No. W9466, January 2003
Chakravorti, S., and Lall, S., ‘The Double Play: Simultaneous Speculative Attacks on
Currency and Equity Markets’, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper WP –
2000 – 17, December 2000
Chan, K.S., and Ngiam, K.J., ‘Currency Speculation and the Optimum Control of Bank
Lending in Singapore Dollars: a Case for Partial Liberalization’, International Monetary
Fund Working Paper WP/96/95, August 1996
Chan, K.S., and Ngiam, K.J., ‘Currency Crises and the Modified Currency Board System
in Singapore’, Pacific Economic Review, 3(3), October 1998, 243-63
Corsetti, G., Pesenti, P.A., and Roubini, N., ‘The Role of Large Players in Currency
Crises’, NBER Working Paper No. W8303, May 2001
Devereux, M.B., ‘A Tale of Two Currencies: the Asian Crisis and the Exchange Rate
Regimes of Hong Kong and Singapore’, Review of International Economics, 11(1),
February 2003, 38-54
Dickens, M., ‘Development of the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Market’, Fourth
Round Table on Capital Market Reform in Asia, organized by OECD and the ADB
Institute, April 2002, Tokyo
Financial Stability Forum, Report of the Working Group on Highly Leveraged
Institutions, April 2000
Hashimoto, Y., ‘An Empirical Test of Likelihood and Timing of Speculative Attacks: the
case of Malaysia and Singapore’, Japan and the World Economy, 15(2), 2003, 245-59
Hashimoto, Y., and T. Ito, ‘High-Frequency Contagion between the Exchange Rates and
Stock Prices’, NBER Working Paper No. 10448, April 2004
International Monetary Fund, ‘Singapore: Selected Issues’, IMF Country Report No.
01/177, October 2001
Lawton, J.C. (Acting Director, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, USA), Letter to
J.K. Thorpe, ‘Singapore International Monetary Exchange Limited; Request for NoAction Relief from the Contract Market Designation Requirement’, December 17, 1999

27

Lee, J., ‘Evolution of the Policy on Noninternationalization of the Singapore Dollar’,
Section IV of International Monetary Fund (2001)
McCauley, R., and G. Jiang, ‘Diversifying with Asian Local Currency Bonds’, BIS
Quarterly Review, September 2004, 51-66
Monetary Authority of Singapore, ‘Monetary Policy Operating Procedures in Singapore’,
BIS Policy Paper, n.d., 1-10
Monetary Authority of Singapore, Capital Account and Exchange Rate Management in a
Surplus Economy: The Case of Singapore, Occasional Paper No. 11, March 1999
Monetary Authority of Singapore, A Survey of Singapore’s Monetary History, Occasional
Paper No. 18, January 2000
Monetary Authority of Singapore, Financial Market Integration in Singapore: The
Narrow and the Broad Views, Occasional Paper No. 20, May 2000
Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore’s Exchange Rate Policy, February 2001
Monetary Authority of Singapore, Notice 757 of 28 May 2004
Morgan Stanley, Global Network Management, Short-Selling Details – Equities, March
27, 2003
Ngiam, K.J., Coping with the Asian Financial Crisis: The Singapore Experience, Visiting
Researchers Series No. 8 (2000), Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Singapore, March
2000
Ngiam, K.J., and L. Loh, Developing a Viable Corporate Bond Market: The Singapore
Experience, Economics and Finance No. 2(2002), Institute of Southeast Asian Studies,
Singapore, June 2002
Ong, L.H., ‘Financial Leverage of Singapore Corporations, 1971-1997’, Statistics
Singapore Newsletter, 2nd Quarter, 1998
Peebles, G., and P. Wilson, Economic Growth and Development in Singapore, London,
Edward Elgar, 2002
Poitras, G., ‘Short Sales Restrictions, Dilution, and the Pricing of Rights Issues on the
Singapore Stock Exchange’, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 10(2), 2002, 141-62
Rzepkowski, B., ‘The Expectations of Hong Kong Dollar Devaluation and Their
Determinants’, Paris: CEPII Working Paper 2000-04, February 2000

28

Shook Lin and Bok, ‘MAS Liberalizes Singapore Dollar Policy’, Legal Newsletter, 4
January 2001
Singapore Department of Statistics, Monthly Digest of Statistics, July 1998
Singapore Department of Statistics, Singapore’s External Debt, Occasional Paper on
Economic Statistics, December 1998
Singapore Department of Statistics, Singapore’s External Debt: Definition and 1998
Assessment, Information Paper on Economic Statistics, January 2000
Starr, P., ‘Singapore Props Up Currency’, Australian Financial Review, 18 September
1985
Tan, A., ‘MAS Chalks Up Handsome $5b gain’, Straits Times (Singapore), July 22 2004
Technical Committee, International Organization of Securities Commissions, Report on
Transparency of Short Selling, June 2003
Teh, K.P., ‘Monetary Policy in an Open Economy: Singapore’, 17th SEANZA (SouthEast Asia, New Zealand, Australia) Central Banking Course, Reserve Bank of Australia,
Sydney
Textline Multiple Source Collection, ‘Singapore’s foreign exchange market is virtually
back to normal’, 20 September 1985 (from Factiva)
Thiam, H.N., ‘Stock Market Linkages in South-East Asia’, Asian Economic Journal,
16(4), 2002, 353-77
US Embassy, Singapore, ‘Reforming Singapore’s Financial Services Sector: A
Background and Progress Report’, May 1999
US Embassy, Singapore, ‘Singapore – The Singapore Dollar Bond Market Develops’,
March 2001
Wong, S.J., ‘Rising Bond Prices’, Fundsupermart.com (Singapore), 10 December 2004
Yam, J., ‘Defending Hong Kong’s Monetary Stability’, Speech at TDC Networking
Luncheon, Singapore, 14 October 1998
Yam, J., ‘Coping with Financial Turmoil’, Inside Asia Lecture 1998, Sydney, 23
November 1998

29

Figure 1: Singapore’s Exchange Rates
1.3

200
Appreciation

Mid-80s
Recession

S$/US$
(RHS)

1.4
1.5

, ------------- --

1.6

160

1.7
REER*
(LHS)

140

NEER
(LHS)

1.8
1.9

120

S$ Per US$

Index (1981 Q1=100)

180

Asian Crisis &
Beyond

Appreciation

2.0

. ---------

2.1

100

2.2

Appreciation of S$

2.3

80
81

83

85

87

89

91

93

95

97

99

01

03

* Using export competitiveness weights and deflated by relative unit labour costs

Source: Monetary Authority of Singapore (2001), and kindly updated by the MAS

30

Table 1 Key National Income Statistics, Singapore

Year

Gross National
Income
(GNI)
$M

Per Capita
GNI

Gross National
Saving

Gross Capital
Formation

$

$M

$M

At Current Market Prices

Gross Domestic Gross Fixed
Product
Capital
Formation
$M
$M
At 1995 Market Prices

1993

94,604.0

28,535

42,062.4

35,258.2

98,838.2

32,439.3

1998

141,068.3

35,968

75,416.8

44,316.0

138,345.0

51,253.3

1999

142,617.3

36,097

70,644.6

44,739.5

147,834.4

48,717.8

2000

159,097.0

39,599

73,984.6

51,150.6

162,162.3

52,933.8

2001

155,472.3

37,634

67,150.2

38,296.3

159,073.0

50,549.3

2002

157,818.5

37,834

67,238.5

33,444.1

162,493.2

45,530.6

2003

157,173.9

37,555

70,351.3

21,245.0

164,265.9

43,779.4

Percentage Change Over Previous Year
1993

13.0

10.1

8.7

21.3

12.3

10.3

1998

-4.3

-7.4

-3.0

-20.3

-0.9

-6.0

1999

1.1

0.4

-6.3

1.0

6.9

-4.9

2000

11.6

9.7

4.7

14.3

9.7

8.7

2001

-2.3

-5.0

-9.2

-25.1

-1.9

-4.5

2002

1.5

0.5

0.1

-12.7

2.2

-9.9

2003

-0.4

-0.7

4.6

-36.5

1.1

-3.8

Source: Yearbook of Statistics, 1994 (Singapore Department of Statistics)

31

Table 2 Average Leverage Ratio During the 1970’s, 1980’s and 1990’s
1970s

1990s1

1980s

Average ratio during the period
Singapore
Debt-to-Asset Ratio (DAR)
Short-term DAR
Long-term DAR

0.33
0.24
0.09

0.36
0.24
0.12

0.31
0.21
0.10

Short-to-Long-term Debt Ratio

2.55

1.97

1.98

Debt-to-Asset Ratio (DAR)
Short-term DAR
Long-term DAR

0.24
0.11
0.13

0.28
0.17
0.11

0.30
0.15
0.15

Short-to-Long-term Debt Ratio

0.86

1.53

1.04

0.30
0.11
0.19
0.59

0.33
0.15
0.18
0.85

0.37
0.17
0.21
0.80

Canada

United States
Debt-to-Asset Ratio (DAR)
Short-term DAR
Long-term DAR
Short-to-Long-term Debt Ratio

For Singapore, data refer to period 1990 - 1997. For Canada, data refer to period
1990 - 1996. For the United States, data refer to period 1990 - 1994.

Source: Ong (1998)

TABLE 3 SINGAPORE'S EXTERNAL DEBT, END-95 TO END-98
$ million
End-95

End-96

End-97

End-98P

Private Sector

9,801

12,341

16,490

14,734

Loans - BIS Banks

6,921

7,390

11,161

9,274

434

1,053

811

808

2,446

3,898

4,518

4,652

0

0

0

0

Total

9,801

12,341

16,490

14,734

Previous Estimates

9,801

10,927

15,631

Loans - Non-BIS Banks
Loans - Other Non-Residents
Public Sector

-

Source: SDOS (2000)

32

Table 4 Singapore Debt Sustainability Ratios, End-95 to End-98 (%)
_______________________________________________
End-95

End-96

End-97

End-98P

_______________________________________________

Debt/GNP
Debt/(Domestic) Exports

8.1

9.3

11.2

10.0

10.0

11.9

15.3

13.9

Source: SDOS (2000)

33

TABLE 5 EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY RATIOS
OF SELECTED COUNTRIES
per cent
End-93

End-94

End-95

End-96

External Debt/GNP
Indonesia

58.9

57.4

56.9

59.9

Malaysia

38.7

36.9

42.6

42.1

Philippines

64.1

59.3

51.5

47.3

Thailand

37.1

43.1

34.9

50.3

External Debt/Exports
Indonesia

211.9

195.8

202.9

222.2

Malaysia

43.5

37.7

40.8

42.4

187.0
93.0

160.6
103.1

121.8
76.6

97.6
120.5

Philippines
Thailand

Source: World Bank, World Debt Tables.

Reproduced in SDOS (1998)

34

Table 6 Overseas Loans of Local and Foreign-Owned Companies, End-97
Identified Bank Loans1

Non-Bank Loans

Total

Value
Share
Value
Share
Value Share
($ million) (per cent) ($ million) (per cent) ($ million) (per cent)
Local-Owned

1,258

21

1,445

32

2,703 26

Foreign-Owned

4,754

79

3,073

68

7,827 74

Total

6,012

-

4,518

-

10,530

1 Bank loans that are identified in SDOS's surveys

Source: SDOS (2000)

35

Table 7 SECONDARY FORMS OF EXTERNAL DEBT, END-95 TO END-98
$
million
EndEndEndEnd96
97
98P
951
1,952
2,419
3,585
3,662
Debt Securities
FDI Non-Equity Capital - Net Liability
5,194
5,687
7,808
7,792
Loans
4,074
5,437
5,752
Trade Credits - Liabilities
9,852
6,830
7,431
6,825
Trade Credits - Assets
4,658
5,217
5,060
4,785
Non-FDI Trade Credits - Net Asset
3,267
6,238
8,092
7,072
Assets
16,662 17,632 21,148
19,639
Liabilities
13,395 11,394 13,056
12,567
1 Data for 1995 has been revised

Source: SDOS (2000)

TABLE 8 NET EXTERNAL POSITION - LOANS AND DEBT
SECURITIES, END-96 TO END-97
$ million

End-96
Debt Securities

End-97

6,303

7,454

Assets

8,722

11,039

Liabilities

2,419

3,585

4,804

6,846

Assets

8,702

11,364

Liabilities

3,898

4,518

3,518

3,944

Assets (Outward FDI)

7,592

9,381

Liabilities (Inward FDI)

4,074

5,437

Loans

- Other Non-Residents

Loans

–

FDI

Source: SDOS (2000)

36

Figure 2: S$ and US$ bond yields

Source: Bloomberg (quoted in Wong, op. cit.: the left column measures the
Singapore bond yield)

Figure 3: US$ and S$ bond yields (cont.)

Source: Bloomberg (quoted in Wong, op. cit.: the left column measures the US bond
yield)

37

