NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPECULATIVE TRADING AND STOCK PRICES:
EVIDENCE FROM CHINESE A-B SHARE PREMIA
Jianping Mei
Jose Scheinkman
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 11362
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11362
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005

Mei is at New York University, Scheinkman and Xiong are at Princeton University and affiliated with the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Scheinkman thanks the National Science Foundation and the Blaise
Pascal Research Chair for research support. We thank Yakov Amihud, Cheol Eun, Ed Glaeser, Galina Hale,
Lin Peng, Li Wei and participants at several seminars and conferences for valuable comments and
suggestions. We are grateful to Chunhui Miao and Aureo de Paula for able research assistance, and to Ming
Cai, Kent Hargis, Shenzhen GTA Information Technology Inc. and Boshi Fund Management Company for
providing us with the Chinese market data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Jianping Mei, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Speculative Trading and Stock Prices: Evidence from Chinese A-B Share Premia
Jianping Mei, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 11362
May 2005
JEL No. G0, G1, F3
ABSTRACT
The market dynamics of technology stocks in the late nineties has stimulated a growing body of
theories that analyze the joint effects of short-sales constraints and heterogeneous beliefs on stock
prices and trading volume. This paper examines implications of these theories using a unique data
sample from China, a market with stringent short-sales constraints and perfectly segmented dualclass shares. The identical rights of the dual-class shares allow us to control for stock fundamentals.
We find that trading caused by investors' speculative motive can help explain a significant fraction
of the price difference between the dual-class shares.
Jianping Mei
New York University
jmei@stern.nyu.edu
Jose Scheinkman
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Bendheim Center for Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08450

1

Introduction

The market dynamics of technology stocks during the late nineties indicates a connection
between trading volume and stock price overvaluation. In the case of Palm and 3Com
analyzed by Lamont and Thaler (2003), the market valuation of Palm surpassed its parent
company 3Com by over 20 billion dollars in March 2000. At the same time, the available
shares of Palm changed hands every week. This pattern was not unique to Palm-3Com,
Ofek and Richardson (2003) and Cochrane (2003) document the association between high
prices and trading volume in the technology sector.
Although trading volume does not play a role in the classic asset pricing theory, several
recent papers have articulated theories that establish a connection between overvaluation
and trading volume. Following the basic insights of Miller (1977), Harrison and Kreps
(1978) and Chen, Hong and Stein (2002), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), and Hong,
Scheinkman, and Xiong (2004) emphasize the joint effects of short-sales constraints and
heterogeneous beliefs on stock prices. When there are limits to the ability of arbitrageurs
to short overvalued shares, the marginal buyer of shares tends to be an optimist. This
introduces a speculative motive among investors. An asset owner has the option to resell
his shares to other more optimistic investors in the future for a profit, and equilibrium
prices reflect this option. Typically, as the volatility of the difference in investors’ opinions
increases, investors trade more often and the value of the resale option also increases.
This results in a positive association between trading volume and prices.1
It is complicated to directly test overvaluation with data from the Nasdaq stocks
because of the difficulty in measuring fundamental values of these stocks. In this paper,
we use a unique data set from Chinese stock markets to investigate the joint effects of
short-sales constraints and heterogeneous beliefs on trading volume and stock prices.
Chinese stock markets are well suited for such an analysis for several reasons. First,
1

Duffie, Garleanu and Pedersen (2002) provide a model that endogenously determines costs of selling short,
and links overvaluation to short interest and securities’ lending fees.

1

short-sales of stocks are prohibited by law, and equity derivatives markets were not yet
developed during the sample period we use. Second, equity issuance and buy-backs, a
common practice that firms use to “arbitrage” the miss-valuation of their own stocks, are
severely constrained by the restrictive rules imposed by the government. Third, Chinese
stock markets were only re-opened in early 1990s after being closed for nearly half a
century. Thus, the stock trading was new to most domestic investors and had created
much excitement among them, just like internet stocks were to U.S. investors in the late
nineties. More importantly, during the period 1993-2000, several dozen firms offered two
classes of shares, class A and class B, with identical rights. Until 2001, domestic investors
could only buy A shares while foreign investors could only hold B shares. Despite their
identical payoffs and voting rights, class A shares traded on average for 420% more than
the corresponding B shares. In addition, A shares turned over at a much higher rate 500% versus 100% per year for B shares. The high price and heavy share turnover of A
shares echo observations on the Nasdaq bubble.
The main hypothesis of our empirical analysis is that the speculative motive of Ashare (domestic) investors generated a speculative component in A-share prices, and this
component is positively related to A-share turnover rate. The identical payoff structure of
A and B shares allows us to control for stock fundamentals. Thus, we focus on the crosssectional relation between the A-B share premia and the turnover rates. The stringent
short-sales constraints avoid potential complications of estimating stocks’ short-selling
cost. The relatively large panel (75 stocks) also permits us to control for cross-sectional
differences in risk and liquidity, as well as the time variation of interest rates and risk
premium.
We find that A-share turnover has a significant and positive correlation with the A-B
share premia in the period of 1993-2000, and explains, on average, 20% of the monthly
cross sectional variation of this premium.
We also perform several robustness exercises. We control for the effect of liquidity

2

using the proportion of no-price-change days in a month for each share.2 This does not
change much the effect of A-share turnover on the A-B share premia. To determine
whether trading in A-share and B-share markets is driven by speculation or liquidity
reasons, we examine the cross-sectional correlation between share turnover and asset float
(the total market value of publicly available shares) for both A and B shares. Liquidity
typically improves as asset float increases. On the other hand, a negative correlation
between turnover and float is consistent with implications of speculative trading theories,
since when investors are risk averse, it takes a larger dispersion in investors’ beliefs for
a larger float of shares to change hands. We find a negative and significant association
between share turnover and asset float in A-share markets in the period of 1993-2000,
suggesting that trading volume of A shares is not mainly a result of liquidity. As further
robustness checks, we control for several measures of risk. We find that the strong
association between A-share turnover and the A-B premium is still present. We also
estimate a panel regression of the A-B share premium on A-share and B-share turnover
with time and firm fixed effects. We again find that A-share turnover rate has a positive
and highly significant effect on A-B premium. In addition, the variation in the time effect
coefficients is well explained (R2 = 85%) by a linear combination of Chinese and world
interest rates and China’s political risk premium as measured in the dollar denominated
Chinese sovereign bond spread.
Our results corroborate the finding of Cochrane (2003) that there was a positive crosssectional correlation between the market/book ratio of US stocks and their turnover rates
during the Nasdaq bubble period of 1996-2000. Our analysis shows that such a relation
between stock prices and trading volume is present beyond the specific period of the U.S.
markets, and is robust even after controlling for many other factors such as liquidity,
discount rate and risk premium.
This paper is also related to the recent literature analyzing the effects of short-sales
2

This variable has been found to be an effective measure of market liquidity in U.S. stock markets and several
emerging markets by Lesmond, Ogden, and Trzcinka (1999) and Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2003).

3

constraints on stock returns. Jones and Lamont (2002) use U.S. data from the 1920s,
when rebate rates, one of the prime shorting costs, were published. They show that stocks
with higher shorting costs tend to have lower returns. Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002) use
breath of ownership in a firm to proxy for heterogeneous beliefs among investors, while
Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002) use the dispersion in analyst forecasts. They all
find that stocks associated with higher dispersions of beliefs tend to have lower returns.
Our analysis complements these studies by using share turnover, a direct consequence
of fluctuations in heterogeneous beliefs, to analyze overvaluation caused by short-sales
constraints.
Our analysis also adds to the earlier studies that use the relative pricing between
securities with identical or similar fundamentals to analyze the non-fundamental determinants of asset prices. For example, Lee, Shleifer and Thaler (1991) study the discounts
of closed-end funds relative to their net asset values, and Froot and Dabora (1999) examine three examples of twin shares, including Royal Dutch and Shell, that are traded
in different markets across the world. The relatively simple environment in China’s stock
markets (strictly enforced restrictions on short-sales, segmentation of A and B shares,
and lack of derivatives markets) allows us to identify speculative trading by investors as
an important determinant of stock prices.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our empirical hypotheses. In Section 3, we introduce the institutions of the Chinese stock markets. In
Section 4, we report our empirical analysis on the A-B share premium. Section 5 further
examines the price determinants based on a natural experiment due to the government’s
policy shift. Section 6 concludes the paper.

2

Empirical Hypotheses

Our analysis builds on the growing literature that models the joint effects of heterogeneous beliefs and short-sales constraints for asset prices. In a static setting, a stock’s
4

price will be upwardly biased when there is a sufficient divergence of opinion because it
will only reflect the valuations of the optimists as pessimists simply sit out of the market
instead of short-selling (see, e.g., Miller (1977), Chen, Hong and Stein (2002)). In a
dynamic setting, these two ingredients also generate a non-fundamental (or speculative)
component in asset prices (see, e.g., Harrison and Kreps (1978), Scheinkman and Xiong
(2003)). Investors pay prices that exceed their own valuation of future dividends as they
anticipate finding a buyer willing to pay even more in the future. The price of an asset
exceeds the fundamental value as a result of this resale option.
Investors often differ in their beliefs about stock fundamentals. Overconfidence, a
widely observed behavioral bias in psychological studies, provides a convenient way to
generate heterogeneous beliefs.3 Overconfidence can lead investors to differ in their information processing, i.e., some investors might choose to overweigh a subset of available
information in analyzing asset fundamentals, while other investors might overweigh another set, therefore generating heterogeneous beliefs. The difference in investors’ beliefs
will fluctuate more if investors are more overconfident and differ more in their information processing, or if there is more fundamental uncertainty which leaves more room for
opinions to differ.
Our empirical analysis focuses on the relation between stock prices and trading volume. When short-sales of assets are constrained, heterogeneous beliefs create a speculative motive for investors. An asset owner expects not only to collect future cash flows
from the asset, but also to profit from other investors’ over-optimism in the future by
selling the share at a price higher than he thinks it is worth. Thus, the price of an asset
can be decomposed in two components: the fundamental valuation of the asset owner
if forced to hold the asset forever and collect all the future cashflows, and a speculative
component generated by the asset owner’s option to sell the share for a speculative profit.
3

Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Teoh (2002) and Barberis and Thaler (2003) review the related psychological evidence
and discuss implications of overconfidence to financial markets. Heterogeneous beliefs could also come from other
sources. For example, Morris (1996) generates heterogeneous beliefs by removing the common prior assumption.

5

The magnitude of the speculative component is positively related to the frequency of
trades. Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) offer a continuous-time model that produces this
relationship. They show that the resale option, analogous to standard financial options
but with the difference in investors’ beliefs as the underlying asset, is valuable to the asset
owner even if other investors’ beliefs are currently lower. In particular, the valuation of
the resale option depends crucially on the volatility of the difference in beliefs, which
increases with investor overconfidence and the fundamental volatility of the asset. As
the difference in investors’ beliefs become more volatile, the resale option becomes more
valuable, and at the same time investors trade more frequently with each other. Hence
we have the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: When investors have heterogeneous beliefs about asset fundamentals
and are constrained from short-selling shares, there is a positive relationship between the
speculative component in asset prices and the turnover of shares.
We will use the pairs of A- and B-shares in China’s stock markets to measure the
speculative component in prices and examine its relationship to turnover, as highlighted
in Hypothesis 1.
We will also examine the relation between share turnover and asset float, i.e., the value
of shares that are available for trading in the market. When investors are risk averse and
not fully diversified, a larger asset float means that it takes a greater divergence in
opinion in the future for asset owners to resell all their shares for a speculative profit,
which implies that the resale option is less valuable today. Indeed, Hong, Scheinkman
and Xiong (2004) provide a model to show that, as the asset float increases, the “strike
price” of the resale option increases. As a result, the resale option becomes less valuable,
and the share turnover rate becomes smaller since asset owners are less likely to exercise
their resale option. Thus, we have the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2: When investors have heterogeneous beliefs about asset fundamentals,
are risk averse, and constrained from short-selling shares, the speculative component in

6

share prices and the share turnover rate decrease with asset float.
Another determining factor in the relationship between asset prices and share turnover
is liquidity. Investors often need to trade assets for portfolio rebalancing or other liquidity
reasons, and assets differ in transaction cost and the level of difficulty in matching buyers
with sellers. Duffie, Garleanu and Pedersen (2003), Vayanos and Wang (2003) and Weill
(2003) provide theoretical models to analyze the effects of liquidity on asset prices and
trading volume, based on a search process between buyers and sellers. It is intuitive that
liquid assets tend to have higher prices and larger turnover rates. These models also
predict that share turnover is positively related to asset float when investors trade for
liquidity reasons, opposite to the prediction in Hypothesis 2. The basic argument is that
when asset float becomes larger, it is easier for a seller to match with a buyer. Hence a
liquidity story implies:
Hypothesis 3: When investors trade for purely liquidity reasons, the turnover rate
of shares increases with asset float.
Hence a finding that turnover is positively related to asset float is consistent with the
speculative motive but inconsistent with purely liquidity reasons.

3

The Institutional Background

3.1

The Market

The Chinese stock market is relatively young, dominated by inexperienced individual
investors. The two stock exchanges in Shanghai and Shenzhen were established in 1990.
These exchanges listed shares of partially privatized state owned enterprises. The market
had grown quickly - by 2001 each exchange listed more than 500 companies and the total
market cap of Chinese stocks exceeded US$500 billion. The number of shareholders
increased 160 times, from 400,000 in 1991 to more than 64 million in 2001.
The Chinese market displayed remarkable booms and busts, similar to the U.S. technology stocks in late nineties. Figure 1 illustrates the behavior of the Shanghai A-share
7

and B-share indices. Beginning in 1991, the Shanghai A-share index went from 100 to
250 in less than a year and then reached 1200 by the first quarter of 1992. Starting
in June 1992, the Shanghai index dropped by more than 60 percent in a period of five
months. Within a few days of hitting bottom, the bull market returned. In just three
months, the overall market index rose from 400 to a new height of 1600. However, by
the mid 1994 the index was back to 400. In the second half of the decade the market
generally trended up, but as it can be seen from the figure, there were numerous episodes
in which the index lost several hundred points in a short period. For example, during
the 1993-2001 period, there were 20 “mini-crashes” when the Shanghai A-share market
Index lost more than 10% in a month, but only 8 similar episodes in the Nasdaq.
Like the technology stocks in the U.S., the Chinese stock market had very high
turnover. From 1991 to 2001, class A shares turned over on average at an annual rate
of 500%, which is even higher than the 365% turnover of DotCom firms in their heyday
(Ofek and Richardson, 2001), and more than five times the turnover rate of a typical
NYSE stock.
The heavy turnover rate of A shares is puzzling from the perspective of standard
models of asset trading, especially given the high transactions cost in Chinese stock
markets. During most 1990s, each side of a trade on the Shanghai Stock Exchange had
to pay a 0.4% commission fee to the broker and a 0.3% stamp tax to the government.4
Thus, a trade would incur a total fee of 1.4% of the proceeds, in addition to other costs
such as the price impact of trades. A turnover rate of 500% a year implies that 7% of the
A-share market capitalization was paid as direct trading fees each year. This number is
hard to justify from the usual hedging or portfolio rebalancing arguments.5
There are several features of the Chinese market during this period that make it
4

See the official website of Shanghai Stock Exchange: http://www.sse.com.cn.
The trading activity in the Chinese markets is much heavier than the neighboring markets. For example, the
average turnover rates in 1994 and 1995 for Indonesia, Japan, and Korea are 23%, 24%, and 125%, respectively,
according to Morgan Stanley International Portfolio Desk, IFC Stock Market Factbook (1996) and Dow Jones
Research. The direct transaction costs per round-trip trade for Indonesia, Japan, and Korea are 1.6%, 0.7%,
and 1.3% respectively.
5

8

particularly suited for testing the joint effects of short-sales constraints and heterogeneous
beliefs.
Chinese residents face a very stringent “short-sale” constraint. Chinese investors’
accounts are kept centrally at the stock exchanges, and it is illegal to sell short. An
exchange’s computer always checks an investor’s position before it executes a trade. This
trading system makes it very difficult for financial institutions to lend stocks to their
clients for short selling purposes. Moreover, there are no futures or option markets on
stocks in China.6
Normally, when equity prices exceed their fundamental values, companies will increase
the supply of equities to arbitrage the difference. Baker and Wurgler (2002) present strong
evidence of market timing by U.S. firms, showing that firms tend to issue equity when
their market value is high. This automatic market correction mechanism is impaired in
China because of the tight government control over IPOs and seasoned equity offerings
(SEOs). Chinese companies need government approval to sell their equity. The process
is highly political and companies often have to wait years for issuing shares. Strict
quotas, which generally bind, stop many qualifying companies from taking advantage of
favorable market conditions to sell their shares. Similarly, when equity prices fall below
their fundamental values, companies are also prevented from share buy-backs due to
restrictive Chinese corporate law.7
Stock trading was also new to most domestic participants. The Chinese stock market only resumed its operation in early 1990s after being shut down for nearly half a
century. In our sample period, it was dominated by individual investors. Investment
6
The government banned bond futures market in 1994 because of a price manipulation scandal and has also
put the development of equity derivatives markets on hold. So far, no equity derivatives have be legally traded
in China due to a lack of government approval.
7
It is worth noting that, while Chinese firms had almost no control over their IPO or SEO process, the Chinese
government does tend to issue more shares in a booming market. However, the issuance is often based on a long
waiting list whose order seems to be more related to politics than to relative valuations in the market place.
As a result, while the new issues approved by the government may take advantage of overall market conditions,
they are not meant to address relative mis-valuations in the marketplace. As late as 2002, a World Bank Report
states “...future decisions about which companies will access the market and when and where they will do so will
be based on market principles.” (Tenev, Zhang, and Brefort, 2002, page 111. The emphasis is ours.)

9

institutions such as mutual funds and pension funds were still in an early stage of development. According to a recent report of the World Bank “at the end of 1999, of the 30
percent of tradable shares, individuals held 25 percent and institutions held 5 percent”
(Tenev, Zhang, and Brefort, 2002, page 77). Feng and Seasholes (2003) summarize the
demographic information of a sample of 90,478 actively investing individuals in China,
and find that these individuals are much younger, and would have less investing/trading
experience when compared to a typical individual investor in U.S.
Given the lack of experience of a typical Chinese investor, it is reasonable to hypothesize that Chinese investors would often disagree about stock valuation and as a result
would involve in intensive speculative trading, just as many individual U.S. investors
speculated in internet stocks in late nineties.8 In the presence of strict short-sales constraints and less experienced individual investors, the mechanism described in Section 2
seems well suited, and we proceed to test its implications.
3.2

Twin Shares

A unique feature of the Chinese market is that several dozen companies issued “twin”
shares – two classes of common shares with identical voting and dividend rights, listed
on the same exchanges (Shanghai or Shenzhen stock exchanges), but traded by different
participants. Class A shares were restricted to domestic residents. Class B shares were
confined to foreigners before February 2001 when domestic residents were allowed to
purchase B shares using foreign currency. Even after the rule change, capital controls
continue to serve as a restriction for Chinese residents to acquire B shares. In the period
1993-2001, 75 companies had both class A and class B shares.
Our sample covers prices and other characteristics for all firms that listed both A and
B shares from 1993-2001. The data include daily closing prices, monthly returns (with
8
There are also psychological experiments indicating that overconfidence is more pronounced in the face of
more difficult tasks (Lichtenstein, Fischhoff, and Phillips, 1982). This evidence again motivates our hypothesis
that Chinese investors were more likely to display overconfidence and therefore be involved in speculative trading,
especially relative to the foreign institutional investors who invested in the Chinese B-share markets.

10

dividend reinvested), annual dividends and earnings per share, turnover, and the number
of floating shares.9 Our sample period of 1993 to 2001 covers the market slump from
1993-1995, a bull market in 1996-1997 and a stock boom from 1999-2001. There is also
the important regime change in February 2001, when the Chinese government changed
the regulations on B-shares, allowing domestic investors to legally own and trade them
if they have foreign currency.
Table 1 provides some simple comparison between A and B shares. The comparison
is based on matching A and B shares of the same companies in the sample. While there
were about 1250 firms on the two exchanges, only 75 firms issued both A and B shares. It
is worth noting that the issuance of both shares are usually not determined by the firm,
but by central government policies. A shares were more actively traded than B shares.
A shares turned over on average at a monthly rate of 47.4%, which is equivalent to an
annual rate of 569%. A-share turnover rate is four times that of B shares (10.7% per
month or 128% per year) during the sample period. There was also more cross-sectional
variation of turnover in A shares than in B shares. The average cross-sectional variation
of monthly turnover in A shares was 18.5% compared to 5.3% for B shares.
Table 1 also provides some simple statistics on the A-share price premium over the
corresponding B share. On average, A shares fetched a 421.8% premium over B shares,
even though they were entitled to the same legal rights and claim to dividends.10 The
presence of such a large domestic share premium is quite different from many other
emerging and developed markets where domestic shares generally sell at a discount. Hietala (1989), Bailey and Jagtiani (1994), and Stulz and Wasserfallen (1993) have found
a price discount for domestic shares in Finland, Thailand and Switzerland. Typically in
9

The data are obtained from Shenzhen GTA Information Technology Inc., which has recently reached an
cooperative agreement with Wharton Research Data Service (WRDS) to incorporate GTA research databases
on China’s security markets into the WRDS. We have also confirmed part of our data from GTA with the data
that we received from another source, Boshi Fund Management Company.
10
Since B shares were traded in dollars and A shares in Yuans, the difference depends on the exchange rate.
We used the official rate of the Bank of China. A black market rate would lower the average premium, but would
not affect the cross sectional results that we emphasize. In fact, according to Reinhart and Rogoff (2002), the
premium in the black market rate was in single digits during the period 1994-2001.

11

these countries a class of restricted shares is offered to local investors only, and another
class of unrestricted shares are offered to both local and foreign investors. The restricted
local shares usually sell at a discount. However, both China’s A and B shares are restricted shares especially before the B shares were opened to local investors in February
2001. Even after February 2001, Chinese capital controls still imposed restrictions on the
ownership of B shares by local investors.
Figure 2 presents a graphic plot of the equally weighted average A shares premium
over time. The premium rose from 300% in April 1993 to about 800% in March 1999
and then fell to 100% at the end of 2001. The relaxation of restrictions on purchase
of B shares by domestic investors in February 2001 did not eliminate all premia and it
remained at a level around 80%, since domestic Chinese investors have limited access to
the necessary foreign currency.11 Figure 2 also provides the number of firms used in our
study of A-B premia. This number changes over time because of listings and de-listings,
and grows from less than 10 to over 70 in the sample period.
In addition to their large magnitude, the A-B share premia also vary dramatically
across firms. The average (over time) cross-sectional standard deviation of the premia
is 167%. This compares with a (time-series) standard deviation of the average monthly
premium of 193% during the same period. Figure 3 plots the cross-sectional standard
deviation of price premia over time. It fluctuates from 50% to over 400%. In the empirical
analysis that follows, we focus on explaining the cross-sectional variation of the premia
based on A-share investors’ speculative motive.

4

Empirical Analysis

Could the existence of a speculative component help explain the large variation of premia
on A shares? In this section, we test this view. We analyze the cross-sectional association
11

The only legal source of foreign currency for domestic investors is remittance from overseas. Recently, the
government has somewhat relaxed its currency control, allowing people to exchange limited amount of foreign
currency for overseas travel.

12

between the A-B share premium, share turnover rate, and asset float as discussed in
Section 2. We also introduce several controls, including firms’ risk characteristics and
measures of liquidity. In addition, we present results from a panel regression that controls
for firm and time fixed effects.
4.1

Speculative Trading and Cross-sectional Variation of A-B Share Premia

As argued in Section 2, the A-share price of a firm (the i-th firm), PiA , can be decomposed
as the sum of two components, a fundamental component and a speculative component.
The fundamental component is the current expected value of discounted future dividends
adjusted for risk premium and we assume that, in analogy to Gordon’s Growth Formula,
it can be written as

Ei
A −g ,
Rit
i

where Ei is the expectation of current (unobservable) earnings,

gi its growth rate and RitA the discount rate that applies. Hence the firm’s A-share price
is
PitA =

Ei
+ SitA ,
− gi

RitA

where SitA is the speculative component in the price of the firm’s A share. This component
depends on the volatility of the difference in beliefs among the Chinese investors about the
firm’s fundamental value and on the float of the firm’s A shares, among other variables.
In turn, the discount rate is given by,
RitA = rChina,t + µA
i
where rChina,t is the domestic interest rate available to Chinese investors and µA
i is the
risk premium which could be determined by the firm’s risk characteristics.
Similarly, the B-share price of the firm, which is traded by foreign investors, can be
written as
PitB =

Ei
+ SitB ,
− gi

RitB

where SitB is the speculative component in the B-share market. This speculative component in B-shares is positive if foreign investors also display heterogeneous beliefs about
13

the fundamental value of the firm. In this case, SitB depends on the volatility of the difference in beliefs among the foreign investors, and on the float of B-shares. The discount
rate RitB is given by
RitB = rW orld,t + µB
i ,
with rW orld,t as the world interest rate and µB
i as the risk premium, which should be
influenced by the firm’s risk profile and China’s sovereign risk premium.
For simplicity, we will assume first that the B-share price provides a reasonable measure of the fundamental component of the firm value, that is SitB = 0. Later we will treat
the case when SitB > 0. Thus, a firm’s A and B share premium can be expressed as
ρit =

PitA − PitB
RitB − gi
SitA
=
− 1.
+
PitB
RitA − gi PitB

(1)

If we ignore the difference in the discount rates for A and B shares, then
ρit ∝

SitA
.
PitB

We start with this simplification, although we will bring back later the term involving
the difference in discount rates.
Hypothesis 1 in Section 2 claims that, as the volatility of the difference in beliefs of the
domestic investors who trade a firm’s A shares changes, the speculative component SitA
and the turnover rate of A shares move in the same direction. There are several reasons
why the volatility of the difference in investors’ beliefs would vary across stocks. First,
since the A-share markets are dominated by individual investors, each stock is likely to
have a different investor base at a given point of time. Second, individuals could display different degrees of overconfidence with respect to information related to individual
stocks. Finally, assets may also differ in the amount of fundamental uncertainty that
creates room for investors’ beliefs to diverge. Thus, we predict a positive association
between the A-B share premium and the A-share turnover rate.

14

Since turnover rates are highly persistent over time and it is difficult to remove this
persistence (Lo and Wang, 2000), we focus on explaining the cross-sectional variation
of A-B share premia. To examine this correlation, we run the following cross-sectional
regression of end-of-month A-B premia on monthly average turnover rates:
ρit = c0t + c1t τitA + c2t τitB + it ,

(2)

where τitA = log(1 + turnoveritA ) and τitB = log(1 + turnoveritB ). Here, we expect the
coefficient c1t to be positive. We incorporate the turnover of B shares in the regression,
since it is possible that a speculative component may also exist in B shares (SitB > 0).
If this is the case, we expect a positive relationship between SitB and τitB since both are
generated by heterogeneous beliefs among the foreign investors who trade the firm’s B
shares, and the coefficient c2t should be negative.
The results of this regression are reported in Table 2.12 In the period that precedes
the liberalization of B-shares trading to domestic investors and that is covered by our
data, April 1993 to December 2000, A- and B-share turnover explain on average 25% of
the cross-sectional variation in A-B share premium. The average c1t , the coefficient on
A-share turnover, is positive and significant with a Fama-MacBeth t-statistics of 6.7,13
and A-share turnover explains 20% of the cross sectional variation of the premium. A 5%
increase in A-share turnover is associated with an increase in excess of 21% of a stock’s
A-B premium. The coefficient of B-share turnover, c2t , is not statistically significant.14
The positive and significant effect of A-share turnover on A-B premium supports our
main hypothesis that A-share investors’ speculative motive contributed a speculative
component to A-share prices. Figure 3 illustrates how the time series variation of the
(cross-sectional) standard deviation of the premia is explained by the turnover rates of
12
Since high turnover and high prices are often observed immediately after IPOs, we only include firms in our
panel one year after their IPOs.
13
The Fama-MacBeth t-stat is computed by the average of the coefficients divided by the modified standard
error calculated as in Petersen (2005) to control for different sample sizes.
14
Although the point estimate is positive it is not significant at conventional levels. Furthermore the panel
regressions that appear below yield a negative and significant estimate.

15

A and B shares.
4.2

Controlling for Liquidity

It may be argued that the relation between A-share turnover and A-B premium is related
to market liquidity of A shares.15 If a firm’s A shares are relatively more liquid, investors
will trade more and may be willing to pay more for these shares, because of the smaller
transaction cost. As such, cross-sectional difference in liquidity could also generate a
positive relationship between A-share turnover and A-B premium.
In reality, liquidity is unlikely to explain much of the the cross-sectional variation
of A-share prices. As discussed earlier, A-share markets were dominated by individual
investors. Domestic investment institutions such as mutual funds and pension funds were
not fully developed. The observed turnover and the likely demand by individual investors
indicate that liquidity was not a problem. On the other hand, liquidity might have been
a problem for foreign institutions who invested in the B-share markets.
Nonetheless, we control for the effects of liquidity in the A-B share premia, using the
proportion of no-price-change days of a stock over a month as a measure of liquidity.
Lesmond, Ogden, and Trzcinka (1999) use this variable to measure liquidity for NYSE
stocks, and find that it is highly correlated with other liquidity estimators such as quoted
bid-ask spread and Roll’s measure of the effective spread. Recently, Bekaert, Harvey, and
Lundblad (2003) suggest that this measure is particularly useful in emerging markets
where direct measures of trading cost such as bid-ask spreads are usually not available.
They find that the fraction of no-price-change days is significant in explaining expected
stock returns using data of 19 developing countries (China not included). On the other
hand, they find that share turnover rates are not significant.
We obtained daily return data for the period 1995-2001. Table 1 shows that A shares
15
Liquidity is an important factor in explaining cross-sectional differences in stock prices and stock returns.
For example, see Amihud and Mendelson (1986), and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) for U.S. stock prices and
returns, Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2003) for emerging market stock returns, and Chen and Xiong (2002)
for prices of Chinese non-tradable shares.

16

averaged only 2.1% of trading days with no price changes in this period, while the corresponding B shares averaged 14.3%. This suggests that B shares are more illiquid than
A shares.
Panel A of Table 3 reports the cross-sectional regression of A-B share premium on
the turnover rates of A-shares and B-shares, and the corresponding proportion of noprice-change days, denoted by zitA and zitB , for the period 1995-2000 that precedes the
liberalization of B-shares. A comparison with Table 2 shows that using our control for
liquidity does not change much the coefficients of A-share and B-share turnover rates.
This is an indication that the effects of turnover rates of the A shares on A-B share
premium does not result from the demand for liquidity.
The proportion of no-price-change days of B shares has a significant and positive
effect on the A-B share premium. This indicates that liquidity is relevant for B-share
prices and is consistent with the results in Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2003) for
other emerging markets. The proportion of no-price-change days in A-shares is not
statistically significant for the determination of the A-B premia. This agrees with our
earlier argument that illiquidity in A markets is not important. Panel B of Table 3
provides similar results by regressing A-B share premium on zitA and zitB only. Dropping
the turnover variables does not change much the point estimates of the no-trade days
coefficients.
4.3

Effects of Asset Float on Turnover

To further differentiate the effects of speculative trading and liquidity reasons, we examine
the relation between the turnover rate of shares and asset float in both A-share markets
and B-share markets.
Hypothesis 2 in Section 2 suggests that share turnover generated by investors’ speculative motive decreases with asset float. This is because when investors are risk averse,
a larger asset float implies that it takes a greater divergence in beliefs for asset owners

17

to resell their shares at a given price in the future.16
On the other hand, hypothesis 3 suggests that share turnover is positively related to
asset float if liquidity reasons are important. As float increases, it is easier for buyers to
match with sellers, thus causing the turnover rate to increase.17
We examine the effect of float on A-share turnover by running the following crosssectional regression:
τitA = α0t + α1t log(F loatA
i,t−1 ) + it .
The float is measured by the market valuation of all publicly available shares. The results
are shown in Table 4 for the period April 1993 to December 2000. Panel A shows that
a firm’s A-share turnover decreases with its float, which is consistent with hypothesis 2,
and the coefficient is significant.
A corresponding regression is conducted for B-share turnover and is reported in Panel
B. It indicates that, in the same period, a firm’s B-share turnover increases with its own
float, and that the coefficient is also significant. The positive relation between B-share
turnover and B-share float is consistent with a liquidity story, as opposed to a purely
speculative trading theory. B shares are usually less liquid than A shares. When a firm’s
B-share float becomes larger, more foreign investors (especially foreign institutions) will
be interested in trading in this share, and liquidity improves. As a result, shares are
turned over faster. The different nature of A-share and B-share turnover is consistent with
our earlier result that speculative trading is important for A-share prices but liquidity is
important for B-share prices.
16
Such a prediction is consistent with the observation by Ofek and Richardson (2003) on the U.S. technology
bubble. The turnover rates of internet stocks dried up after a dramatic expansion in the float of shares in the
spring of 2000, due to insiders’ selling after the expiration of lock-ups.
17
A positive correlation between share turnover and asset float is supported by empirical analysis on liquidity
trading. For example, Amihud and Mendelson (1991) attribute the difference in the liquidity between on-the-run
treasury bonds and off-the-run bonds to the holding of off-the-run bonds by entities such as insurance companies
that typically do not trade. Chordia, Subrahmanyam and Anshuman (2001) provide evidence of a positive link
between firm size, liquidity and turnover in U.S. stocks.

18

4.4

Other Determinants of A-B Share Premia

Besides speculation and liquidity, the A-B share premia should also be driven by differential demand curves of domestic and foreign investors, or equivalently different risks on
a firm’s returns. To control for these effects, we incorporate various risk measures18 of
both A-shares and B-shares into the cross-sectional regression for A-B premia:
ρit = c0t + c1t τitA + c2t τitB + c3t Cov(RBi , RF ) + c4t Cov(RBi , RB )

(3)

+c5t Cov(RAi , RA ) + c6t V ar(RAi ) + it .
The covariances of a firm’s B share returns with the Morgan Stanley world return index,
RF , and China’s B-share return index, RB , are measures of risk in B-share markets.
We measure systematic risk and firm specific risk in A-share markets by the covariance
between a firm’s A-share returns and China’s A-share return index, Cov(RAi , RA ), and
the variance of the firm’s A-share returns, V ar(RAi ).
The regression results are reported in Table 5 for the period April 1993 to December
2000. A-share turnover is still highly significant with a t-stat of 5.9, and it explains 15.5%
of the cross-sectional variations in A-B share premium. Furthermore, the impact of a
one standard deviation of A-share turnover has at least five times the impact of a one
standard deviation of any of the four risk measures.
4.5

Panel Regressions

The Fama-MacBeth estimates do not account for firm specific effects, and this may result
in an underestimation of standard errors (Petersen, 2005.) As a further robustness check,
we use a panel regression approach that includes firm and time effects. The following
parsimonious form is employed:
ρit = ui + c0t + c1 τitA + c2 τitB + it .
18

These risk measures were the ones used by Eun, Janakiramanan and Lee (2001).

19

(4)

The terms ui and c0t come from linearizing the term

B −g
Rit
i
A −g
Rit
i

in equation (1). The ui s deal

with cross-sectional differences in firms’ characteristics and the c0t s time-series variables
such as Chinese and world interest rates, equity premia and China’s political risks.
Table 6 summarizes the estimates. For the model described by equation (4), the
panel regression estimate of the coefficient of A-share turnover is about half of the FamaMacBeth regression estimate in Table 2, but still highly significant with a t-stat exceeding
16. Our point estimate of the coefficient of B-share turnover is now negative and significant. This suggests either the existence of a speculative component in B shares or the
presence of time-varying firm specific liquidity. Since, unless there are omitted variables,
a random effects estimate would yield gains in efficiency, we also present the (almost
identical) results of a random firm effects model, that assumes that firm effects are uncorrelated cross-sectionally. A specification test described by Hausman (1978)19 fails to
reject this restriction.20
Equation (1) suggests that the time effect term, c0t , incorporates the effects of variables such as Chinese interest rates, world interest rates, and the risk premium from
China’s political risk.21 For this reason, we examine the following specification for the
time effect coefficient:
c0t = ϑ0 + ϑ1 rChina + ϑ2 rW orld + ϑ3 iChinaSprd + t .
Intuitively, an increase in Chinese interest rates should lower the A-share prices, and
we should expect ϑ1 to be negative. Similarly an increase in world interest rates should
lower B-share prices, predicting a positive ϑ2 . Here we use the Chinese three-month
deposit rate to proxy for Chinese risk free rate rChina and US three-month Treasury bill
rate for world interest rate rW orld . Moreover, an increase in China’s political/sovereign
19

See also Wu (1973).
We also conducted several other robustness checks for which we do not report detailed estimates. For
instance, the Hausman test rejects a model with random time effects. In addition, both a Durbin-Watson test,
as modified by Bhargava et al. (1982), and a Baltagi-Wu (1999) test fail to reject the hypothesis that the errors
in our panel estimates are independent across time.
21
Since ex-ante risk premia are difficult to measure, we ignore the Chinese and world market equity risk premia.
20

20

risk, which we proxy by using the spread between Chinese long-term bond and US 10-year
bond (iChinasprd ), should also lower B-share prices, yielding a positive ϑ3 .22
Table 7 presents the results for the time period February 1994-December 2000,23
using c0t estimated from specification I of our panel regression. The R2 is 85%, ϑ1 and
ϑ3 have the right signs and are highly significant, while ϑ2 has the right sign but is
not statistically significant. Hence the time effect is well described by a combination of
Chinese interest rates, world interest rates and a measure of the political risks, and each
of these variables contributes with the expected sign, as consistent with the finding of
Fernald and Rogers (2002). While our results from the panel regressions support the
importance of the discount rates and political risk in explaining the A-B share premium,
they also demonstrate that the effect of A-share turnover still holds even after controlling
for these other variables.

5

A Natural Experiment

On February 28, 2001, the Chinese government opened the markets for B shares to
domestic investors, provided they used foreign currency. Here we examine whether the
relationship among A-B share premium, share turnover and asset float changed after the
regulatory shift.24
Table 8 reports the market reaction to the changes. Panel A shows that from February
16, 2001 to March 9, 2001, A-share prices decreased on average 0.5%, and the drop is
statistically insignificant, with a standard deviation of 22%. On the other hand, B-share
prices increased 63% on average and the increase is significant with a standard deviation
of only 7.3%. Therefore, most price reaction came from B shares. Panel B shows the
change in B share turnover rates around the change in regulation. Before the event, B
shares have an average monthly turnover of 12.3%, while post-event it becomes 44.4%,
22

Kim and Mei (2001) show that China’s political risk negatively affects stock prices in Hong Kong.
Our sample here is shorter, since the Chinese Long-term bond data starts on February 1994.
24
Karolyi and Li (2003) and Chan, Menkveld and Yang (2003) also study this rule change. Their focus is on
the effects of liquidity and information asymmetry on the A-B share premium.
23

21

which is similar to the A-share turnover rate reported in Table 1. These observations
indicate that after allowing Chinese domestic investors to buy B shares, these shares
behaved more like A shares, turning over faster and with higher prices.
To further investigate the behavior of B-share markets after February 2001, we repeat
the cross-sectional regression of Tables 2 and 3 (regressing A-B premium to A-share and
B-share turnover) for the period of March 2001 to December 2001. The results are
reported in Part I of Table 9. The coefficient of A-share turnover is still positive and
significant, while the coefficient of B-share turnover becomes negative and significant, in
contrast to the results for the earlier period shown in Tables 2 and 3. This suggests that
a speculative component might have appeared in B-share prices after the rule change.
These results remain unchanged after we control for liquidity using the proportion of noprice-change days. In addition, we note that the coefficient of B-share liquidity becomes
insignificant, in contrast to the positive and significant result for the earlier period. This
indicates that liquidity may no longer be a main determinant of B-share prices after the
increase in trading volume that followed the liberalization.
Part II of Table 9 repeats the same cross-sectional regression in Table 4 (regressing A
and B-share turnover rates on their float) after the rule change. This time, while the Ashare coefficient remains negative, the B share coefficient turns negative and significant,
which is the opposite of the positive coefficient found for the period before the event as
shown in Table 4.25 A negative association between turnover and float suggests that after
the opening of B-shares markets to local investors, trading in B-share markets is driven
more by speculation than by liquidity reasons.
Overall, our analysis of the 2001 relaxation of B-share restrictions shows that while
A-share markets were barely affected, B-share prices and turnover rates went up dramatically, indicating that speculation by domestic investors may have become an important
25

To see whether there is a significant coefficient change post liberalization, Table 9 also provides a simple
t-test by comparing the mean coefficient estimates post liberalization to the corresponding mean estimates before
liberalization. The results in Part II show that while the coefficient change in A share float is insignificant, the
coefficient change in B share float is highly significant.

22

factor in B-share markets after the entrance of domestic investors.

6

Conclusion

We analyze a data sample from a market with perfectly segmented dual-class shares to
test implications from the presence of short-sales constraints and heterogeneous beliefs
on asset prices and trading volume. Using the prices of the foreign shares to control for
variations in firms’ fundamentals, we find several results consistent with the existence
of a speculative component in the prices of domestic shares. First, the price difference
between a firm’s domestic and foreign shares is positively related to the turnover rate
of the domestic share. Second, this positive association still holds after controlling for
several alternative effects, such as liquidity, risk premium, and discount rates. Third,
the turnover rate of domestic shares decreases with their float. We also provide further
evidence through an analysis of a policy shift.
In many aspects, the price dynamics of the newly emerged Chinese market resembled
the technology bubble in the U.S. Our paper, using an entirely different data source,
confirms that investors’ speculative trading is an important determinant of stock prices
during bubbles, e.g., Cochrane (2003), Lamont and Thaler (2003) and Ofek and Richardson (2003).

23

References
[1] Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson, 1986, Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask Spread, Journal of
Financial Economics 17, 223-249.
[2] Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson, 1991, Liquidity, Maturity, and the Yields on the U.S.
Treasury Securities, Journal of Finance 46, 1411-1425.
[3] Bailey, W., and J. Jagtiani, 1994, Foreign Ownership Restrictions and Stock Prices in the
Thai Capital Market, Journal of Financial Economics 36, 57-87
[4] Baker, M. and J. Wurgler, 2002, Market Timing and Capital Structure, Journal of Finance
57, 1-32.
[5] Baltagi, B. and P. Wu, 1999, Unequally Spaced Panel Data Regressions with AR (1)
Disturbances, Econometric Theory 15, 814-823.
[6] Barberis, N. and R. Thaler, 2003, A Survey of Behavioral Finance, in Handbook of the Economics of Finance, edited by G. Constantinides, M. Harris and R. Stulz, North-Holland.
[7] Bekaert, G., C. Harvey, and C. Lundblad, 2003, Liquidity and Expected Returns: Lessons
from Emerging Markets, Working Paper.
[8] Bhargava, A., L. Franzini, abd W. Narendranathan, 1982, Serial Correlation and the Fixed
Effects Model, Review of Economic Studies 49, 533-49.
[9] Chan, K.A., A.J. Menkveld, and Z. Yang, 2003, Evidence on the Foreign Share Discount
Puzzle in China: Liquidity or Information Asymmetry? Working Paper.
[10] Chen, J., H. Hong, and J. Stein, 2002, Breadth of Ownership and Stock Returns, Journal
of Financial Economics 66, 171-205.
[11] Chen, Z. and P. Xiong, 2002, Discounts on Illiquid Stocks: Evidence from China, Working
paper.
[12] Chordia, T., A. Subrahmanyam and V. Anshuman, 2001, Trading Activity and Expected
Stock Returns, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 3-32.
[13] Cochrane, John, 2003, Stocks as money: convenience yield and the tech-stock bubble,
NBER Working Paper 8987 and in William C. Hunter, George G. Kaufman and Michael
Pomerleano, Ed.: Asset Price Bubbles (MIT Press, Cambridge).
[14] Daniel, K., D. Hirshleifer and S. H. Teoh, 2002, Investor Psychology in Capital Markets:
Evidence and Policy Implications, Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 139-209.
[15] Diether, K., C. Malloy, and A. Scherbina (2002), Differences of opinion and the cross
section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.
[16] Duffie, D., N. Garleanu and L. Pedersen, 2002, Securities Lending, Shorting, and Pricing,
Journal of Financial Economics 66, 307-339.
[17] Duffie, D., N. Garleanu and L. Pedersen, 2003, Over-the-Counter Markets, Econometrica,
forthcoming.
[18] Eun, C., S. Janakiramanan, and B. Lee, 2001, The Chinese Discount Puzzle, Working
Paper.
24

[19] Fama, E. and J. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests, Journal
of Political Economy 81, 607-636.
[20] Feng, L. and M. Seasholes, 2003, A Profile of Individual Investors in an Emerging Stock
Market, Working Paper.
[21] Fernald, J. and J. Rogers, 2002, Puzzles in the Chinese Stock Market, Review of Economics
and Statistics 84, 416-432.
[22] Froot, K. and E. Dabora, 1999, How Are Stock Prices Affected by the Location of Trade?
Journal of Financial Economics 53, 189-216.
[23] Gao, S., 2002, China Stock Market in a Global Perspective, Research report, Dow Jones.
[24] Greene, W., 2002, Econometric Analysis, Prentice Hall.
[25] Harrison, M. and D. Kreps, 1978, Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock Market with
Heterogeneous Expectations, Quarterly Journal of Economics 92, 323-336.
[26] Hausman, J., 1978, Specification Tests in Econometrics, Econometrica 46, 1251-71.
[27] Hietala, P., 1989. Asset Pricing in Partially Segmented Markets: Evidence from the Finnish
Market, Journal of Finance 44, 697-718.
[28] Hong, H., J. Scheinkman, and W. Xiong, 2004, Asset Float and Speculative Bubbles,
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
[29] Jones, C. and O. Lamont, 2002, Short-Sale Constraints and Stock Returns, Journal of
Financial Economics 66, 207-239.
[30] Karolyi, A. and L. Li, 2003, A Resolution of the Chinese Discount Puzzle, Working Paper.
[31] Kim, K and J. Mei, 2001, What Makes the Stock Market Jump?—An Analysis of Political
Risk on the Hong Kong Stock Returns, Journal of International Money and Finance,
1003-1016.
[32] Lamont, O. and R. Thaler, 2003, Can the Market Add and Subtract? Mispricing in Tech
Stock Carve-outs, Journal of Political Economy 111, 227-268.
[33] Lee, C., A. Shleifer and R. Thaler, 1991, Investor Sentiment and the Closed-End Fund
Puzzle, Journal of Finance 46, 75-110.
[34] Lesmond, D., J.P. Ogden, and C. Trzcinka, 1999, A New Estimate of Transaction Costs,
Review of Financial Studies 12, 1113-1141.
[35] Lichtenstein, S., B. Fischhoff, and L. Phillips, 1982, Calibration of Probabilities: The State
of the Art to 1980, in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky, ed.: Judgement
under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
[36] Lo, A., and J. Wang, 2000, Trading Volume: Definitions, Data Analysis, and Implications
of Portfolio Theory, Review of Financial Studies, 13, 257-300.
[37] Morris, S., 1996, Speculative Investor Behavior and Learning, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 1111-1133.
[38] Ofek, E. and M. Richardson, 2003, Dotcom Mania: The Rise and Fall of Internet Stock
Prices, Journal of Finance 58, 1113-1137.
25

[39] Pastor, L. and R. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns, Journal
of Political Economy 111, 642-685.
[40] Petersen, M., 2005, Estimating Standard Error in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
Approaches, NBER Working paper 11280.
[41] Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff, 2002, The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements:
A Reinterpretation, Working paper, IMF.
[42] Scheinkman, J. and W. Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles, Journal of
Political Economy 111, 1183-1219.
[43] Stulz, R.M. and W. Wasserfallen, 1995, Foreign Equity Investment Restrictions and Shareholder Wealth Maximization: Theory and Evidence, Review of Financial Studies, 10191057.
[44] Tenev, S., C. Zhang, and L. Brefort, 2002, Corporate Governance and Enterprise Reform
in China, The World Bank and the International Finance Corporation.
[45] Weill, P. 2003, Liquidity Premia in Dynamic Bargaining Markets, Working paper.
[46] Wu, D. M., 1973 Alternative Tests of Independence between Stochastic Regressors and
Disturbances, Econometrica 41 (4), 733-750.
[47] Vayanos, D. and T. Wang, 2003, Search and Endogenous Concentration of Liquidity in
Asset Markets, Working paper.

26

Table 1. Summary Statistics of A-B Pairs
This table provides summary statistics for all firms that had issued both A-shares and B-shares
between April 1993 and December 2001. There were 75 such firms. The share turnover is
calculated as the monthly trading volume divided by the number of floating shares, the logarithm
of asset float is based on the market value of floating shares, and the premium is defined as the
ratio of A-share price over B-share price minus one. These three variables are available for the
period April 1993 – December 2001. The fraction of no-price-change days is calculated directly
from daily prices for the sample period January 1995 – December 2001. The Cross-sectional STD
of a variable is calculated as the time average of cross-sectional standard deviation.

Mean

Cross-sectional STD

Turnover

Log (asset

(monthly)

float)

A

47.4%

19.63

B

10.7%

19.13

A

18.5%

0.801

B

5.3%

0.909

27

Premium

% of No-pricechange Days

421.8%

2.1%
14.3%

167.3%

3.0%
11.8%

Table 2. Cross-Sectional Regressions of A-B Share Premium
(Monthly, April 1993 - December 2000)
This table presents a summary of the following monthly cross-sectional regressions:

ρ it = c 0 t + c1tτ itA + c 2 tτ itB + ε it ,
where ρ it is the A-B share premium for firm i in month t, τ itA = log( 1 + turnover

τ

B
it

= log( 1 + turnover

B
it

A
it

),

) . The reported coefficients are the time-series average of monthly

estimates, weighted by the number of observations each month. The Fama-MacBeth t-stat is
computed by the weighted average of the coefficients divided by the modified standard error as in
Petersen (2005) to control for different sample sizes. Average Marginal R2 is the time-series
average of marginal R2 of the monthly cross-sectional regressions.

c0t

c1t

c2t

Average Adj.R2

Average Coefficient

3.777

4.259

1.731

0.255

FM t-Stat

24.72

6.734

1.098

-

0.203

0.046

Average Marginal R2

28

Table 3. Cross-Sectional Regressions of A-B Share Premium
(Monthly, January 1995 - December 2000)
This table presents a summary of the following monthly cross-sectional regressions:

ρ it = c 0 t + c1tτ itA + c 2 tτ itB + c 3 t z itA + c 4 t z itB + ε it
where ρ it is the A-B share premium for firm i in month t, τ itA = log( 1 + turnover

τ

B
it

= log( 1 + turnover

B
it

A
it

),

A
it

) , z is the proportion of no-price-change days for the A-shares of

firm i in month t, and z itB is the proportion of no-price-change days for the B-shares of firm i in
month t. The reported coefficients are the time-series average of monthly estimates, weighted by
the number of observations each month. The Fama-MacBeth t-stat is computed by the weighted
average of the coefficients divided by the modified standard error as in Petersen (2005) to control
for different sample sizes. Average Marginal R2 is the time-series average of marginal R2 of the
monthly cross-sectional regressions.

A. Turnover and No-price-change Days

Average Coefficient
FM t-Stat
2

Average Marginal R

c0t

c1t

c2t

c3t

c4t

Average Adj.R2

3.498

4.559

1.599

2.018

3.586

0.270

22.499 6.444

1.021

1.318

6.944

0.032

0.027

0.044

-

0.157

B. No-price-change Days Only
c0t

c1t

c2t

c3t

c4t

Average Adj.R2
0.091

Average Coefficient

4.622

2.215

4.557

FM t-Stat

23.08

1.376

8.091

-

0.029

0.060

Average Marginal R2

29

Table 4. Cross-Sectional Relation between Turnover and Asset Float
(Monthly, April 1993 - December 2000)
This table presents monthly cross-sectional regression of A-share turnover and B-share turnover,
τ itA = log( 1 + turnover itA ) and τ itB = log( 1 + turnover itB ), on the corresponding asset float.
Asset float is measured by the market valuation of all floating shares. The reported coefficients
are the time-series average of monthly estimates, weighted by the number of observations each
month. The Fama-MacBeth t-stat is computed by the weighted average of the coefficients divided
by the modified standard error as in Petersen (2005) to control for different sample sizes. Average
Marginal R2 is the time-series average of marginal R2 of the monthly cross-sectional regressions.

A. Summary of Cross-Sectional Regressions for A shares

τ itA = α 0 t + α 1t Log ( Float iA,t −1 ) + ε it
α0t

α1t

Average Adj.R2

Average Coeff.

1.408

-0.054

0.125

FM t-Stat

7.776

-5.854

B. Summary of Cross-Sectional Regressions for B shares

τ itB = α 0 t + α 1t Log ( Float iB,t −1 ) + ε it
α0t

α1t

Average Adj.R2

Average Coeff.

0.001

0.003

0.067

FM t-Stat

0.049

2.436

30

Table 5. Cross-Sectional Regressions of A-B Premium
(Monthly, April 1993 - December 2000)
This table presents a summary of the following monthly cross-sectional regressions:

ρit = c0t + c1tτ itA + c2tτ itB + c3t Cov( RBi , RF ) + c4t Cov( RBi , RB ) + c5t Cov( RAi , RA ) + c6tVar( RAi ) + ε it
where ρ it is the A-B share premium for firm i in month t, τ itA = log( 1 + turnover

τ itB = log( 1 + turnover

B
it

A
it

),

) , Cov( RBi , RF ) is the covariance between a firm’s B-share return

and the Morgan Stanley world return index, Cov( RBi , RB ) is the covariance between a firm’s Bshare return and the B-share return index, Cov( RAi , RA ) is the covariance between a firm’s Ashare return and the A-share return index, and Var ( R Ai ) is the variance of a firm’s A-share
return. The reported coefficients are the time-series average of monthly estimates, weighted by
the number of observations each month. The Fama-MacBeth t-stat is computed by the weighted
average of the coefficients divided by the modified standard error as in Petersen (2005) to control
for different sample sizes. Average Marginal R2 is the time-series average of marginal R2 of the
monthly cross-sectional regressions.

c0t

c1t

c2t

c3t

c4t

c5t

c6t

Average Adj.R2

Average Coefficient

4.136

2.642

2.426

15.597

-14.16

7.039

0.045

0.263

FM t-Stat

26.026

5.896

1.456

4.64

-19.91

3.559

0.192

0.155

0.041

0.013

0.03

0.02

0.009

2

Average Marginal R

31

Table 6. Panel Regression of A-B premium
(Monthly, April 1993-December 2000)
This table presents estimates for the following panel regression:

ρ it = u i + c 0 t + c1τ itA + c 2τ itB + ε it
where ρ it is the A-B share premium for firm i in month t, τ itA = log( 1 + turnover

A
it

) and

τ = log( 1 + turnover ) . The estimation is based on an unbalanced panel of 75 stocks
from April 1993 to December 2000. Specification I allows time effects and firm fixed
effects, while Specification II allows time effects and firm random effects. The economic
significance is defined as the parameter estimate multiplied by the standard deviation of
the exogenous variable and then dividend by the standard deviation of the dependent
variable. The specification test is the χ2 test proposed by Hausman (1978).
B
it

B
it

c1

c2

Adjusted R2
0.702

I. Time effects and firm

Coeff.

1.597

-1.203

effects

t-Stat

16.740

-3.400

Economic Significance

0.164

-0.059

II. Time effects and

Coeff.

1.623

-1.205

random firm effects

t-Stat

16.950

-3.390

Economic Significance

0.166

-0.059

Specification Test against A: χ2= 0.00

32

0.702

Not Rejected

Table 7. Explaining the Time Variation of c0t
(Monthly, February 1994-December 2000)
This table presents estimates of the time-series regression:

c 0 t = ϑ 0 + ϑ 1 rChina + ϑ 2 rworld + ϑ 3 i ChinaSprd + ε t
where c0t is the time-effect coefficient from the panel regression in Table 7 (specification I) of
A-B share premium on A and B share turnover, rChina is the Chinese 3-month deposit rate, rworld
is the U.S. 3-month treasury rate, and iChinaSprd is the spread between Chinese long-term bond and
U.S. 10-year treasury bond. The t-statistics are computed using Newey-West autocorrelationconsistent standard errors with 6 lags.

ϑ0

ϑ1

ϑ2

ϑ3

Adj. R2

Coefficient

-1.866

-0.683

0.187

2.473

0.851

t-Stat

-1.355

-11.02

1.02

9.806

33

Table 8. Market Reactions to the Event of Opening B Shares to Domestic Investors
in February 2001
This table presents a summary of market reactions to the opening of B shares to Chinese domestic
investors on February 28, 2001.

A. Price reactions (2/16/2001 – 3/09/2001)
N

Mean

STD

A share price changes

73

-0.5%

22%

B share price changes

73

63%

7.3%

B. Changes in monthly turnover of B shares (6 months before and after)
N

Mean

Median

STD

Pre-event turnover

73

12.3%

10.5%

7.7%

Post-event turnover

73

44.4%

44.7%

15.8%

Ratio (Post/Pre)

73

3.62

4.25

2.06

34

Table 9. Regression Results after the Opening of B shares
(Monthly, March 2001 - December 2001)
This table summarizes several cross-sectional regressions for the period after the opening of Bshares. The reported coefficients are the time-series average of monthly estimates, weighted by
the number of observations each month. The Fama-MacBeth t-stat is computed by the weighted
average of the coefficients divided by the modified standard error as in Petersen (2005) to control
for different sample sizes. Average Marginal R2 is the time-series average of marginal R2 of the
monthly cross-sectional regressions. We also provide a t-test of significance of the coefficient
change post liberalization.

Part I: Cross-Sectional Regression of A-B Share Premium
This part reports estimates for the following regression:

ρ it =

PitA − PitB

= c 0 t + c 1t τ itA + c 2 t τ itB + c 3 t z itA + c 4 t z itB + ε it

PitB

where τ itA = log( 1 + turnover

A
it

) , τ itB = log( 1 + turnover

B
it

) , z itA is the proportion of no-

price-change days for the A-shares of firm i in month t, and z itB is the proportion of no-pricechange days for the B-shares of firm i in month t.

A. Turnover Only
c0t

c1t

c2t

Average Coefficient

1.975

0.406

-0.433

FM t-Stat

20.223

2.927

-2.505

-

0.053

0.065

9.937

5.951

1.364

Average Marginal R2
t-test of Change

c3t

c4t

Average Adj.R2
0.086

B. Turnover and No Price Change Days
c0t

c1t

c2t

c3t

c4t

Average Adj.R2

Average Coefficient

2.011

0.387

-0.415

-0.743

-0.473

0.106

FM t-Stat

20.615

2.749

-2.390

-1.880

-0.600

-

0.052

0.062

0.010

0.014

8.102

5.784

1.278

1.746

4.307

Average Marginal R2
t-test of Change

C. No Price Change Days Only
c3t

c4t

Average Adj.R2

1.927

-0.953

-0.805

0.026

38.24

-3.293

-1.013

-

0.009

0.018

13.05

1.937

5.505

c0t
Average Coefficient
FM t-Stat
2

Average Marginal R
t-test of Change

c1t

c2t

35

Part II. Cross-Sectional Relation between Turnover and Asset Float
This part presents monthly cross-sectional regression of A-share turnover and B-share turnover,
τ itA = log( 1 + turnover itA ) and τ itB = log( 1 + turnover itB ), on the corresponding asset float.
Asset float is measured by the market valuation of all floating shares.

A. Summary of Cross-Sectional Regressions for A shares

τ itA = α 0 t + α 1t Log ( Float iA,t −1 ) + ε it
α0t

α1t

Average Adj. R2

Average Coefficient

1.630

-0.069

0.138

FM t-Stat

3.790

-3.484

t-test of Change

-0.476

0.687

B. Summary of Cross-Sectional Regressions for B shares

τ itB = α 0 t + α 1t Log ( Float iB,t −1 ) + ε it
α0t

α1t

Average Adj. R2

Average Coefficient

0.766

-0.021

0.020

FM t-Stat

5.995

-6.478

t-test of Change

-5.912

6.921

36

Figure 1: Shanghai A and B Share Price Indices
Shanghai A (thin line) and B (thick line) share-price indices between January 1992 and January 2003.
2500

2000

1500
A Share
B Share
1000

500

0
Jan-92

Jan-93

Jan-94

Jan-95

Jan-96

Jan-97

Jan-98

37

Jan-99

Jan-00

Jan-01

Jan-02

Jan-03

Figure 2: Average A-B Share Price Premium and Number of Firms
Average A-B share premium (thick line) and the number of firms (thin line) that had both A shares and B shares outstanding in each
month for the period April 1993 - December 2001.
900%

80

800%

70

700%
60
600%

Premium

50
500%
40
400%
30
300%
20
200%
10

100%

0%

0
Apr93

Oct93

Apr94

Oct94

Apr95

Oct95

Apr96

Oct96

Apr97

Oct97

38

Apr98

Oct98

Apr99

Oct99

Apr00

Oct00

Apr01

Oct01

Mean
Obs

Figure 3: Cross-sectional Variation of Price Premium
The thick line is the cross-sectional standard deviation of A-B premium in sample, while the thin line is the amount of cross-sectional
standard deviation explained by the regression model:
ρ it = c0t + c1tτ itA + c2tτ itB + ε it
where ρ it is the A-B share premium for firm i in month t, τ itA = log( 1 + turnover

A
it

) and τ itB = log( 1 + turnover

B
it

).

450%

400%

350%

SD of Premium

300%

250%

SD Explained
SD(Premium)

200%

150%

100%

50%

0%
Apr93

Oct93

Apr94

Oct94

Apr95

Oct95

Apr96

Oct96

Apr97

Oct97

Apr98

39

Oct98

Apr99

Oct99

Apr00

Oct00

Apr01

Oct01

