                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           A THEORY OF PYRAMIDAL OWNERSHIP
                              AND FAMILY BUSINESS GROUPS

                                            Heitor Almeida
                                           Daniel Wolfenzon

                                         Working Paper 11368
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11368


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




Heitor Almeida and Daniel Wolfenzon are at the Stern School of Business, New York University and the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank two anonymous referees, Ken Ayotte, Bernie Black, Mike
Burkart, Luis Cabral, Mara Faccio, Rachel Hayes, Oliver Hart, Jay Hartzell, Rafael La Porta, Walter Novaes,
Andrei Shleifer, Sheridan Titman, and seminar participants at the 2004 WFA meetings, the 2004 Corporate
Governance Conference at the University of Texas, the 2004 UNC-Duke Conference on Corporate Finance,
MIT, Princeton University, University of Minnesota, Tilburg University, the London Business School, the
NYU/Columbia joint seminar, PUC-Rio, the University of Amsterdam, the Stockholm School of Economics,
and the University of California San Diego for valuable comments. The usual disclaimer applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Heitor Almeida and Daniel Wolfenzon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
A Theory of Pyramidal Ownership and Family Business Groups
Heitor Almeida and Daniel Wolfenzon
NBER Working Paper No. 11368
May 2005
JEL No. G32

                                             ABSTRACT

We provide a rationale for pyramidal ownership (the control of a firm through a chain of ownership
relations) that departs from the traditional argument that pyramids arise to separate cash flow from
voting rights. With a pyramidal structure, a family uses a firm it already controls to set up a new
firm. This structure allows the family to 1) access the entire stock of retained earnings of the original
firm, and 2) to share the new firm's non-diverted payoff with minority shareholders of the original
firm. Thus, pyramids are attractive if external funds are costlier than internal funds, and if the family
is expected to divert a large fraction of the new firm's payoff; conditions that hold in an environment
with poor investor protection. The model can differentiate between pyramids and dual-class shares
even in situations in which the same deviation from one share-one vote can be achieved with either
method. Unlike the traditional argument, our model is consistent with recent empirical evidence that
some pyramidal firms are associated with small deviations between ownership and control. We also
analyze the creation of business groups (a collection of multiple firms under the control of a single
family) and find that, when they arise, they are likely to adopt a pyramidal ownership structure. Other
predictions of the model are consistent with systematic and anecdotal evidence on pyramidal
business groups.

Heitor Almeida                                          Daniel Wolfenzon
NYU Stern School of Business                            NYU Stern School of Business
Department of Finance                                   Department of Finance
44 West 4th Street, Room 9-85                           44 West 4th Street, Room 9-190
New York, NY 10012                                      New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                                and NBER
halmeida@stern.nyu.edu                                  dwolfenz@stern.nyu.edu
       Many …rms in the world have a controlling shareholder, usually a family or the State (La

Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 1999). In several countries, single individuals or families

control a large number of …rms; an organization typically referred to as a family business group.1

The controlling family often organizes the ownership of the group member …rms in a pyramidal

structure.2 In such a structure the family achieves control of the constituent …rms by a chain of

ownership relations: the family directly controls a …rm, which in turn controls another …rm, which

might itself control other …rms, and so forth.

       Despite the ubiquity of pyramidal business groups, there is surprisingly no formal theory that

explains their existence. There are, however, some informal arguments. The traditional one is

that a pyramid allows a family to achieve control of a …rm with a small cash ‡ow stake.3 For

instance, a family that directly owns 50% of a …rm, which in turn owns 50% of a di¤erent …rm,

achieves control of the latter …rm with an ultimate cash ‡ow stake of only 25%. Securing control

through such arrangements is bene…cial for the family when private bene…ts of control are large.

Because this view suggests that pyramids are created to separate cash ‡ow from voting rights, it

predicts that pyramidal …rms should always be associated with a substantial separation between

ownership and control. In fact, there are a number of examples in the literature in which …rms in

pyramidal groups are characterized by considerable separation between ownership and control (see

for example Claessens, Djankov and Lang, 2000).

       Nevertheless, a more detailed examination of the available data reveals some facts that cannot

be adequately explained by the traditional view. For example, the …nding that pyramidal …rms are

associated with large deviations from one share-one vote is not universal. There are many cases in

which the separation achieved is minimal and does not seem to warrant the use of a pyramid (see,

for example, Franks and Mayer, 2001, and section 4 for a discussion of this and other evidence).
   1
     The term business group is sometimes used in the literature to refer to other types of corporate groupings such
as those in which the member …rms are tied together by common ethnicity of the owners, interlocking directorates,
school ties, etc. An example is the Japanese keiretsu, an organization in which individual managers have considerable
autonomy in their …rms but coordinate their activities through the President Council and a common Main Bank
(Hoshi and Kashyap, 2001). Another example are the horizontal …nancial-industrial groups in Russia (Perotti and
Gelfer, 2001, p. 1604). To avoid confusion, we use the term family business groups to refer to groups in which
member …rms are controlled by the same family, such as the groups in Western Europe, Latin America, and East
Asia.
   2
     See, among others, Claessens, Djankov, and Lang (2000) for the evidence on East Asia, Faccio and Lang (2002)
and Barca and Becht (2001) for Western Europe, Khanna (2000) for emerging markets, and Morck, Strangeland and
Yeung (2000) for Canada.
   3
     This argument goes back at least to the beginning of the 20th century. Berle and Means (1932) and Graham and
Dodd (1934) use this argument to explain the creation of pyramids in the U.S. in the early 20th century.


                                                         1
   Moreover, even the cases in which pyramids do seem to separate cash ‡ow from voting rights are

not entirely explained by the traditional view. The reason is that pyramids are not the only way to

achieve this separation. For example, absent restrictions to the use of dual-class shares, the family

can achieve any degree of separation by directly owning the …rm and selling shares with inferior or

no voting rights. In such a case, why would a family choose to control a …rm through a pyramid

instead of using dual-class shares? Yet, despite this apparent equivalence, the empirical evidence

indicates that pyramids are much more common throughout the world than dual-class shares (La

Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 1999). The higher incidence of pyramids does not appear to

be caused by restrictions to the use of dual-class shares. Although these restrictions set an e¤ective

upper bound to the deviation from one share one vote that can be achieved with dual-class shares,

many pyramidal …rms have deviations that fall below this permitted upper bound (Bianchi, Bianco

and Enriques, 2001). All this evidence suggests that considerations other than separation of cash

‡ow from voting rights motivate the creation of pyramidal business groups.

   In this paper we present a model that provides a rationale for the existence of pyramids that does

not rely on separation of cash ‡ow from voting rights. The model is consistent with the …nding that

pyramids arise even in situations in which the family can use dual-class shares to facilitate control.

The model can also explain why …rms controlled through pyramids sometimes have substantial

deviations between ownership and control, while other times the separation is minor. The theory

addresses both the ownership structure of business groups (the reason why groups are organized

as pyramids as opposed to a structure in which group …rms are owned directly by the controlling

family), and the existence of the group itself (the reason why a single family controls multiple

independent …rms). We show that the implications of the model are consistent with anecdotal and

empirical evidence regarding the characteristics of pyramidal business groups.

   The model has two key ingredients. The …rst one is the assumption of limited investor protec-

tion. If investor protection is poor, the family extracts private bene…ts from the …rms it controls

at the expense of minority shareholders. The second ingredient is the assumption that business

groups are created over time. The family initially sets up a …rm and, at some point in the future,

the opportunity to set up another …rm arises.

   When this opportunity arises, the family must decide on the ownership structure of the business

group. In a pyramidal structure the new …rm is owned by all the shareholders of the original …rm.

                                                  2
As a result, the family shares the security bene…ts of the new …rm with non-family shareholders

of the existing …rm, but it has access to the entire stock of retained earnings (cash) of the original

…rm.4 We consider an alternative ownership structure in which the family controls the new …rm by

directly holding its shares. We refer to this direct ownership structure as a horizontal structure.5

Under this structure, non-family shareholders of the existing …rm have no rights to the cash ‡ows

of the new …rm, and thus the family captures the entire security bene…ts of the new …rm. However,

the family only has access to its share of the retained earnings of the original …rm.6

    The level of investor protection plays a crucial role in the choice of structure. Poor investor

protection leads to high diversion of cash ‡ows, which makes the pyramidal structure more attractive

for two reasons. First, diversion increases the family’s private bene…ts of control, at the expense of

a reduction in security bene…ts.7 Because in a pyramidal structure the family shares the security

bene…ts with non-family shareholders, while in the horizontal structure it keeps them entirely, high

diversion increases the family’s payo¤ under the pyramidal structure relative to the payo¤ under

the horizontal structure (payo¤ advantage). Second, because external investors anticipate diversion

and discount the terms at which they are willing to provide …nance, it is optimal for the controlling

shareholders to use internal funds of existing …rms to set up new …rms, before any external …nance

is raised.8 Thus, the family’s ability to use the entire stock of retained earnings of existing group

…rms when it chooses the pyramid becomes more valuable (…nancing advantage).

    In addition to the level of investor protection, certain …rm characteristics in‡uence the choice

of structure. In particular, we show that …rms with high investment requirements and/or low

pro…tability are more likely to be set up in pyramids. The argument is similar to that described

in the previous paragraph. Because of their characteristics, these types of …rms generate lower

security bene…ts for investors. Thus, the family achieves a higher payo¤ and, at the same time,
   4
     Security bene…ts represent the fraction of the …rm’s returns that is not diverted by the family and thus accrues
to all shareholders. The remaining part (the diverted value) represents a private bene…t of control for the family.
   5
     Admittedly, we are analyzing two highly stylized ownership structures. In reality, business groups are more
complex. However, by analyzing cleanly de…ned ownership structures, we hope to provide a starting point for the
analysis of more complex groups.
   6
     Graham and Dodd (1934) argue that the ability to use the resources of an already established …rm to set up or
acquire new …rms was one of the reasons for the existence of pyramids in the U.S. in the early 1900’s (see p. 564).
   7
     There is a large empirical literature providing evidence that private bene…ts of control are larger in poor investor
protection countries. See Zingales (1994), Nenova (1999) and Dyck and Zingales (2004).
   8
     This argument is related to the pecking order theory of external …nance (Myers and Majluf, 1984). However, the
wedge between external and internal …nance in our model arises from a moral hazard type of problem, and not from
asymmetric information about …rm cash ‡ows.



                                                           3
…nds it easier to …nance these …rms if it uses a pyramid to set them up.

   In sum, in our model pyramids are chosen by the family because of the payo¤ and …nancing

advantages they provide when …rms are expected to yield low security bene…ts relative to the

required investments. This rationale for pyramids is di¤erent from that proposed by the traditional

view. In particular, in our model pyramids can be optimal even if the opportunities for separating

cash ‡ow and votes with dual-class shares are not exhausted. This result helps explain one of the

puzzles raised above.

   In this paper we distinguish between a business group (a collection of …rms controlled by the

same family) and a pyramidal or horizontal structure (the particular ownership structure used to

control the group’s member …rms). The analysis above assumes that the family always sets up the

original and the new …rm. However, we also analyze the conditions that allow the same family

that set up the original …rm to control the new …rm. That is, we analyze the conditions that lead

to the creation of a business group. As it turns out, these conditions are similar to those that are

conducive to the creation of pyramids. A …rm is more likely to be added to a business group when

its security bene…ts are low relative to the required investments. In such cases, it is di¢ cult for

an outside, less wealthy entrepreneur to …nance the required investment in the external market.

As a result, families that already own successful …rms might be the only ones with the …nancial

resources to set up the new …rm, regardless of whether they are the most e¢ cient owners. Thus,

business groups should be more prevalent in poor investor protection countries and they should

adopt a pyramidal structure. This implication is consistent with available empirical and anecdotal

evidence (e.g., La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 1999).

   The observation that pyramidal …rms are associated with low security bene…ts raises another

question. Because the low security bene…ts are shared with existing shareholders of the business

group, these shareholders might not …nd it optimal to buy into the business group in the …rst place.

To answer this question, we analyze the set up of the …rst …rm in the business group and show that

pyramids can still arise. First, if the family cannot contractually commit to rule out pyramids in

the future, it simply compensates shareholders for the future costs of pyramiding by transferring

a large enough fraction of the value of the …rst …rm to them (through a reduced share price).

Second, the family might not want to commit to rule out pyramids. Because retained earnings

relax …nancing constraints, and because in a pyramidal structure the family has access to a greater

                                                 4
pool of internal funds, there are situations in which the family needs to use pyramids to add new

…rms to the group. Thus, contractual mechanisms to rule out pyramids might not be used even if

it is feasible to enforce them.

       We also show that observed ultimate ownership is lower and equilibrium diversion is higher

in …rms that are controlled through pyramids. This result is driven by a selection e¤ect. Firms

with low security bene…ts relative to their investments require that the family sell more shares to

…nance them. As a result, the family’s ultimate stake in these …rms is low, and diversion high.

But, as explained above, given that expected diversion is high, it is optimal for the family to set

these …rms up in a pyramidal structure. Thus, …rms with low security bene…ts relative to their

investment requirements are associated with lower ownership concentration, high diversion and end

up in pyramidal structures. Similarly, …rms with high security bene…ts relative to their investment

requirements are associated with high ultimate ownership concentration, low diversion and are

more likely to be set up in horizontal structures, or even outside business groups. This prediction

is consistent with evidence that shows signi…cant expropriation of investors in …rms that belong

to pyramidal structures (Bertrand, Mehta and Mullainathan, 2002, and Johnson et al., 2000).

However, it is important to point out that, in our model, the pyramidal structure itself is not the

cause for the increased diversion. Rather, the expectation of high levels of diversion makes the

pyramidal structure an optimal choice for the controlling family.

       Despite the fact that pyramidal …rms are associated with lower ultimate ownership relative to

…rms controlled directly by the family, our model does not necessarily require (as the traditional

argument does) that the ultimate ownership concentration in a pyramidal …rm be small in an

absolute sense.9 In fact, our model is consistent with families holding either large or small ultimate

ownership stakes in pyramidal …rms, leading to either minor or substantial separation of cash ‡ow

from voting rights. This result helps explain another of the puzzles raised above, namely, that

pyramidal structures with small deviation between cash ‡ow and votes do exist. In addition, we

show that pyramidal structures with small deviations are more likely to appear in poor investor

protection countries.

       Finally, we consider extensions of the basic model that address additional questions raised by
   9
    The selection argument above only suggests that families should hold smaller ownership stakes in …rms that they
control through pyramids, relative to …rms that they own directly. This prediction is not incompatible with high
observed ownership stakes in pyramidal …rms, in an absolute sense.


                                                        5
the theory. First, we analyze whether it is optimal for the family to set up new …rms as legally

independent entities or as divisions inside existing …rms. This question is important because, if

new …rms are set up as divisions, the resulting structure does not match the usual de…nition of a

pyramid. Within the framework of our model, we show that as long as there is variation in the

level of investor protection across …rms in the same group, the family is very likely to set up the

new …rm as a partial subsidiary.

      Second, we extend the model to allow for a variable scale of investment in …rm B. We show

that our previous conclusions are robust to this natural extension. We also show that the family

might have an incentive to overinvest in …rms that are owned through pyramids, because the cost

of overinvestment is shared with existing shareholders of the business group. Such overinvestment

is more likely when retained earnings in the business group are very large. Thus, the possibility of

pyramiding might destroy value if there is too much cash available to the family, a version of the

well-known free cash ‡ow problem (Jensen, 1986).

      Existing literature treats the creation of business groups and the determinants of their ownership

structures separately. Regarding business groups, Le¤ (1978) and, more recently Khanna and

Palepu (1997, 1999), argue that they arise to substitute for missing markets (e.g. labor and …nancial

markets).10 . Other bene…ts of groups include the possibility to prop up (inject money into) failing

…rms (Morck and Nakamura, 1999, Friedman, Johnson, and Mitton, 2003) and the use of a group’s

deep pockets as a strategic tool in product market competition (Cestone and Fumagalli, 2004).

None of these arguments considers the ownership structure (e.g., pyramids, horizontal structure,

etc.) of the business group.

      To explain the ownership structure of groups, the literature has relied on a di¤erent set of

arguments. As we discussed above, the traditional argument for pyramids is that they arise to

separate cash ‡ow from voting rights. The question still remains as to why a pyramid is the best

mechanism to achieve this separation. The same observation can be made regarding the models

in Gomes (2000), who shows that separation of cash ‡ow and voting rights might have reputation

bene…ts, and Bebchuk (1999), who argues that an initial owner might want to separate cash ‡ow

and voting rights to prevent potential raiders from seizing valuable control. Regulatory or tax

considerations might also help explain the existence of pyramids. For example, Morck (2003)
 10
      See also Aoki (1984), Ghatak and Kali (2001), and Kim (2004) for other value-enhancing arguments.


                                                         6
shows evidence that taxes on inter-company dividends a¤ect the incidence of pyramidal structures.

    Our basic model of pyramidal and horizontal business groups is presented in section 1. We

initially consider a version of the model in which the family already owns a given …rm, and needs to

decide on the structure to use (pyramidal or horizontal) to set up a new …rm. We use this framework

to characterize the conditions that lead to the choice of each structure by the family. Next, we

consider the creation of business groups. We end this section by analyzing the creation of the …rst

…rm in the group. In section 1 we assume that diversion entails no costs. This assumption makes

diversion insensitive to the …rm’s ownership structure, and simpli…es the analysis considerably. In

section 2 we relax this assumption, and derive implications regarding variations in diversion and

ownership concentration in di¤erent structures. Section 3 considers the question of whether new

projects that are taken by the pyramid should be organized as stand-alone …rms or divisions, and

the implications of a variable scale of investment in the new …rm. Our theory generates a number

of empirical implications that we discuss in section 4 together with the relevant empirical literature.

Section 5 concludes.


1    Pyramidal and horizontal business groups

In this section we present a framework to analyze pyramidal and horizontal business groups. The

model has three dates. At date 0, a family sets up a …rm (…rm A), keeping a fraction             of its

shares. At date 1, …rm A generates cash ‡ows of c, and the opportunity to set up another …rm

(…rm B) arises. Firm B requires an investment i at date 1 and generates a revenue r at date 2,

with r > i: We also assume for now that the family is the only possible owner of …rm B. In section

1.4 we analyze the e¤ects of competition from an alternative owner.

    At date 1, the family chooses the optimal ownership structure for …rm B (horizontal or pyra-

midal). In a pyramidal structure, the family sets up …rm B as a partial subsidiary of …rm A and

thus can use the cash c in …rm A to set up …rm B. In an horizontal structure, the family itself –and

independently from …rm A–sets up …rm B. In this case, the family has access only to its personal

wealth of c. In either structure, the family sells shares of …rm B to raise additional funds.

    We assume that there are no legal restrictions to the use of dual-class shares. This assumption

ensures that the family always retains complete control of …rm B, irrespective of the structure it

chooses and its ultimate ownership.

                                                  7
          Control allows the family to divert cash from …rm B into its pockets. We assume that when the

family diverts dr of the cash ‡ows, it pays a cost (one can think of this as waste involved in the

diversion process) of c(d; k)r, where k is the level of investor protection.

          One implicit assumption in this formulation is that diversion opportunities are the same re-

gardless of the structure the family chooses. The reason for this assumption is that, because the

family retains the same degree of control in both structures, the set of feasible actions the family

can take and hence the diversion opportunities should be the same. Of course, as we will see below,

actual diversion will be a¤ected by the incentives that the family faces in each structure. Finally,

notice that our diversion technology does not capture intra-…rm diversion (e.g., diversion from …rm

B to …rm A) or diversion directly from …rm A. However, our results continue to hold if we allow

for these di¤erent diversion opportunities.11

          Finally, we assume that the market interest rate is zero and that the family maximizes its date

2 payo¤. We start by solving the model from date 1 and take the family stake in …rm A,                     , as

given. In section 1.5, we endogenize          by solving the model from date 0.

1.1         Horizontal structure

The family has personal wealth of c. To set up …rm B at date 1, the family contributes RIH of these
                  H from the external market by selling 1
funds and raises RE                                                     H    shares of …rm B (the subscripts

I and E stand for internal and external funds, respectively). The family’s payo¤ at date 2 can be

written as

                            c   RIH +   H
                                            RIH + RE
                                                   H
                                                       i + (1    d)r + (d        c(d; k))r:                 (1)

          At date 2, the family chooses the level of diversion that maximizes the above expression. Thus,

d = arg maxd         H (1   d) + d   c(d; k): This expression de…nes d(     H ; k):

                                                                     H = (1
          Because investors break even in equilibrium, we can write RE                H )(RH +RH   i+(1 d)r):
                                                                                           I   E
                           H , plugging this value into Equation (1), and letting N P V
Solving this equation for RE                                                                           r    i

c(d; k)r be the NPV of …rm B net of diversion costs, we obtain the payo¤ of the family as of date

1:

                                               U H = c + N P V:                                             (2)
     11
    We analyzed these alternative diversion opportunities in a previous version of the paper (available from the
authors upon request).




                                                       8
This expression is the family’s payo¤ conditional on …rm B being set up. The family is able to set

up …rm B whenever RIH + RE
                         H                                                   H leads to
                                        i; which by replacing the value for RE

                                       RH        RIH + (1              H
                                                                           )(1       d)r       i:                              (3)

Conditional on setting up …rm B, the family’s date 1 problem is:

                                                        max                     UH
                                                 RIH 2[0;   c];   H 2[0;1]


                                                 subject to RH                   i                                             (4)
                                                                            H
                                                 and to d = d(                  ; k):

1.2   Pyramidal structure

Firm A has retained earnings of c, out of which it contributes RIP to the set up cost of …rm B. In
                     P from the external market by selling 1
addition, it raises RE                                                                         P    shares of …rm B. The family’s

payo¤ at date 2 is given by

                          [c   RIP +    P
                                            (RIP + RE
                                                    P
                                                                  i + (1         d)r)] + (d           c(d; k))r;               (5)

             P
where RIP + RE        i + (1   d)r are the security bene…ts of …rm B at date 2.

   At date 2, the family chooses the level of diversion that maximizes the above expression. Thus,

d = arg maxd       P (1   d) + d    c(d; k): Comparing this expression with the corresponding one in the

horizontal case, it can be seen that in both structures diversion depends in the same way on ultimate

ownership (    H   in the horizontal structure and                    P   in the pyramidal). Therefore, diversion in the

pyramidal case is given by d(          P ; k).   In section 2, it will be more convenient to think about the

family as choosing its ultimate ownership concentration in …rm B rather than the direct ownership.

Thus, for future reference we de…ne ! H                H    and ! P                     P.

                                    P = (1
   Moving back to date 1, we write RE                              P )(RP           P
                                                                                 + RE          i + (1     d)r): Solving for RE and
                                                                        I

plugging this expression into Equation (5), we get the family’s payo¤ as of date 1:

                                   UP = c + NPV                   (1         )[(1        d)r        i]:                        (6)

The payo¤ di¤erences between the horizontal and the pyramidal structures can be derived by

comparing Equations (2) and (6). In the horizontal structure the family sets up …rm B and,

because new investors of …rm B break even, the family ends up capturing the entire NPV of the

                                                                  9
project. In the pyramidal structure …rm A sets up …rm B, and so the NPV is shared between the

family and non-family shareholders of …rm A. However, the NPV is not distributed in proportion

to the stakes in …rm A because the family –but not the other shareholders of …rm A–receives the

diverted amount. Only the non-diverted NPV ((1            d)r       i) is divided in proportion to the stakes in

…rm A. That is, non-family shareholders of …rm A get (1                   )[(1    d)r   i] and the family receives

the rest.

   For the family to be able to set up …rm B, it must be that RIP + RE
                                                                     P                     i: Replacing the value
    P leads to
of RE

                                 RP     RIP + (1          P
                                                              )(1    d)r     i:                               (7)

The family’s problem conditional on setting up …rm B is


                                               max             UP
                                        RIP 2[0;c]; P 2[0;1]

                                       subject to RP            i                                             (8)

                                       and to d = d(            P ; k):


1.3   Choice of structure, investor protection and …rm characteristics

There are two parts to the family’s problem. First, the family …nds the optimal ownership con-

centration for each of the two possible structures (problems in Equations (4) and (8)). Next, it

chooses the structure that provides the highest payo¤.

   To provide the intuition for each of the two steps, we …rst consider a very simple cost of diversion

function that guarantees that, in equilibrium, the cost of diversion is always zero. We show that this

simplifying assumption implies that the family’s payo¤ is independent of ownership concentration.

This allows us to abstract from the e¤ects of ownership concentration and isolate the choice of

structure.

   In section 2 we allow diversion to be costly, using a similar framework to that in Burkart, Gromb,

and Panunzi (1998), and Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002). With this assumption, diversion, the cost

of diversion, and consequently the family’s payo¤ depend on ultimate ownership concentration.

This new assumption allows us to derive additional implications regarding the optimal ownership

concentration and equilibrium levels of diversion, but it does not change the substance of the

implications of the model of this section.


                                                     10
   We assume that diversion entails no cost and that the level of investor protection limits the

amount of diversion that can take place (similar formulations of the diversion technology can be

found in Pagano and Roell (1998) and in Burkart and Panunzi (2002)). In other words, we assume

that:
                                                            0 if d d(k)
                                       c(d; k) =                        ;                                     (9)
                                                           +1 otherwise
        @d
with    @k   < 0.

   Because diversion up to d is costless, the family sets d = d; regardless of the structure it uses.

Using Equations (2) and (6), we get


                             U H = c + N P V; and                                                           (10)

                              UP = c + NPV                     (1     )[(1   d)r     i];


where N P V = r     i: These payo¤s, however, are conditional on the project being taken. Because

payo¤s are not a¤ected by ownership concentration, the family is indi¤erent among all ownership

concentration levels that allow it to raise the necessary funds. Therefore, without loss of generality,

we assume that the family chooses the ownership concentration that allows it to raise the most

funds.

   In the case of the horizontal structure, we de…ne:

                                   H
                               R                max            RH = c + (1     d)r:                         (11)
                                           RIH 2[0; c];    H


                                                               H
The horizontal structure is feasible whenever R                     i. In this simpli…ed model, because diversion

does not depend on ownership concentration, the family maximizes the funds raised by fully dis-

persed ownership in …rm B. This is not a general result. As we show in section 2, with costly

diversion the family always tries to keep ownership concentration as high as possible.

   Similarly, for the pyramidal case we de…ne:

                                       P
                                 R               max           RP = c + (1    d)r:                          (12)
                                             RIP 2[0;c];   P


                                                               P
The pyramidal structure is feasible whenever R                      i. In this case, …rm A contributes all of its

retained earnings, c; and fully disperses ownership in …rm B.

   The following result characterizes the choice of structure in this version of the model.


                                                               11
Result 1 If the non-diverted NPV of …rm B, (1                 d)r    i; is positive, the family always chooses

the horizontal structure. If the non-diverted NPV of …rm B is negative and the pyramid is feasible
   P
(R > i), the family chooses the pyramid. In all other cases …rm B is not set up.

       The proof of this result, as well as all other proofs, is in the appendix. When the non-diverted

NPV is positive, …rm B can be …nanced in either structure because the contribution of external

investors, (1      d)r; is su¢ cient to pay the investment cost, i: In terms of payo¤s, however, the

family prefers the horizontal structure. If the family sets up the pyramid, it shares this positive

non-diverted NPV with the non-family shareholders of …rm A, whereas if it chooses the horizontal

structure it gets to keep the entire amount. Therefore, in this case, the horizontal structure is

chosen.

       When the non-diverted NPV is negative, …rm B is not always feasible because the maximum

amount external investors contribute is less than the set up costs. Firm B is feasible only when the

internal resources are su¢ ciently high. In addition, when the non-diverted NPV is negative, the

family prefers the pyramid because this structure allows it to share this negative value with the

other shareholders of …rm A. Therefore, in this region, the family chooses the pyramidal structure

whenever it is feasible.

                              P
Result 2 Assume that R              i, such that …rm B is feasible under the pyramidal structure. Given

this condition, …rm B is less likely to be owned through a pyramid when

         Firm B generates higher revenues

         Firm B requires a smaller investment

         Investor protection increases

       This result follows from the fact that the non-diverted NPV is higher and so more likely to

be positive when pro…tability increases, investment decreases or investor protection is stronger.

Because the non-diverted NPV is more likely to be positive, the family is more likely to use a

horizontal structure both because its payo¤ is higher, and because it becomes easier to …nance the

project.12
  12
    We condition on …rm B being feasible under the pyramidal structure because, empirically, only the set of projects
that are feasible under the least restrictive conditions is observable.


                                                         12
       Our assumption that there are no legal restrictions to the use of dual-class shares implies

that the family can use either structure to secure control, regardless of how small a cash ‡ow it

holds. Therefore, in this framework any argument for the existence of pyramids that relies on

separation of ownership and control (e.g., the traditional argument) cannot make predictions as to

which structure the family should use. Because in our model pyramids are not used to separate

ownership from control, but rather to allow the family to maximize its internal sources of …nancing

and to share the security bene…ts of new …rms, they can be optimal in this environment. That is,

in our model, pyramids are not equivalent to direct ownership with the (potential) use of dual-class

shares, even when there are no legal restrictions to the use of dual-class shares.

1.4      Business groups

We de…ne a business group as an organization in which a family owns and controls more than one

…rm. In the last section we assumed that the family is the only party with the ability to set up

…rm B. This e¤ectively means that we assumed the existence of a business group. In this section

we investigate the conditions under which a business groups arises.

       We introduce the possibility that, at date 1, there is an alternative owner for …rm B (whom we

call the entrepreneur). The set up cost of …rm B for the entrepreneur is also i: The entrepreneur

might be a better or a worse manager than the family, a possibility that we capture by assuming

that under his control revenues of …rm B are (1 + t)r. The parameter t can be positive or negative,

and is a measure of the productivity di¤erential between the family and the entrepreneur. We

also assume that the entrepreneur has no personal wealth. Thus, if the parameter t > 0, the only

advantage of the family is its higher …nancing capacity due to the accumulation of internal funds

in the existing …rms it owns (that is, the cash c of …rm A).

       For simplicity, we assume that the market in question only allows for one …rm.13 Thus, if t < 0

the family will be the natural owner of the …rm because it has both a technological and a …nancing

advantage. If t > 0, the entrepreneur is the most productive owner but might not own the …rm

because of the family’s wealth advantage. We capture this possibility by assuming that, if the

entrepreneur can raise su¢ cient funds, he will be the only one to enter the market because of his
  13
    Presumably, the family and the entrepreneur would engage in some form of competition for the market, which
might involve a phase when both enter and attempt to capture the market. Our assumption that only one can enter
can be seen as a reduced form of a competition game under which one of the …rms must eventually prevail.



                                                      13
higher productivity. If he cannot raise the necessary funds, then the family sets up …rm B using

any of the two structures described in the last section.14 Given this assumption, we can prove the

following result.


Result 3 Business groups are less likely to arise when


         The entrepreneur’s productivity di¤ erential, t, is positive and large

         Firm B generates higher revenues

         Firm B requires a smaller investment

         Investor protection is higher


       If t > 0, the comparative advantage of the family is that they have accumulated wealth, and

thus do not need to rely as much on external capital markets. As investor protection improves, the

comparative advantage of the family eventually disappears and the entrepreneur is able to set up

his …rm. The entrepreneur is also more likely to raise the necessary funds to set up …rm B when

…rm B’s NPV is large, which happens when r and t are high, and i is low.

       Notice that the conditions that are conducive to the formation of business groups are also

conducive to the formation of pyramids (compare Results 2 and 3). In fact, in this simple model

we can prove the following result.


Result 4 Business groups that arise because of the family’s …nancing advantage, that is, when

t > 0, are always organized as pyramids. If t < 0 it is possible that business groups are organized

horizontally.


       If t > 0, competition from the entrepreneur eliminates the region of the parameter space in which

a horizontal structure arises. Thus, in our model, there is an endogenously derived equivalence

between business groups that arise due to …nancing reasons and pyramids. The intuition for this

result is that horizontal structures only appear when the non-diverted NPV of …rm B is positive,
  14
    The assumption that a more productive entrepreneur owns the …rm whenever he can …nance it is a bit extreme.
A situation could arise in which the wealthy family manages to drive out an entrepreneur that is only marginally
viable, for example by using its …nancing clout to lower the output price. However, such a possibility would not lead
to results that are qualitatively di¤erent than the ones we describe below, since it would still be the case that the
entrepreneur would become the most natural owner if its productivity di¤erential and/or …rm B’s security bene…ts
are large enough. See also the proof of result 3.


                                                         14
because in such cases the family does not want to share the positive NPV of …rm B with the existing

shareholders of …rm A. However, under such conditions entrepreneurial …nance is possible, because

the fraction of the pro…ts of …rm B that can be pledged to outside investors, (1 d)(1+t)r, is bigger

than the investment i. Thus, the situations in which an horizontal structure is optimal are precisely

the situations in which the business group loses its …nancing advantage over the entrepreneur. This

also means that horizontal groups can only arise because of technological reasons, that is, when

t < 0. Finally, notice that a corollary of result 4 is that conditional on the business group arising,

a pyramid is more likely to appear when the family is not the most e¢ cient owner of …rm B.

       It is worth discussing what is novel regarding the results in this section. The idea that business

groups are more likely to arise in countries with poor investor protection because external …nancing

is more limited is not new. This idea is related to the arguments in Le¤ (1978) and Khanna and

Palepu (1997, 1999), mentioned in the introduction. However, these authors have not considered

the optimal choice of ownership structure in a business group. Result 4 suggests that, if business

groups are created to substitute for …nancial markets that are curtailed by poor investor protection,

they should also be organized as pyramids.

1.5      Ex-ante optimality of pyramids

In our model, whenever the pyramidal structure is chosen shareholders of …rm A realize a negative

return, because they share the negative non-diverted NPV with the family. This raises the question

of why shareholders buy into …rm A in the …rst place. Even though it is possible that shareholders

do not anticipate the creation of a pyramid, in this section we analyze a model in which shareholders

rationally foresee this event.15

       To analyze this question, we extend the model to date 0. We assume that, at date 0, …rm A

needs an investment of iA and generates revenues of rA > iA at date 1. Similarly, …rm B requires

an investment of iB at date 1 and generates a revenue of rB at date 2. For simplicity, we assume

that there is no diversion of the cash ‡ows of …rm A. We also assume that the family has no wealth

at date 0, and we do not consider competition by the entrepreneur, neither at date 0, nor at date

1.16
  15
     Aganin and Volpin (2005) document the case of the Pesenti group. The …rst …rm in the group, Italcementi, was
established in 1865. The creation of the Pesenti pyramid happened when the family started to acquire …rms in 1945.
The possibility that shareholders in 1865 foresaw the creation of a pyramid 80 years later, is possible, but unlikely.
  16
     If competition at date 0 leads to the entrepreneur setting up …rm A, then the entrepreneur becomes the family


                                                         15
    Suppose …rst that the family cannot commit at date 0 to rule out the use of pyramids in the

future. In this case we have the following result.

Result 5 Suppose that rA + (1            d)rB > iA + iB , and that (1        d)rB < iB . In this case, the family

sets up …rm A at date 0 and uses a pyramid to set up …rm B at date 1. Shareholders of …rm A

break even from the perspective of date 0.

    The above result shows that, absent any contractual mechanisms to rule out pyramids, these

structures can appear even when investors in the initial …rm anticipate their formation. Intuitively,

the …rst …rm that the family sets up must be pro…table enough in order to compensate initial

shareholders for the future expropriation associated with pyramids. If this condition holds, the

group’s shares can be priced low enough such that initial shareholders break even and the family

can raise enough to …nance …rm A.

    However, Result 5 does not rule out the possibility that the family might bene…t from a mech-

anism (such as a contract or a charter provision) that allows it commit not to use pyramids. This

commitment might be valuable because, from the perspective of date 0, the family bears all costs

of future expropriation associated with pyramids.17

    Importantly, the family may not want to rule out pyramids by contract even if it can do so.

There are cases in which the only way the family can set up both …rms A and B is by allowing

pyramidal structures. Ruling out pyramids might thus eliminate the possibility of setting up …rm

B. Since …rm B is a positive NPV project, this is ine¢ cient from an ex-ante perspective.

    This type of situation arises when there is uncertainty regarding the cash ‡ow produced by …rm
                                                                                                        1
A. Suppose that the revenue generated by …rm A is rA = rA                          with probability     2,   and rA =

rA +     with probability 12 .

Result 6 Suppose that the following conditions hold:
                                       iA
                                  1             + rA     iA + (1     d)rB     iB < 0;                              (13)
                                       rA
in date 1, from the perspective of our model. Competition at date 1 from a talented entrepreneur has the same e¤ect
it had in section 1.3: it eliminates horizontal structures if the pledgeable income of …rm B is larger than the required
investment.
   17
      In the version of the model that we analyze in this section, pyramids do not have higher deadweight costs relative
to horizontal structures. Conditional on the family being able to …nance both …rms, the family’s ex-ante payo¤ is
identical under pyramidal or horizontal structures. However, this is unlikely to be a general conclusion. For example,
section 3.2 shows that pyramidal structures might destroy value because of the possibility of overinvestment in …rm
B.


                                                          16
and
                                                   1
                                      rA    iA +     (1        d)rB   iB > 0                                  (14)
                                                   2
In this case, it is not optimal for the family to rule out pyramids at date 0.


         Under condition in Equation (13), the family cannot set up …rm B in an horizontal structure

at date 1, even in the high cash ‡ow state. In this situation it might be e¢ cient for the family

to allow pyramids to be formed at date 1, because pyramids relax the date 1 …nancing constraint

by increasing the cash available for investments. The problem with the pyramid is that because

shareholders of …rm A expect future expropriation, allowing pyramids to be formed tightens the

date 0 …nancing constraint. The condition in Equation (14) is required for the date 0 constraint to

be met if the pyramid is formed only in the high cash ‡ow state.18

         So far we assumed that …rm B can only be set up at date 1. The next result endogenizes the

timing of this decision in the context of the current extension.


Result 7 Suppose the family has access to both projects at date 0. Under the conditions of result

6, the optimal investment policy is to set up …rm A …rst, and then set up …rm B in a pyramid if

the cash ‡ows of …rm A are high.


         Result 6 shows that pyramids can only have ex-ante bene…ts if the sum of the pledgeable incomes

of …rms A and B is lower than the sum of the required investments. This follows from the …rst
                                                                           iA
condition in result 6, because rA       iA + (1    d)rB        iB <    1   rA     < 0. In this case, the family

cannot set up both …rms at date 0. Furthermore, as we explained above, the family can still set

up …rm A at date 0 and, set up …rm B in a pyramid, if the high cash ‡ow state realizes. Thus,

pyramids are created following good performance of the existing …rms in the group.


2         Ultimate ownership and diversion

The simple framework of the previous section generates several results about the conditions under

which business groups appear and the type of structures they use. However, because we assume

that diversion is independent of ownership concentration, the family can fully dilute ownership
    18
    We show in the appendix that if conditions 13 and 14 hold, the family can never raise enough funds to set up
…rm A at date 0, and set up the pyramid in both states at date 1, because in this case shareholders of …rm A cannot
break-even.


                                                          17
without any implications for value. Thus the previous model is not well suited to address the

question of concentration of cash ‡ow rights in pyramidal …rms. Furthermore, because diversion

is the same irrespective of the organizational form, the model does not have predictions for the

relationship between the pyramidal organizational form and diversion.

   In this section, we endogenize diversion and the ultimate ownership concentration of …rm B.

To this end, we assume that diversion is costly. In particular, we assume that c(0; k) = 0; cd > 0;

cdd > 0; and cdk > 0. These assumptions imply that a high degree of investor protection (high k)

corresponds to a high cost of diversion.

   When diversion is costly, the family tries to reduce it by maximizing its ultimate ownership

concentration in …rm B. In other words, the family chooses the structure that allows it to …nance

the new …rm with the smallest equity issuance. Because pyramids allow the family to use …rm

A’s cash to …nance …rm B, it might appear that they provide the family with a higher …nancing

capacity. However, the …nancing cost of using a pyramid is that the non-family shareholders in

…rm A receive shares that could have been sold to the market, had the horizontal structure been

used. Thus, which structure maximizes …nancing capacity depends on the relation between the

market price and the implicit price paid by non-family shareholders of …rm A. For example, when

diversion is expected to be high, the market price is low and so the pyramidal structure is the one

that maximizes …nancing capacity. Conversely, when diversion is expected to be low, the horizontal

structure is the one that maximizes …nancing capacity.

2.1      Optimal ownership concentration in each structure

We start solving the model at date 2. In both structures, d(!; k) is de…ned by d = arg maxd !(1

d) + d    c(d; k); where ! is the family’s ultimate ownership concentration in …rm B. Assuming an

interior solution, d(!; k) satis…es the …rst order condition of this problem, cd (d(!; k); k) = 1   !.

   It follows from the properties of c( ; ) that diversion is decreasing in ownership concentration

(d! < 0) and in the level of investor protection (dk < 0). We de…ne the NPV net of diversion
                                                       @N P V
costs as N P V = r     i    c(d; k)r. We have that      @!      > 0 because higher ultimate ownership

concentration reduces diversion and consequently the total cost of diversion.

   Moving back to date 1, the family solves the problem in Equations (4) and (8). We obtain the

following result.


                                                  18
Result 8 In both structures the family maximizes its ownership concentration in …rm B, subject to

raising su¢ cient funds to …nance this …rm. For this reason the internal resources contributed are

set to the maximum possible (RIH = c and RIP = c). Also, the ultimate ownership concentration is

set at the highest value that is consistent with the …nancing requirement. That is, for the horizontal

structure, if   c     i, then ! H = 1; and if      c < i, ! H is the maximum value that satis…es

                              eH (! H )
                              R               c + (1      ! H )(1       d(! H ; k))r = i:                          (15)

For the pyramidal structure, if c         i; then ! P =        (i.e.,    P   = 1), and if c < i; ! P is the maximum

value that satis…es
                               eP (! P ) = c + (1      !P
                               R                               )(1      d(! P ; k))r = i:                          (16)

                eH (! H ) is the amount of funds raised in the horizontal structure when the family
   The function R

contributes     c of its own funds and the ultimate ownership concentration in …rm B is ! H : This

expression is found by replacing RIH = c and d = d(! H ; k) into the expression for RH (Equation 3).
           eP (! P ) represents the funds collected in the pyramidal structure when …rm A contributes
Similarly, R

c and the ultimate ownership concentration in …rm B is ! P : This expression is found by replacing

RIP = c and d = d(! P ; k) into the expression for RP (Equation 7).

   In the horizontal structure the cost of diversion falls back on the family, who gets the entire

NPV of the project. Thus, the family has an incentive to maximize its ownership concentration so

as to minimize diversion (d! < 0).

   In the pyramidal structure, it is not a priori clear that the family wants to minimize diversion

because reducing diversion has two opposing e¤ects on the family’s payo¤ (see Equation (6)). First,

it reduces the cost of diversion and hence increases the NPV of the …rm B. However, lower diversion

also means that the family has to share a greater fraction of the NPV with existing shareholders

(the term (1        )[(1 d)r i] goes up). However, we show that the family always wants to maximize

ownership concentration even in this case. The reason is that the family bases its diversion decision

on its ex-post stake in …rm B, ! P =          P,   and diverts d(            P ; k):   Nevertheless, from the viewpoint

of date 1, the family gets a fraction        of the non-diverted revenue (because diversion is priced in).

That is, from the viewpoint of date 1, optimal diversion is d( ; k): Because the ex-post stake is

lower than , the family diverts too much from the perspective of date 1, and hence bene…ts from

lower diversion.

                                                          19
2.2         Comparison of the pyramidal and horizontal structures

We can now use Result 8 to …nd the optimal ownership levels for each structure. We then compare

the family’s maximum payo¤ with each structure to determine which of the two is optimal. To

compare the payo¤ under the two structures, we …rst need to know the relation between ! H and

!P :

2.2.1         The relation between the ultimate ownership concentration levels ! H and ! P

We concentrate on the most interesting cases, those in which the family needs to rely on the external

market to …nance …rm B (i.e., c < i). The optimal ownership concentration levels, ! H and ! P ; are

given in Result 8. Rearranging Equations (15) and (16) leads to:

                       eH (! H ) = c + (1
                       R                       ! H )(1 d(! H ; k))r = i; and                                                (17)
                                                    h    c                                i
                       eP (! P ) = c + (1
                       R                       !P ) m       +   (1   m)(1    d(! P
                                                                                   ; k))r   = i;                            (18)
                                                       !P
                   !P
where m           1 !P
                         (1    1):

         Equations (17) and (18) highlight an important distinction between a pyramidal and an hori-

zontal structure. In an horizontal structure, there are only two types of shareholders of …rm B: the

family and the new shareholders. The family keeps a fraction ! H of …rm B and contributes all of

its wealth, c: New shareholders buy a fraction 1                   ! H of the …rm and pay (1              ! H )(1   d(! H ; k))r,

where (1          d(! H ; k))r is the market price per share. In a pyramidal structure, there are three

types of shareholders: the family, non-family shareholders of …rm A and new shareholders. The

family retains a fraction ! P of …rm B and contributes                            c. The remaining fraction, 1            ! P ; is

distributed between non-family shareholders of …rm A and new shareholders of …rm B.19 The term

in brackets in Equation (18) re‡ects the average price of these shares in which m and 1                                        m

are the proportion of each of these two types of shareholders. New shareholders pay the market

price of …rm B, (1            d(! P ; k))r; while non-family shareholders of …rm A pay an implied price of

    c=! P : The latter price follows from the fact that non-family shareholders of …rm A contribute

their share of retained earnings (1             )c for a fraction (1               )    P   of …rm B. Thus, the implied price

is (1         )c=[(1      )   P]   = c=! P :
    19                                                                 P
         Non-family shareholders of …rm A indirectly own (1        )       = (1        ! P )m of …rm B, and new shareholders hold
          P
1           = (1 ! P )(1 m) of …rm B.



                                                              20
       As Equations (17) and (18) indicate, even though the family has access to the entire stock of

earnings of …rm A when it chooses the pyramidal structure, this does not necessarily translate into

a …nancing advantage. The reason is that, in the pyramidal structure, non-family shareholders

receive shares, which could have been sold to the market if the horizontal structure had been used

instead. Thus, the horizontal structure has the …nancing advantage when the market price is higher

than the implied price paid by shareholders of …rm A. More precisely, suppose that we compare the

funds raised in each structure for the same level of ultimate ownership concentration in …rm B, !:
                          eH (!) > R
Simple algebra shows that R        eP (!) (the horizontal structure has the …nancing advantage)
                                    c
if and only if (1    d(!; k))r >   !    (the market price is higher than the implied price).

       To illustrate how the optimal choice of structure is a¤ected by the di¤erent parameters we use

Figure 1. In this …gure we focus on a single parameter, the investment required, i (Results 9 and

10 present the general case). In the horizontal axis we have the ultimate ownership of the family in

…rm B (! H and ! P ). In the vertical axis we have the amount raised in each structure for a given

ownership concentration.
                                    eH and R
       First, we plot the values of R      eP as a function of the family’s ultimate ownership in

…rm B, !.20 We de…ne ! as the ultimate ownership concentration for which the family raises

the same amount of funds with either structure (we call this amount i). It must be then that

at ! = !; the implied price paid by non-family shareholders of …rm A equals the market price

paid by new shareholders of …rm B: For higher ownership concentration levels, ! > !; the market

price increases (because there is less diversion in …rm B), and the implied price declines (because

non-family shareholders receive more shares but contribute the same amount). Thus, as explained
                                                                   eH (!) > R
above, the family raises more funds with the horizontal structure (R        eP (!)). Conversely,

for lower ownership concentration levels, ! < !, the market price of …rm B is lower than the implied
                                                                                eH (!) < R
price. In this case, the family raises more funds with the pyramidal structure (R        eP (!)).

       Second, we show the optimal ownership concentration levels, ! H and ! P for two investment

levels i1 and i2 with i1 < i < i2 : Because the family raises just enough funds to set up …rm B, the
                                                                                     eP (! P ) = i
optimal ownership concentration in the pyramidal (horizontal) structure is such that R
 eH (! H ) = i). As the Figure shows, for the low investment level, i1 , the ultimate ownership in the
(R
  20
    Figure 1 only shows the relevant part of the curves. Both RH and RP might have increasing and decreasing
regions. However, the solution is never in an increasing region, because a slightly higher ownership concentration
would increase NPV ( @N@!
                        PV
                            > 0) and at the same time allow the family to raise more funds.


                                                       21
pyramidal structure is lower than that in the horizontal structure (!1P < !1H ). Conversely, at the

high investment cost, i2 , !2P > !2H :

2.2.2   The non-diverted NPV at the optimal ownership concentration

The non-diverted NPV is negative for both structures when i > i, and is positive for both structures

when i < i. Consider the case in which i > i. In this case, Figure 1 shows that ! H < ! P < !:

But we argued above that when ! < !; the implicit price paid by non-family shareholders of …rm

A is higher than the market price. In other words, the non-family shareholders of …rm A realize

a negative NPV in their investment in …rm B, or equivalently, the non-diverted NPV of …rm B is

negative. A similar argument holds for the other case.

2.2.3   The choice of structure

The …nal step is to compare the maximum payo¤ with each structure (Equations (2) and (6)) at the

optimal ownership concentration. The key result is that, if i < i; the horizontal structure is chosen,

and if i > i; the pyramidal structure is chosen. When i < i; the ultimate ownership in the horizontal
                                                                                      @N P V
structure is higher. A more concentrated ownership leads to a higher NPV (because      @!      > 0). In

addition, the non-diverted NPV in this region is positive and therefore it is better to capture this

value entirely (horizontal structure) than to share it with the non-family shareholders of …rm A

(pyramidal structure). Conversely, when i > i; the ultimate ownership in the pyramidal structure

is higher and the non-diverted NPV of …rm B is negative. Thus, in this region, the pyramid is the

best option for the family.

   We summarize the above discussion in the following Result.

Result 9 Let ( ; c; r; i; k) be parameters such that ! H = ! P = !. For i > i; the ultimate ownership

in a pyramid is higher (! P (i) > ! H (i)), the non-diverted NPV of …rm B is negative under both

structures and, if feasible, the pyramidal structure is chosen (identical results hold when r < r

and when k < k). For i < i; the ultimate ownership in a pyramid is lower (! P (i) < ! H (i)), the

non-diverted NPV of …rm B is positive under both structures and the horizontal structure is always

chosen (identical results hold when r > r and when k > k).

   As the above discussion illustrates, the model with endogenous ownership produces essentially

the same results regarding pyramidal and horizontal structures that we described in section 1.

                                                 22
   The relative size of the family’s ultimate cash ‡ow stake in the pyramidal and in the horizontal

structure depends on the parameter values. For some parameter values we have that ! P > ! H ,

and for others, ! P < ! H : However, result 9 cannot be taken to the data because it compares

the hypothetical values of ownership concentration that would arise if each structure were to be

chosen. It does not compare the observed (or e¤ectively chosen) ownership concentration levels.

The following result establishes that relation.


Result 10 Suppose that di¤ erent structures are the result of variation in r, i or k (one by one).

The ultimate ownership concentration level observed in any pyramidal structure is lower than the

ultimate ownership observed in any horizontal structure. It follows directly that diversion from …rm

B is higher in pyramids.


   This result is a direct implication of Result 9 and be understood using Figure 1. The pyramidal

structure is chosen when i > i: These investment levels map into ownership concentrations that

satisfy ! P < !: Also, the horizontal structure is chosen whenever i < i: The associated ownership

concentration levels are ! H > !:

   Finally, we analyze the determinants of the threshold !:


Result 11 The threshold of ultimate ownership below which the pyramid is chosen, !, is decreasing

in investor protection.


   At the threshold !; the non-diverted NPV of …rm B is zero. As investor protection deteriorates,

ownership concentration must increase to keep the diversion level and the NPV constant. The

implication of this result is that, in poor investor protection countries, it is more likely that families

hold a large ultimate cash ‡ow stake in pyramidal …rms.

2.3   Discussion

We show in Result 10 that the observed ultimate ownership in a pyramidal structure is lower than in

an horizontal structure. The observation that ultimate ownership in a pyramid is low has been made

informally by many authors. The traditional argument is that the chain of control mechanically

reduces ultimate ownership. As Result 9 indicates, however, if one compares the ultimate ownership

a …rm would have under a pyramid and under a horizontal structure, it is not always the case that


                                                   23
ultimate ownership is lower in a pyramidal structure. The traditional argument ignores the fact

that, because of the presence of retained earnings, the pyramid might have a …nancing advantage,

and consequently, the family might need to sell fewer shares when using this structure to …nance

the new …rm. Our argument in Result 10 is di¤erent. The pyramid is set up when the investment

required is high, revenues are low and/or investor protection is low. But in these situations more

shares need to be sold to …nance the set up costs of the new …rm. This selection e¤ect is the reason

that ultimate ownership is lower in a pyramid than in a horizontal structure.

   A similar argument holds for diversion. The traditional view is that diversion is higher in a

pyramidal structure because the chain of control reduces the family’s ultimate ownership. This

argument ignores the fact that families are interested in reducing diversion because its cost falls

back to them (see Result 8). Our model is consistent with the empirical observation that there is

more diversion in pyramids even when families are interested in minimizing diversion. In our model

some types of …rms end up in horizontal structures and other types of …rms end up in pyramidal

structures. Diversion is higher in …rms that end up in pyramidal structures. However, for the …rms

that are optimally set up in pyramids, diversion would have been even higher (because of a lower

ultimate ownership concentration) if the horizontal structure had been chosen instead. That is, in

our model it is not the case that the pyramidal structure itself increases diversion.

   Result 10 shows that the observed ultimate ownership in pyramids is lower than in horizontal

structures. It does not imply that ownership concentration should be low in a pyramid in an

absolute sense. In fact, the threshold of ultimate ownership at which the family switches to the

pyramidal structure, !; can be quite high. If, for instance, this threshold is strictly above 50%,

some pyramidal …rms will have ultimate ownership concentration around 50%. Clearly, for these

…rms, the family could have achieved the same degree of control by simply holding shares directly.

Yet, the family chooses the pyramid because of its …nancing and payo¤ advantages described above.

Depending on the parameter values, our model can also predict very small ownership concentration

in pyramidal …rms. Thus, unlike the traditional argument for pyramids, our model accommodates

both high and low ownership concentration in pyramidal …rms. We see this as a strength of the

model because the empirical evidence indicates that both cases are common.




                                                 24
3         Extensions

In this section we consider two extensions of our basic framework. First, we discuss a few reasons

why a pyramid might be di¤erent than a single …rm comprising of …rms A and B. Second, we

analyze the possibility of variable scale of investment in …rm B.

3.1        Should …rm B be a separate …rm or a division?

Our analysis so far de…nes a pyramid as the structure that results when …rm A sets up …rm B.

However, in addition to this feature, the de…nition of a pyramid requires …rm B not to be wholly-

owned by …rm A. Otherwise, one could think of …rm B simply as a project of …rm A.

         There are several reasons outside our model for why a controlling shareholder might wish to

separately list a …rm (see Morck, Wolfenzon and Yeung, 2005, for a review of the relevant literature).

The potential bene…ts include the option to separately …le for bankruptcy while preserving the assets

of the other companies in the group, the possibility of o¤ering better incentives and more control

for middle managers, and an increase in transparency that stems from the information in stock

prices. Our model, augmented with any of these mechanisms, would produce pyramidal structures

in which the two …rms are legally independent …rms.

         One possibility that is related to our model is that the diversion technology might depend on

the ownership structure chosen for …rm B.21 For example, two independent projects might be more

transparent than a single diversi…ed conglomerate composed of these two projects, specially when

the projects are in di¤erent industries. It can be argued that higher transparency would make it

more di¢ cult to divert or, in the terminology of our paper, that transparency increases k:22 Under

this assumption, whether the family wants to set up a pyramid (separate legal entities) or a single

…rm in which …rm B is a wholly-owned subsidiary of …rm A, depends on whether A and B are in

the same industry. If A and B are in di¤erent industries, the family would prefer a pyramid to a

diversi…ed conglomerate because that structure increases transparency and commits the family not

to divert. If, on the other hand, A and B are in the same industry, then there is a smaller loss of

transparency from having …rm A own 100% of the shares of …rm B. This argument suggests that

separate companies in pyramids should be more likely to correspond to separate industry ventures,
    21
     In the benchmark model, as in section 3.1.1 below, the maintained assumption is that the choice of ownership
structure does not a¤ect the diversion technology.
  22
     We thank one of our referees for suggesting this argument.


                                                       25
while same industry expansion could be done within existing …rms.

   Next, we consider an extension of our basic framework that can also distinguish between a

pyramid and a conglomerate, even if the choice of ownership structure has no direct e¤ect on the

diversion technology.

3.1.1   Within-country variation in the degree of investor protection

We focus on the cases in which the family chooses the pyramidal structure, and analyze the optimal

…nancing of …rm B. This …nancing can take the form of sale of shares of …rm A, of …rm B, or a

combination of the two. We show that in a large number of cases it is optimal for the family to sell

shares of …rm B directly to the market, i.e., it is optimal for …rm A to retain less than 100% of the

cash ‡ow rights of …rm B. In these cases, it is clear that the resulting structure is a pyramid.

   To analyze this question we need a model in which the optimal ownership concentration is

well-de…ned. For that reason we use the model with costly diversion of section 2. In addition, we

augment that model by allowing for the possibility of diversion from …rm A. Because we model

diversion from both …rms A and B, we can analyze the trade-o¤ between selling shares of these

…rms to raise funds.

   In section 2, the parameter k in the cost of diversion c(d; k) is common to all …rms in a country.

The underlying assumption is that all …rms are subject to the same laws, regulations, and other

institutions that protect outside investors. However, even though there is an important common

component in investor protection, there is also evidence of within-country variation (Durnev and

Kim (2005)). The reason for this …rm-speci…c heterogeneity can be purely technological: some

industries are inherently more obscure than others (Durnev, Morck and Yeung (2004)). It is also

the case that …rms can take actions to modify the degree of protection they provide. For example,

…rms can hire more or less outside directors, have their books audited by a reputable accounting

…rm, etc. Accordingly, in this section we assume that there is within-country variation in the degree

of investor protection o¤ered by …rms by letting kA be potentially di¤erent from kB ; where kA and

kB are the parameters in the cost of diversion function for …rms A and B, respectively. However,

we maintain the assumption that there is a signi…cant country component. This assumption is

consistent with Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), who …nd that most of the variation in individual

…rm corporate governance measures is driven by country characteristics. We also maintain the


                                                 26
assumption that kA and kB are independent of the choice of ownership structure.

     As in section 2, we consider a model that starts at date 1. At this date the family has a stake

 1   in …rm A and the possibility of setting up …rm B appears. Instead of assuming that …rm A

generates cash ‡ows at date 1, we assume that it only generates a cash ‡ow, rA ; at date 2: Of

course, the cash ‡ow rA that occurs at date 2 can be converted into a date-1 cash ‡ow by selling

claims against it. However, because we introduce costly diversion from …rm A, this conversion will

entail deadweight costs. The goal of the family is to set the ownership structure of …rms A and B

so as to raise the necessary funds in the most cost-e¢ cient way.

     We show in the Appendix that, whenever kB > kA , it is optimal to sell shares of …rm B directly

to the market. The family prefers to sell shares of the …rm with a higher diversion cost, because a

higher cost helps the family commit to low levels of diversion and thus to an overall lower deadweight

cost. Since …rm A holds a stake in …rm B, the family could sell rights to the cash ‡ows of …rm B

indirectly by selling shares of …rm A. However, when kB > kA ; it is more e¢ cient to sell shares of

…rm B while minimizing the number of shares of …rm A that the family sells. To achieve this goal,

the family needs to sells shares of …rm B directly.

3.1.2    Discussion

We acknowledge that there are many potential reasons outside our model for …rm B to be a separate

legal entity. Nevertheless, it is important to stress that most of these arguments cannot, on their

own, explain why the family would not prefer to create a horizontal business group because, in

this structure, …rms are also legally independent. Furthermore, these stories do not explain the

existence of the business group in the …rst place. In this sense, we believe the results and ideas in

this section are complementary to those in sections 1 and 2.

     An important question, however, is whether the need for additional arguments to di¤erentiate

pyramids from single …rms changes the nature of the empirical implications of our model. The

answer is that it depends on whether these additional arguments are orthogonal to the …rm and

country characteristics that are conducive to the family using …rm A to set up …rm B, or whether

they are correlated to these characteristics in a way that invalidate our previous implications.

     We analyze this question in the context of the model of section 3.1.1. As shown in sections 1.3

and 2, whether …rm B is set up by …rm A or directly by the family is determined by the absolute


                                                 27
value of kB , and also by the inherent pro…tability of …rm B (the parameters rB and iB ).

   Consider …rst the empirical prediction that pyramids should be more common in poor investor

protection countries. If there is a country component in the determination of k (Doidge, Karolyi,

and Stulz (2004)) then it is more likely that …rm B will be set up by …rm A in poor investor

protection countries. However, this result does not guarantee that there will be more pyramidal

…rms in these countries. If, for some reason, …rm A is also more likely to set up …rm B as a wholly-

owned subsidiary in countries with poor investor protection, then our result will break down.

However, in section 3.1.1 we have shown that, conditional of …rm A setting up …rm B, whether

shares of …rm B are sold directly to the market (pyramid) or not (wholly-owned subsidiary) depends

only on the relative magnitudes of kA and kB : Because there is no reason to expect the probability

of kB > kA to vary systematically with investor protection, the proportion of pyramids to wholly-

owned subsidiaries should not vary systematically across countries.

   In addition, we show in the appendix that whether the family prefers a pyramid or a wholly-

owned subsidiary does not depend of the inherent pro…tability of …rm B. We conclude that the

additional considerations in section 3.1.1 do not change the empirical implications that we derived

in sections 1.3 and 2.

3.2   Variable scale and overinvestment in pyramids

In this section we allow the family to choose the size of the investment in …rm B. We use the model

of section 1.3, with one modi…cation. Firm B now produces a cash ‡ow r(i) at date 2 when an
                                                                0          00                    0
amount i is invested at date 1. The function r(i) satis…es r (:) > 0, r (:) < 0 and limr (i) = 1.
                                                                                           i!0
The expressions for U P ; U H ; RP ; and RH are identical to those in section 1.3, except that r(i)

replaces r. The family computes the optimal investment in each structure and then chooses the one

with the highest payo¤. We show in the appendix that result 1 essentially holds in this extension:

                                                                0
Result 12 Let the …rst best level of investment be de…ned by r (iF B ) = 1. If (1 d)r(iF B ) iF B < 0,

the pyramid is always chosen.


   The intuition for this result is very similar to that in section 1.3, with the additional complication

that the level of investment is now endogenous. The key expression, (1          d)r(i)   i, should now be

evaluated at the …rst best level of investment (iF B ), which maximizes the total NPV of …rm B and is


                                                  28
consequently the optimal level of investment in the horizontal structure. If (1             d)r(iF B )   iF B < 0,

then the pyramid yields a higher payo¤ than the highest possible payo¤ under the horizontal

structure. In addition, pyramids are associated with greater …nancing capacity. Thus, pyramids

must be optimal. Because the condition that determines whether the pyramid is chosen is almost

identical to that in section 1.3, the comparative statics of result 2 hold.

      The analysis in this section has an important additional implication. In section 1.3 we assume

that …rm B must always be a positive NPV investment, taking into account both security and

private bene…ts. In contrast, the next result shows that the family might have an incentive to make

investments in …rm B that are on the margin negative NPV. The following proposition characterizes

the possibility of overinvestment.23


Result 13 Suppose that iF B               c + (1     d)r(iF B ). If the family chooses the pyramid, it will

overinvest (relative to the …rst best) in …rm B.


      The family generally has incentives to invest more than the …rst best level in the pyramidal

structure because the cost of overinvestment are shared with the existing shareholders of …rm A.

However, when the condition in Result 13 does not hold, the family will not have the resources to

…nance investment levels above the …rst best.

      The other reason why we might not observe overinvestment is that the family might prefer to

use the horizontal structure, which is always associated with the …rst best investment level. In

particular, result 12 shows that the horizontal structure is more likely to be optimal when …rm

B’s security bene…ts are high at the …rst best level of investment. In such cases, the family might

choose to forego the private bene…ts of overinvestment in pyramids and set up a horizontal structure

instead.

      We conclude that the clearest case for overinvestment in pyramids happens when …rm B’s

security bene…ts are low (because of high diversion, for example), but the family has accumulated

a signi…cant amount of cash in …rm A.24 In this case the excess availability of cash might e¤ectively

destroy value in the pyramid, in the sense that …rm B would have produced a higher combination

of private and security bene…ts if the pyramidal structure had been ruled out.
 23
      We thank one of our referees for suggesting that we pursue this argument.
 24
      The underlying logic here is very similar to Jensen’s (1986) free cash ‡ow problem.



                                                          29
4         Empirical Implications

Our theory generates a number of empirical implications, which we list and discuss here. We also

mention empirical and anecdotal evidence that is consistent with our theory, and suggest some

additional implications that can be tested in the future. We structure this section by discussing

…rst the implications that are unique to our theory. We then discuss the implications that are

shared with the traditional argument.

         As discussed in the introduction, the traditional argument for pyramids is that they are devices

to separate ownership and control, and entrench the controlling family. However, as the …rst two

empirical observations suggest, considerations other than separation of cash ‡ow from voting rights

motivate the creation of pyramidal business groups.


         1. It is possible to observe pyramids in which the controlling family has high cash

‡ow stakes in member …rms, and thus the separation between ownership and control

is not large

         The literature has a number of examples of pyramids in which the family has achieved substantial

deviation from one share-one vote (see La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 1999, and Claessens,

Djankov and Lang, 2000). However, there are also many other cases in which the separation

achieved is small and does not warrant the use of a pyramid. For example, Franks and Mayer

(2001) …nd in their sample of German …rms that, in 69% of the …rms controlled through pyramids,

the controlling shareholder could have achieved the same level of control by simply holding shares

directly in the …rm. The authors conclude that, in Germany, pyramids are not used as a device to

achieve control.25 In a study of ownership and control of Chilean …rms, Lefort and Walker (1999)

…nd that the controlling shareholder owns more cash ‡ow than necessary to achieve control. They

compute the ultimate cash ‡ow ownership of the controlling shareholder in all the members of a

pyramidal group and …nd this integrated ownership to be on average 57%. Thus, the separation of
    25
     Franks and Mayer de…ne 25%, 50% and 75% as critical control levels and argue that voting power between any
of these critical levels provide the same degree of control. They show that in 69% of their sample of pyramidal …rms,
the cash ‡ow and control rights do not straddle a control treshold. To see that, when this is the case, the pyramid
is not used to separate ownership and control, consider the following example. A family’s ultimate cash ‡ow rights
in a …rm that belong to a pyramid are 55% and his voting rights are 70%. If the same controlling party held 55%
of the shares directly in the …rm, he would have 55% of the votes (assuming one-share-one-vote). Because 55% and
70% are between the same two critical levels, direct holdings in the …rm and the pyramid provide the controller with
the same degree of control.



                                                         30
ownership and control achieved through pyramids is minimal. Attig, Fischer and Gadhoum (2003)

…nd that, in Canada, the cash ‡ow stake of the controlling shareholder in a pyramid is, on average,

31.78% while the controlling stake is only a bit higher, 41.68%. Faccio and Lang (2002) report that

both dual-class shares and pyramids are commonly used in Western European countries. However,

they …nd large deviations between ownership and control in only a few of the Western European

countries they analyze. Demirag and Serter (2003) report similar …ndings for Turkey, where cash

‡ow and voting rights appear to be closely aligned despite the widespread prevalence of pyramidal

structures. Finally, Valadares and Leal (2001) draw a similar picture for Brazil, where according

to the authors pyramids do not appear to be a mechanism to deviate from one-share-one-vote.

   Our model is consistent with these examples. Even though the ultimate ownership concentration

in pyramids is lower than that in horizontal structures, it can still be the case that the ultimate

ownership in a pyramid is high in an absolute sense (see section 2.3). In fact, depending on the

parameter values, pyramidal …rms can have either low or high ultimate ownership concentration

(and consequently large or small separation of ownership and control). This is consistent with

the evidence that in some pyramids a signi…cant separation is achieved, while in others there is

virtually no separation of ownership and control. In addition, Result 11 indicates that violations

of the traditional story (pyramidal …rms with high ultimate ownership) are more likely to be found

in countries with poor investor protection.

   2. The family might strictly prefer to create a pyramid, even when restrictions to

the issuance of dual-class shares are not binding

   Because we identify a rationale for pyramids over and above the separation of cash ‡ow from

voting rights, our model can distinguish between pyramids and direct ownership with dual-class

shares even if there are no legal restrictions to the use of dual-class shares. Therefore, according to

the model, it should not be surprising to …nd that pyramids arise even if families have not exhausted

the possibility of issuing dual-class shares. In contrast, in such cases the traditional story cannot

di¤erentiate between a pyramid and a horizontal structure with dual-class shares.

   We do observe pyramids in situations in which the family could have achieved the same sep-

aration with dual-class shares alone. For example, in Italy, Bianchi, Bianco, and Enriques (2001)

measure the ultimate ownership in each …rm that belongs to a pyramid, compute the number of



                                                  31
units of capital that the family controls with one unit of its own capital, and average this ratio for

all the …rms in a pyramid. As a benchmark, consider a family who holds directly 50% of the cash

‡ows and votes in a …rm. In this case the ratio is 2. The family can increase this ratio because

Italian law allows the issuance of 50% of the …rm’s capital in non-voting shares (savings shares or

azioni di risparmio). If the family uses the maximum fraction of dual-class shares and retains 50%

of the voting shares (i.e., 25% of the total capital), it can achieve a ratio of 4. Bianchi, Bianco

and Enriques …nd that, while some pyramids allow the controlling shareholder to control a large

amount of capital (e.g., the ratio for the De Benedetti group is 10.33 and that for the Agnelli group

is 8.86), the ratio for other groups is below 4, and sometimes even below 2 (e.g., for the Berlusconi

group, it is 3.66, and for the Pirelli group it is only 1.95). Brazil is another example of a country

in which dual-class shares can be issued. The evidence in Valadares and Leal (2001) suggests that

pyramids are common despite the fact that many Brazilian …rms do not exhaust the possibility of

issuing shares with superior voting rights.


   Besides these two key implications, our model generates at least two more implications that we

believe to be unique to our framework.

   3. Pyramids tend to be created dynamically, following good performance of existing

family …rms

   The timing of the model is exogenously speci…ed in most of the analysis. However, Result 7

endogenizes the timing. It shows that pyramids will not be set up at a single point in time, even

when the family has access to both …rms at date 0. Thus, our model predicts that pyramids evolve

over time, as a function of the performance of the existing …rms in the pyramid.

   This implication is consistent with the claim of Khanna and Palepu (2000, p. 869), that one

of the most important roles of groups is to set up new …rms in which the family and the member

…rms acquire equity stakes. Aganin and Volpin (2004) describe the evolution of the Pesenti group

in Italy, and show that this group was created by adding new subsidiaries to the …rms the Pesenti

family already owned. One of their conclusions is that, in Italy, business groups expand through

acquisitions when they are big and have signi…cant cash resources. Claessens, Fan and Lang (2002)

…nd that …rms with the highest separation of votes and ownership (those at the bottom of the

pyramid) are younger than those with less separation (those at the top).


                                                 32
       4. Separate companies in pyramids are more likely to correspond to separate indus-

try ventures by the controlling family, and are less likely to be in the same industry.26

       We argue in section 3.1.1 that, if there is variation in investor protection across …rms in a

country, some of the group’s new …rms will have higher investor protection than existing …rms. In

this case, it is optimal for the family to sell shares of the new …rms directly to the market. By

doing so total diversion is lower than in the alternative case in which the new …rm is set up as a

whole-owned subsidiary and capital is raised by selling shares of the parent …rm. Implication 4

follows from the observation that, for the same legal and institutional environment (i.e., within the

same country), investor protection is more likely to vary across industries than within the same

industry (Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004)).27

       We note that, because there are other reasons outside the model why the family might want to

separately list group …rms (see section 3.1), it is possible to have pyramids composed of …rms in

similar industries. However, the model does predict that all else constant, multi-industry pyramids

should be easier to observe in the data than single-industry ones. We are not aware of any systematic

evidence on this implication.


       The next two implications are also consistent with the traditional view that pyramids are

entrenchment devices that magnify agency costs. However, our theory suggests a di¤erent inter-

pretation for the empirical evidence.

       5. Diversion is higher in …rms placed in a pyramid, than in …rms controlled directly

by the family. This is not due to the fact that pyramids facilitate diversion. Instead,

higher diversion in pyramidal …rms is due to a selection e¤ect.

       We show that the observed ultimate ownership is lower in pyramidal …rms, and thus diversion is

higher (result 10). This prediction is consistent with empirical …ndings that pyramids are associated

with high expropriation (Bertrand, Mehta, and Mullainathan, 2002 Bae, Kang and Kim, 2002).

       The traditional argument for pyramids is also consistent with a positive (negative) correlation

between pyramidal ownership structures and diversion (ultimate ownership). In fact, it is often

argued that pyramids are chosen precisely because they allow the family to divert more resources.
  26
   We thank one of our referees for suggesting this empirical implication.
  27
   As we mention in section 3.1, this implication would also follow from the assumption that one-industry …rms are
more transparent than diversi…ed conglomerates.



                                                       33
The problem with this argument is that, if expropriation is priced, it is not clear why the controlling

family has incentives to choose a structure that maximizes expropriation.

       In contrast, in our model the family chooses a pyramidal structure to minimize –not to facilitate–

diversion. In addition, our model is consistent with the empirical evidence that, in a cross-section,

we should observe more expropriation in pyramids. This result is driven by a selection e¤ect. When

the new …rm requires a large investment, generates low revenues, and when investor protection is

low, diversion is expected to be high in both structures. In such cases the pyramidal ownership is

optimal. In the opposite case (low investment required, high revenues, good investor protection),

expropriation is expected to be low under both structures, and the horizontal structure is optimally

chosen. This is the reason why our model predicts a positive association between pyramids and

expropriation. However, this is not equivalent to the statement that pyramids maximize diversion.

In fact, if the family were forced to set up the new …rm in a horizontal structure in the parameter

region in which pyramids are optimal, ultimate ownership would be lower and diversion higher than

if the pyramid structure were used.

       6. Firm value and …rm performance are lower in …rms that are owned through

pyramids, than in una¢ liated …rms or horizontal structures. As in implication 5, in

our model this correlation is due to a selection e¤ect.

       Our model predicts that projects of lower pro…tability are undertaken inside pyramids (results

2 and 9). Thus, even if the pyramid does not have a direct negative e¤ect on performance, one

should observe a negative relationship between measures of …rm value such as Tobin’s Q and

pyramidal membership because of a selection e¤ect. There is evidence that …rms in business

groups organized as pyramids have lower Tobin’s Q than stand-alone …rms and …rms organized in

horizontal groups (Claessens et al. 2002, Volpin 2002) and that this undervaluation is greater if the

controlling shareholder has lower ultimate ownership (Holmen and Hogfeldt, 2004). There is also

evidence that the separation of ownership and control is detrimental to performance (Claessens

et al 2002, Lemmon and Lins 2003, Lins 2003, Mitton 2002, and Joh 2003).28 Finally, Attig,

Fischer and Gadhoum (2003) show that low Tobin’s Q predicts membership in a pyramidal group.

This last result is particularly consistent with the idea that pyramids undertake lower pro…tability
  28
    There is also a literature that examines the relationship between valuation and …rm membership in business
groups, without distinguishing between pyramids and other types of groups. See Khanna and Rivkin (1999), Khanna
and Palepu (2000), Fisman and Khanna (2000) and Claessens, Fan, and Lang (2002).


                                                      34
projects. We emphasize that while the negative correlation between pyramidal ownership and

…rm performance is also a prediction of the traditional argument for pyramids, the particular

interpretation of this correlation as a selection e¤ect is unique to our paper.


      Finally, the model generates four implications that should also follow from the traditional

argument for pyramids. Despite this fact, we discuss these implications to show that our paper

does not contradict existing empirical evidence on pyramidal business groups.

      7. Family business groups should be more prevalent in countries with poor investor

protection

      In the model, families have a …nancing advantage over potentially more e¢ cient, but less wealthy

entrepreneurs, because families can utilize the funds of the …rms they already control. In low

investor protection countries, this …nancing advantage is more important because it is more di¢ cult

to raise external …nance (see result 3). Thus, the fraction of the corporate sector that ends up in

business groups should be higher in such countries.

      This implication is in the spirit of Khanna and Palepu (1997, 1999), who argue that business

groups arise in countries with underdeveloped markets. However, it could also be consistent with

the traditional argument for pyramids, which broadly predicts a greater concentration of corporate

control in countries in which control is more valuable (i.e., poor investor protection countries).29

We believe there is no systematic evidence on this implication, but there is some scattered and

anecdotal evidence. For example, Claessens, Fan and Lang (2002) show that the incidence of

business groups is high in developing Asian countries, where more than 50% of the …rms in their

sample are a¢ liated with business groups. Faccio and Lang (2002) report similar results for Europe.

      8. Family business groups are more likely to be organized as pyramids, especially

in countries with poor investor protection

      In our model, the conditions that are conducive to the appearance of business groups are

also conducive to the choice of pyramids over horizontal structures. Families choose the pyramidal

structure if the security bene…ts associated with the new …rm are low (high investment, low revenues

and poor investor protection). However, it is precisely in these cases that an outside, talented

entrepreneur cannot …nance this new venture in the external capital market. As a result, the
 29
      See for example Bebchuk (1999).


                                                   35
business group is created and the pyramid is used.

   As we discuss in section 1.4, if there are other reasons for …rm B to be set up in a business group

(for example, if the family is also the most e¢ cient owner of …rm B), then the business group may

be organized horizontally. However, in this case the underlying rationale for the existence of the

business group does not necessarily correlate with investor protection. A more general way to state

the implication of our model is that the types of business groups that appear because of poor investor

protection (in our model those that appear because of …nancial market underdevelopment) tend

to be organized as pyramids. Thus, while business groups are likely to have pyramidal structures

in countries with poor investor protection, they might be organized horizontally in other countries

with higher investor protection.

   The traditional argument also predicts that pyramids should be widely used by the business

group’s controlling family in order to magnify the separation between ownership and control.

   La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (1999) show evidence that pyramids are very common

in countries with poor investor protection. Another piece of evidence that business groups are

typically organized as pyramids is that researchers have treated these two terms as synonymous

when analyzing the role of family control in developing countries.

   9. Firms in pyramids are larger, or they are more likely to belong to capital intensive

industries

   We show that as the required investment increases …rms are more likely to belong to pyramidal

business groups (Results 2 and 9). In addition, the extension in section 3.2 we show that pyramids

might lead to overinvestment. Both arguments suggest that pyramidal …rms should be associated

with larger scales of capital investment. Nevertheless, this implication can also be generated by

the traditional argument because a greater degree of separation between ownership and control

might be needed for the family to control larger …rms. Attig, Fischer and Gadhoum (2003) …nd

evidence consistent with this implication, using Canadian data. Claessens, Fan and Lang (2002)

also …nd that in East Asia group …rms tend to be larger than una¢ liated …rms. Bianchi, Bianco

and Enriques (2001) …nd similar evidence for Italy.

   10. When a new …rm is added to a pyramidal structure, the existing non-family

shareholders of the pyramid realize a negative return


                                                 36
    Results 1 and 9 show that pyramids can only be chosen when the pledgeable income of …rm B

is lower than the required investment. This condition implies that existing shareholders of …rm A

realize an ex-post loss when the pyramid is formed. As we show in section 1.5, this does not mean

that shareholders also lose in an ex-ante sense because the shares in the parent …rm were probably

priced to re‡ect future expropriation.

    Because the traditional argument associates pyramids with high agency costs, this implication

also appears to be consistent with the usual argument for pyramids. We are not aware of any direct

tests of this hypothesis in the empirical literature.


5    Concluding Remarks

We believe that a full understanding of the structure of business groups requires an answer to three

di¤erent questions: 1) why are multiple assets in the hands of a single family, 2) why are these assets

grouped into legally independent …rms, and 3) what determines the choice of ownership structure

of these …rms (e.g., pyramidal, horizontal, or more complex structures). In this paper we provide

answers to these questions by using a single imperfection: poor investor protection.

    The theory explains why families use a pyramidal structure to achieve control of several …rms

in a business group, as opposed to holding shares directly in these …rms (horizontal). It shows

that pyramids have both a payo¤ and a …nancing advantage over horizontal structures when the

amount of diversion is expected to be high (e.g., because investor protection is poor). It also shows

that the cases in which the pyramidal structure is optimal for the family are also cases in which

the business group itself is more likely to appear. Thus, our theory provides a rationale for why it

is so common for business groups to adopt a pyramidal ownership structure.

    Our argument departs from the traditional story that pyramids are a device to separate cash

‡ow from voting rights. Because of this feature, our model can generate cases in which pyramidal

…rms have only minor deviations from one share-one vote. It can also explain why pyramids arise

even if the family is free to deviate from one share-one vote with the use of dual-class shares, i.e.,

it explains why pyramids are di¤erent from dual-class shares. Our theory can help understand

recent empirical evidence –which is inconsistent with the traditional view of pyramids–that some

pyramidal …rms are associated with small separation between ownership and control. While some

predictions of the model are consistent with existing empirical …ndings, other predictions are only

                                                  37
backed by anecdotal evidence. Future empirical work could test these implications in a more

systematic way to help us better understand these complex organizations.

   Another important issue that could be explored by future theoretical work regards the normative

implications of the existence of business groups. We have argued that pyramidal business groups

can be e¢ cient for the family, but this is not enough to establish e¢ ciency from the perspective

of social welfare. Previous authors have argued that family business groups can have deleterious

e¤ects on overall economic e¢ ciency because they foster an ine¢ cient allocation of corporate control

through family inheritances (Morck, Stangeland and Yeung, 2000), they hamper the development

of external capital markets (Almeida and Wolfenzon, 2005), and they lobby for regulation that

impede …nancial development (Rajan and Zingales, 2003a, 2003b, Morck and Yeung, 2004). A

model that blends these ideas into our current framework might generate interesting normative

implications regarding pyramidal business groups.




                                                 38
                                      References
Aganin, Alexander and Paolo Volpin, 2005, History of Corporate Ownership in Italy, in Morck,
   R., ed.: The History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to
   Professional Managers (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).
Almeida, Heitor and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2005, Should business groups be dismantled? The equilib-
   rium costs of e¢ cient internal capital markets, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Aoki, M. (editor), 1984, The economic analysis of the Japanese …rm, (North Holland ).
Attig, Najah, Klaus Fischer and Yoser Gadhoum, 2003, On the determinants of pyramidal own-
    ership: Evidence on expropriation of minority interests, Working paper, Laval University.
Bae, Kee-Hong H, Jun-Koo Kang, and Jin-Mo Kim, 2002, Tunnelling or value added? Evidence
    from mergers by Korean business groups, Journal of Finance 57, 2695-2740.
Barca, Fabrizio and Marco Becht, 2001, The Control of Corporate Europe (Oxford University
    Press, Oxford).
Bebchuk, Lucian, 1999, A rent protection theory of corporate ownership and control, NBER
    working paper 7203.
Bebchuk, Lucian, Reinier Kraakman and George Triantis, 2000, Stock pyramids, cross-ownership,
    and dual class equity, in Randall M., ed.: Concentrated Corporate Ownership (University of
    Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).
Berle, Adolph A., and Gardiner C. Means, 1932, The Modern Corporation and Private Property,
    (McMillan).
Bertrand, Marianne, Paras Mehta and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2002, Ferreting out tunnelling: An
    application to Indian business groups, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 121-148.
Bianchi, Marcello, Magda Bianco, and Luca Enriques, 2001, Pyramidal groups and the separation
    between ownership and control in Italy, Working paper, Bank of Italy.
Burkart, Mike, Denis Gromb and Fausto Panunzi, 1998, Why higher takeover premia protect
    minority shareholders, Journal of Political Economy 106, 172-204.
Burkart, Mike, and Fausto Panunzi, 2002, Agency con‡icts, ownership concentration, and legal
    shareholder protection, Working paper, Stockholm School of Economics.
Cestone, Giacinta, and Chiara Fumagalli, 2004, The strategic impact of resource ‡exibility in
    business groups, RAND Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, Joseph P.H. Fan, and Larry H.P. Lang, 2002, Disentangling the
    incentive and entrenchment e¤ects of large shareholdings, Journal of Finance 57, 2741-2771.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Larry H.P. Lang, 2000, The separation of ownership and
    control in East Asian Corporations, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 81–112.
Claessens, Stijn, Joseph P.H. Fan, and Larry H.P. Lang, 2002, The bene…ts of group a¢ liation:
    Evidence from East Asia, Working paper, University of Amsterdam.
Demirag, Istemi and Mehmet Serter, 2003, Ownership patterns and control in Turkish listed
   companies, Corporate Governance 11, 40-51.

                                              39
Doidge, Craig, G. Andre Karolyi, and Rene M. Stulz, 2004, Why do countries matter so much for
    corporate governance? Working paper, University of Toronto and Ohio State University.

Durnev, Art, and E. Han Kim, 2005, To steal or not to steal: …rm attributes, legal environment,
    and valuation, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Durnev, Art, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, 2004, Value-enhancing capital budgeting and
    …rm-speci…c stock return variation, Journal of Finance 59, 65-105.

Dyck, Alexander and Luigi Zingales, 2004, Private bene…ts of control: An international compari-
    son, Journal of Finance 59, 537-600.

Faccio, Mara, and Larry H.P. Lang, 2002, The ultimate ownership of Western European corpora-
    tions, Journal of Financial Economics 65, 365-395.

Fisman, Raymond and Tarun Khanna, 2000, Facilitating development: The role of business
    groups, working paper, University of Columbia and Harvard University.

Franks, Julian, and Colin Mayer, 2001, Ownership and control of German corporations, Review
    of Financial Studies 14, 943-977.

Friedman, Eric, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton, 2003, Propping and tunneling, Journal of
     Comparative Economics 31, 732-750.

Graham, B. and D. Dodd, 1934, Security Analysis (McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New York.)

Ghatak, Maitreesh and Raja Kali, 2001, Financially interlinked business groups, Journal of Eco-
   nomics and Management Strategy 10, 591-619.

Gomes, Armando, 2000, Going public without governance: managerial reputation e¤ects, Journal
   of Finance 55, 615-646.

Holmen, Martin, and Peter Hogfeldt, 2004, Pyramidal power, mimeo, Uppsala University and
    Stockholm School of Economics.

Hoshi, Takeo, and Anil Kashyap, 2001, Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan (MIT
    Press, Cambridge, MA).

Jensen, Michael, 1986, Agency costs of free cash ‡ow, corporate …nance and takeovers, American
    Economic Review 76, 323-329.

Joh, Sung Wook., 2003, Corporate governance and pro…tability: evidence from Korea before the
    economic crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 287-322.

Johnson, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2000, Tunnel-
    ing, American Economic Review 90, 22-27.

Khanna, Tarun, 2000, Business groups and social welfare in emerging markets: existing evidence
   and unanswered questions, European Economic Review 44, 748-61.

Khanna, Tarun, and Krishna G. Palepu, 1997, Why focused strategies may be wrong for emerging
   countries, Harvard Business Review 75, 41-51.

Khanna, Tarun, and Krishna G. Palepu, 1999, The right way to restructure conglomerates in
   emerging markets, Harvard Business Review 77, 125-134.


                                             40
Khanna, Tarun, and Krishna G. Palepu, 2000, Is group a¢ liation pro…table in emerging markets?
   An analysis of diversi…ed Indian business groups, Journal of Finance 55, 867-891.

Kim, Se-Jik, 2004, Bailout and conglomeration, Journal of Financial Economics 71, 315-347.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership
    around the world, Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.

Le¤, Nathaniel, 1978, Industrial organization and entrepreneurship in the developing countries:
    The economic groups, Economic Development and Cultural Change 26, 661-675.

Lefort, Fernando, and Eduardo Walker, 1999, Ownership and capital structure of Chilean con-
    glomerates: Facts and hypotheses for governance, Revista ABANTE 3, 3-27.

Lemmon, Michael L., and Karl V. Lins, 2003, Ownership structure, corporate governance and
   …rm value: Evidence from the East Asian …nancial crisis, Journal of Finance 58, 1445-1468.

Lins, Karl V., 2003, Equity ownership and …rm value in emerging markets, Journal of Financial
     and Quantitative Analysis 38, 159-184.

Mitton, Todd, 2002, A cross-…rm analysis of the impact of corporate governance on the East Asian
    …nancial crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 64, 215-241.

Morck, Randall, 2003, Why some double taxation might make sense: The special case of inter-
   corporate dividends, Working paper, University of Alberta.

Morck, Randall, and M. Nakamura, 1999, Banks and corporate control in Japan, Journal of
   Finance 54, 319-339.

Morck, Randall, David Stangeland, and Bernard Yeung, 2000, Inherited wealth, corporate con-
   trol and economic growth: The Canadian disease, in R. Morck ed.: Concentrated Corporate
   Ownership (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).

Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon, and Bernard Yeung, 2005, Corporate governance, economic
   entrenchment and growth, Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.

Morck, Randall and Bernard Yeung, 2004, Family control and the rent-seeking society, Entrepre-
   neurship: Theory and Practice, Vol. 28, p. 391-409.

Myers, Steward C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate …nancing and investment decisions
   when …rms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13,
   187-221.

Nenova, Tatiana, 2003, The value of corporate voting rights and control: A cross-country analysis.
    Journal of Financial Economics 68, 325-351.

Pagano, Marco and Ailsa Roell, 1998, The choice of stock ownership structure: agency costs,
    monitoring and the decision to go public, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 187-225.

Perotti, Enrico, and S. Gelfer, 2001, Red barons or robber barons? Governance and investment
    in Russian …nancial-industrial groups, European Economic Review 45, 1601-1617.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 2003a, The great reversals: the politics of …nancial
    development in the 20th Century, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.



                                               41
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 2003b, Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists (Random
    House, Inc., New York)

Shleifer, Andrei, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2002, Investor protection and equity markets, Journal of
     Financial Economics 66, 3-27.

Valadares, Silvia M., and Ricardo Leal, Ownership and control structure of Brazilian companies,
    Working paper, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.

Volpin, Paolo, 2002, Governance with poor investor protection: Evidence from top executive
    turnover in Italy, Journal of Financial Economics 64, 61-90.

Zingales, Luigi, 1994, The value of the voting right: A study of the Milan stock exchange experi-
    ence, Review of Financial Studies 7, 125-148.




                                              42
      Appendix
Proof of Result 1
                                                        H
    When (1 d)r > i; it holds that U H > U P and R         i. Therefore, the horizontal structure is chosen.
                                         H     P
    When (1 d)r < i; it holds that U < U . In this case, we cannot guarantee that the pyramidal structure is
                                      P     H
always feasible. However, because R        R ; the pyramidal structure is feasible whenever the horizontal structure
is. As a result, the family chooses the pyramidal structure whenever it is feasible (i.e., it is never the case that the
pyramid is preferred but only the horizontal is feasible).

    Proof of Result 2
    The condition (1    d)r < i is more likely to hold when r is low, i is high and investor protection is low (i.e., d is
high).

    Proof of Result 3
    If t < 0, the entrepreneur never owns the …rm. If t > 0, whenever the entrepreneur can …nance the required
investment i, he will set up …rm B and thus business groups will not appear. Thus, the condition required for business
groups not to appear is that the income that the entrepreneur can pledge to outside investors is enough to …nance
the investment:
                                                E
                                              R = (1 d)(1 + t)r i                                                 (19)
Clearly, if r is high, t is high and/or i is low, Equation (19) is more likely to hold. Furthermore, an increase in
investor protection k decreases diversion d and facilitates entrepreneurial …nance.
    As we claim in footnote 14, notice that if the family can drive out entrepreneurs who are just marginally viable
               E
(that is, if R    i is positive but small), then r and t would have to be higher and/or i and d would have to be lower
to generate entrepreneurial ownership. Such a possibility would thus lead to a result that is qualitatively identical to
result 3.

    Proof of Result 4
    By result 1, a horizontal structure can only arise when (1 d)r i. However, this condition implies that when
        E
t > 0, R = (1 d)(1 + t)r        i, and thus the entrepreneur can …nance the project. Thus, the business group does
not appear. If t < 0, the family always owns …rm B, and the horizontal group appears under the same conditions
characterized in result 1.

    Proof of Result 5
    In order to …nance …rm A, the family sells a fraction (1 ) of this …rm and raises R: Because (1 d)rB < iB ;
at date 1 the family sets up …rm B in a pyramid. Thus, …rm A does not pay a dividend at date 1, but rather
invests the cash c = R iA + rA of …rm A to set up …rm B. To raise additional …nance at date 1, …rm A sells a
stake of (1    P ) of …rm B to the market. We assume (wlog) that …rm A raises just enough cash to set up …rm
B, that is, R iA + rA + (1       P )(1  d)rB = iB : At date 2, …rm A receives dividends of P (1 d)rB , which
by the previous equation equals R iA + rA + (1 d)rB iB : Because investors in …rm A break even, we have
that R = (1       )[R iA + rA + (1 d)rB iB ], or R = 1 [rA iA + (1 d)rB iB ]: Note that as long as
rA iA + (1 d)rB iB > 0, the family can raise any amount of money at date 0. In particular, the family can raise
enough to fund …rm A, and to make the pyramid feasible at date 1.

    Proof of Result 6
    Consider …rst the case in which pyramids are ruled out by contract. At date 0, the family sells a fraction 1
of …rm A to raise the set up cost, iA (this is wlog – i.e. can show there is no bene…t in raising more). Then
(1     )rA = iA : Let  = 1 riA A
                                 denote the stake that the family retains in …rm A.
    The cash that the family holds at date 1 is rA and so setting …rm B in a horizontal structure is feasible if and
only if:   rA + (1 d)rB > iB : In the low state this inequality becomes:

                                                 + rA    iA + (1    d)rB > iB
This inequality never holds since, by assumption, rA iA + (1       d)rB < iB : In the high cash ‡ow state the horizontal
structure is feasible when
                                               + rA iA + (1        d)rB > iB :                                       (20)
    Consider now the case in which pyramidal structures are not ruled out. In this case, the horizontal structure
never arises since (1 d)rB < iB . At date 0, the family sells a fraction 1  of …rm A and raises R. Suppose that
investors expect the family to set up …rm B in a pyramid only when the cash ‡ows of …rm A are high (we will show


                                                           43
below that it will never be an equilibrium to expect that the family sets up the pyramid when cash ‡ows are low).
In case of a low cash ‡ow, the family pays the cash in …rm A, c = R iA + rA         ; as dividends and does not set
the pyramid. In the case of a high cash ‡ow, the family uses all the cash in …rm A to set up …rm B in a pyramid.
The family sells 1    P shares of …rm B to raise additional cash to set up …rm B. We assume (wlog) that the family
raises just enough cash to set up …rm B, that is:

                                      R     iA + rA +      + (1        P )(1   d)rB = iB

    At date 2, …rm A receives dividends of P (1 d)rB , which by the last equation equal R iA +rA + +(1 d)rB iB :
We now consider the relation between R and . Because R must equal the expected cash ‡ows to date 0 investors,
we have:
                                   1                     1
                    R = (1      )    (R iA + rA       ) + [R iA + rA + + (1 d)rB iB ]
                                   2                     2
or
                                          1                 1
                                      R=        rA iA + [(1 d)rB iB ] :                                    (21)
                                                            2
To sustain the equilibrium, R needs to be large enough so that the pyramid is feasible only when cash ‡ows are high.
That is, we need:
                                        R iA + rA + + (1 d)rB iB ;
and
                                            R    iA + rA        + (1     d)rB < iB :
Note that, as long as
                                                      1
                                            rA     iA + [(1 d)rB iB ] > 0                                         (22)
                                                      2
R can be set to any positive value by an appropriate choice of (see Equation (21)).
     Furthermore, notice that the only possible equilibrium when Equation (22) holds is the one we consider in which
shareholders expect the family to set up the pyramid only when cash ‡ows are high. It might seem that R can be
set su¢ ciently high so as to …nance the pyramid in all states. However, this is not an equilibrium because if R is
su¢ ciently high to make the pyramid feasible in both states, investors anticipate that the family will always set up
…rm B in a pyramid, and the expression for R changes to R = 1         rA iA + (1 d)rB iB . But the right hand
side is always negative so this is not an equilibrium. We can also see from this explanation why it is not possible to
have a pyramid only when the cash ‡ows are low. If the pyramid is feasible in the low cash ‡ow state, it will also be
feasible in the high cash ‡ow state and the family will not be able to raise any money.
     Finally, notice that when Equation (22) holds, but Equation (20) does not, ruling out pyramids eliminates the
possibility of setting up …rm B, whereas not ruling them out at least allows the family to set up …rm B in the high
cash ‡ow state. There is a region of the parameter space where it is possible to have both Equation (22) holding but
not Equation (20). This region is de…ned by:

                                   + rA     iA + (1     d)rB < iB < 2(rA        iA ) + (1   d)rB :

Because 2(rA     iA ) can be greater than        + rA      iA ; this inequality is possible.

      Proof of Result 7
      If the pyramid is set up at date 0, the maximum pledgeable income of …rms A and B is rA        iA + (1   d)rB   iB <
       iA
 1     rA
            + rA iA + (1 d)rB iB < 0, where the last inequality follow from condition 13. Thus the family
cannot set up the pyramid at date 0 even if …rm B is available at that date.

    Proof of Result 8
    We just need to show that, in both structures, the family bene…ts by committing to a low level of diversion. For
                                     H
the horizontal structure, we have @U
                                   @d
                                       = cd < 0: Thus the family gains by reducing diversion.
                                                                                                       P
     For the pyramidal case, the optimal diversion level from the perspective of date 1 solves @U     @d
                                                                                                         = 0 or 1        =
cd (d; k); which using the de…nition of d( ; ) can be expressed as d( ; k): However, diversion is decided at date 2, when
                                      P                                                        2 P
the family ultimate ownership is        : Thus, actual diversion is given by d( P ; k): Since @@dU2 = cdd (d; k)r < 0; the
closer d( P ; k) is to d( ; k); the higher is U P : Because d( P ; k) > d( ; k); the family gains by reducing diversion.

      Proof of Result 9




                                                               44
   We …rst show that for the parameter values ( ; c; r; i; k) it follows that (1                        d(!; k))    i = 0 and U P = U H : By
Equations (17) and (18),
                                                              eH (!) = R
                                                              R        eP (!)
                                                                                          !
                                  c + (1       !)(1       d(!; k))r = c + 1                   (1    d(!; k))r

                                                                                 c
                                                    (1    d(!; k))r =              :
                                                                                !
Thus, as explained in the text, the market price, (1 d(!; k))r, and the implied price, !c ; are the same. Plugging
the last equality into Equation (17) leads to (1 d(!; k))r = i: Now, U P = c + N P V (1                )[(1 d(!; k))r i] =
  c + NP V = UH:
     Now, we prove another intermediate result. Let i1 > i2 > c; then, it must be that ! H (i1 ) < ! H (i2 ) and ! P (i1 ) <
! (i2 ):3 0 We prove this result only for the horizontal structure (the pyramidal case is identical). Suppose towards
  P

a contradiction that i1 > i2 > c and ! H (i1 )     ! H (i2 ): First, because R  eH (1) = c < c < i2 < i1 = R    eH (! H (i1 ));
then by the Intermediate Value Theorem (RH is continuous), there exists a !                H                    eH (b
                                                                                     b 2 (! (i1 ); 1) such that R   ! ) = i2 :
Now, since by assumption ! H (i1 ) ! H (i2 ); it must be that !   b > ! H (i2 ): But this a contradiction because ! H (i2 ) is
de…ned as the highest ! such that R  eH (!) = i2 .
     We now prove the result for i: Proofs for r and k are identical. We consider the parameter ( ; c; r; i; k) with
i > i:Recall that we are considering only investment levels strictly above c;that is i > c:
     By the intermediate result shown above, ! H (i) < ! H (i) = ! and ! P (i) < ! P (i) = !: Also, because (1
d(!; k))r i is increasing in ! and decreasing in i; and (1 d(!; k))r i = 0; it must be that (1 d(! H (i); k))r i < 0
and (1 d(! P (i); k))r i < 0:
     Next, we show that ! P (i) > ! H (i): We showed above that (1 d(! H (i); k))r i < 0: Replacing i = R      eH (! H (i)) =
            H              H                                                                  c             H
  c + (1 ! (i))(1 d(! (i); k))r into this last inequality and rearranging leads to !H (i) > (1 d(! (i); k))r. Now,
evaluating R eP at ! H (i) :

                      eP (! H ) = c +          !H                     c                !H
                      R                                  !H                 + 1               (1    d(! H ; k))r
                                                                 !H
                                               !H                                                  !H
                                > c+                     !H    (1         d(! H ; k))r + 1              (1   d(! H ; k))r

                                = c + (1        ! H )(1                       eH (! H ) = i;
                                                               d(! H ; k))r = R

where the inequality follows from       c
                                               > (1                     eP (! H (i)) > i > c = R
                                                 d(! H (i); k))r: Since R                        eP ( ); by the Intermediate
                                     ! H (i)
Value Theorem, there must be a !  b 2 (! H (i); ) such that R  eP (b
                                                                   ! ) = i: Because ! P (i) is de…ned as the highest ! such
     e P                           P
that R (!) = i; it must be that ! (i) !    b ; and consequently ! P (i) > ! H (i).
    Finally, we compare utilities under both structures

                     U P = c + N P V (! P )          (1        )[(1        d(! P ; k))r     i] > c + N P V (! H ) = U H

The inequality follows because 1) N P V (! P ) > N P V (! H ) since ! P > ! H and N P V (!) is increasing, and 2)
(1 d(! P ; k))r i < 0.

     Proof of Result 10
     Fix a parameter vector ( ; c; r; i; k) such that, for these parameters, ! H = ! P = !: Suppose that the di¤erent
structures are chosen due to variation in i (an identical argument can be made with the other parameters). We know
from Result 9 that the pyramidal (horizontal) structure is chosen for i > i (i < i) and that ! P (i > i) < ! and
! H (i < i) > !: That is, all pyramids we observe have ultimate ownership below ! and all horizontal structures have
ultimate ownership above !.

     Proof of Result 11
     Recall that ! is the ultimate ownership concentration at which both the pyramidal and the horizontal structure
                                                  eH (!) = i and R
raise the same amount i: That is, it is de…ned by R               eP (!) = i: We can re-write this system as

                                                          !(1         d(!; k))r = c
  30
    This intermediate result is simply saying that to …nance a larger investment level, the family needs to sell more
shares. The reason why the proof is not trivial is that we cannot gurantee that the functions RH and RP are always
decreasing with !: In fact, there are regions in which these functions are increasing.


                                                                           45
and
                                                                     (1       d(!; k))r = i:
    Because the system has two equations, for it to hold after a change in k; at least two parameters need to change.
We consider the e¤ect on ! and i: Di¤erentiating the …rst equation with respect to k leads to r [! k (1 d) !d! ! k !dk ] =
0 or ! k = !dk =(1 d !d! ) < 0 because 1 d 0, d! < 0 and dk < 0: The solution to i can be found from the
second equation.

    Proof of the result of section 3.1 that, when kA < kB ; the family sets P < 1 when setting a pyramid
    To raise funds, …rm A sells a fraction 1    2 of …rm B and, in addition, issues new shares of its own. Letting                                         2
be the family’s …nal stake in …rm A, the amount of funds raised is given by:

                                                  2
                           RP =           1           ((1          dA )rA +     2 (1   dB )rB ) + (1         2 ) (1   dB )rB :                         (23)
                                                  1

The …rst term is the amount collected by selling shares of …rm A and the second term is the amount raised by selling
shares of …rm B. Note that because …rm A keeps a fraction 2 of …rm A, the family sells a fraction of …rm B indirectly
through the sale of shares in …rm A.
    The family’s payo¤ at date t2 is given by:

                                                                                           kA d2A                      kB d2B
                    UP =       2   ((1        dA )rA +      2 (1     dB )rB ) + dA                      rA + dB                    rB;                 (24)
                                                                                             2                           2
where the …rst term is its security bene…ts and the last two terms are the diverted amount from each …rm net of the
cost of diversion.
     At date t2 the family chooses dA and dB to maximize its payo¤. Using the …rst order conditions (and assuming
an interior solution) we get dA = (1      2 )=kA and dB = (1       2 2 )=kB :
     From the viewpoint of date t1 ; the goal of the family is to maximize U P subject to RP   iB and to the expressions
for dA and dB : As we have shown before, the fact that diversion is costly implies that it does not pay for the family to
raise more funds than the strictly necessary to set up …rm B. Thus, at the solution RP = iB : Replacing this equality
in the family’s payo¤ leads to:

                                                                                               kA d2A                    kB d2B
                 UP =      1   ((1        dA )rA + (1         dB )rB          iB ) + dA                  rA + dB                    rB :               (25)
                                                                                                 2                         2

    The problem of the family is to chose 2 and 2 to maximize its payo¤ (Equation (25)) subject to raising enough
funds to set up …rm B (RP      iB ) and to the expressions dA = (1  2 )=kA and dB = (1   2 2 )=kB :
    The family’s problem is to choose 2 and 2 so as to maximize its payo¤. It will be convenient to divide this
problem in two steps. First, we …x 2 and …nd the optimal 2 and the maximum attainable payo¤ for the given value
of 2 :We let 2 ( 2 ) and U P ( 2 ) be the optimal value of 2 and the maximum attainable payo¤, respectively, as a
function of 2 : This …rst maximization problem can be written as

                                                                                                    kA d2A                       kB d2B
             UP (   2)   = max       1   ((1     dA )rA + (1          dB )rB       iB ) + dA                   rA + dB                     rB          (26)
                             2                                                                        2                            2
                      subject to
                 RP       iB ;                                                                                                                         (27)
                      dA = (1             2 )=kA ;    and
                      dB = (1             2 2 )=kB ;

where the objective function comes from Equation (25) and RP is given in Equation (23). The second step is simply
to maximize U P ( 2 ) over 2 :
    Because the family sells shares to raise funds, the solution has 2         1 and 2     1:It can be shown (by using
a similar proof as that of Result 8) that increasing 2 towards 1 and 2 towards 1 raises the family payo¤. An
implication of this fact is that the family does not raise more capital than it needs, that is, at the solution RP = iB ;
which using the expression for RP in Equation (23) can be written as:

                                         2
                               1               ((1    dA )rA +         2 (1     dB )rB ) + (1       2 ) (1    dB )rB = iB ;                            (28)
                                         1

where dA = (1      2 )=kA and dB = (1                       2 2 )=kB : This equation implicitly de…nes 2 as a function of                       2;   i.e., it
de…nes 2 ( 2 ): The expression for U P (              2)   can be found by plugging 2 ( 2 ) into the objective function.



                                                                                 46
    The optimal value of 2 is the one that maximizes U P ( 2 ): We are only interested in showing that                                                               2      < 1: It will
be su¢ cient to show that U P 0 ( 2 ) j 2 =1 < 0:
    Di¤erentiating the objective function in Equation (26) and recognizing that 2 is a function of                                                                          2       and that
dA = (1     2 )=kA and dB = (1         2 2 )=kB we get:

                                                  2                      0                                                                                      2        0
                               kA rB          2       2     +       1    2   (kB rA + kA rB          2)     +    2   kA rB        1      kB rA + kA rB      2            2
        U P 0(   2)   =                                                                                                                                                             ;   (29)
                                                                                                    kA kB
where we use 2 instead of 2 ( 2 ) and 20 instead of 20 ( 2 ) to lighten notation. Next, we obtain                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                         2( 2)      by completely
di¤erentiating Equation (28) with respect to 2 and rearranging:

          0                                                              kA rB 2 (1 kB + 1 2 2                               2)
          2( 2)   =                                                                                                                                                     2       :       (30)
                          (kA rB (1 +                  1)       2)   + kB (rA ( 1 + kA  1 ) + kA rB                          2)   +2      2   kB rA + kA rB         2

                          0
Finally, we replace       2( 2)     into Equation (29) and evaluate the expression at                                            2    = 1 to obtain

                                                                                        (kA kB ) rA rB ( 1  2)  2
                 U P 0(   2)   j   2 =1   =                                                                                                                     :                       (31)
                                                      kB rA (1 +              1        kA ) kA rB (1 + 1 kB ) + 2 (kB rA + kA rB )                          2

We show that this expression is negative. Note that the numerator is negative. The reason is that kB > kA and
 1 >    2 (1): It is always the case that 1    2 ( 2 ) because the family sells some non-negative amount of shares of
…rm A. However, when 2 = 1; the inequality is strict. If not, then RP would be 0 which is not possible because 2
and 2 should be such that RP = iB > 0.
     We now show that the denominator is positive. We do this by deriving a condition that 2 (1) must satisfy. We
go back to the problem in Equation (26) and solve it for 2 = 1: We let R     bP ( 2 ) be the expression for the amount
raised (given in Equation (23)) as a function of 2 when 2 = 1:

                                                          bP =
                                                          R              1
                                                                                    2
                                                                                         ((1    dA )rA + (1          dB )rB )):                                                         (32)
                                                                                    1

By replacing the expressions for dA = (1                                     2 )=kA     and dB = (1             2 2 )=kB    = (1          2 )=kB    into the above expression
                                                                                                                        r         r
                                                                                                       bP
                                                                                                        2             2 kA + kB
and di¤erentiating two times with respect to                                      2;    we obtain    @ R
                                                                                                                 =       A    B                                 bP …rst
                                                                                                                                         < 0: This implies that R
                                                                                                      @ 2
                                                                                                        2                    1

increases and then decreases with 2 : We let be the value of                                                2
                                                                                                                         bP achieves its maximum. The value of
                                                                                                                at which R
                            b
  can be found by solving @@RP2 = 0 and is equal to

                                         1 kB rA (1 + 1 kA ) + kA rB (1 + 1 kB )
                                                          =                      :
                                         2             kB rA + kA rB
Note that 2 (1)      : Suppose not, i.e., 2 (1) < : By increasing 2 to two things happen. One is that the amount
                   0
raised goes up ( RP ( 2 ) > 0 for 2 < ) and also the payo¤ of the family goes up (we explained above that the
payo¤ of the family increases as 2 increases towards 1 ). Thus, it must be that 2 (1)    : Finally, the numerator
in Equation (31) satis…es

                                     kB rA (1 +                 1        kA )       kA rB (1 +      1       kB ) + 2 (kB rA + kA rB )           2

                                          kB rA (1 +                 1       kA )       kA rB (1 +      1       kB ) + 2 (kB rA + kA rB )
                                   = 0;

where the inequality follows because 2 (1)         :
      In sum, we show that the numerator in Equation (31) is negative and the denominator positive. Therefore
U P 0 ( 2 ) j 2 =1 < 0;which implies that the optimal value of 2 satis…es 2 < 1:

    Proof of the result of section 3.1 that r and i do not a¤ect the result above
    We showed above that, when kA < kB ; the family sets P < 1. This result followed from the fact that
 P0
U ( 2 ) j 2 =1 < 0: Inspection of Equation (31) shows that the sign of this derivative is not a¤ected by r or i.

    Proof of Result 12
                                                                                        P
    If (1 d)r(iF B ) iF B < 0, then U P (iF B ) > U H (iF B ) = maxi U H (i). Thus, if R (iF B ) iF B , then the
pyramid is chosen since it yields a higher payo¤ than the maximum possible payo¤ under the horizontal structure.




                                                                                               47
       P
If R (iF B ) < iF B , then the …nancing constraint will bind in both structures, and investment must be lower than
iF B .3 1 The investment levels in this case are determined directly by the …nancing constraints:
                                                                 H
                                                                R (i) = iH
                                                                 P
                                                                R (i) = iP

Since the pyramid has a larger …nancing capacity, we have iF B > iP > iH in this case. Thus, given that iF B
is the …rst best investment level, U H (iP ) > U H (iH ). Finally, in order for the constraint to bind it must be that
(1 d)r(iP ) iP < 0. Therefore, U P (iP ) = U H (iP ) (1               )[(1 d)r(iP ) iP ] > U H (iH ). We conclude that
whenever (1 d)r(iF B ) iF B < 0 the pyramid must be chosen.
                                                                                                              H
     If (1 d)r(iF B ) iF B > 0, on the other hand, we know that U H (iF B ) > U P (iF B ). We also have R (iF B ) =
  c + (1 d)r(iF B ) > iF B , so the horizontal structure can …nance the …rst best investment level. Since U H (iF B ) =
maxi U H (i), the family invests at iF B if it chooses the horizontal structure. Nevertheless, optimal investment in the
pyramid is not necessarily iF B . The investment that yields the largest payo¤ for the pyramid solves the following
problem:
                                                                         P
                                            iP = arg max U P (i), s.t. R (i) i
                                                            i

       If the …nancing constraint is not binding, the …rst order condition is:
                                                   0                           0
                                                 [r (iP )   1] + (1        )dr (iP ) = 0
              0                                        0
      Since r (iP ) 1 > 0 for iP < iF B , and r (iP ) > 0, the investment level that solves this equation is larger than
iF B . Denote this level of investment by bi, and let imax be the maximum amount of investment that a pyramid can
…nance:
                                                       P
                                                     R (imax ) = imax
      Clearly, iP = min(bi; imax ). If (1 d)r(iF B ) iF B > 0, it must be that iF B iP .
      In order for the horizontal structure to be chosen, we must have that U P (iP ) < U H (iF B ). We can write:

                          U H (iF B )   U P (iP ) = U H (iF B )      U H (iP ) + (1   )[(1   d)r(iP )   iP ]

     While the …rst term is always positive, it is possible that (1 d)r(iP ) iP < 0, and that U P (iP ) > U P (iF B )
if (1 d)r(iP ) iP is small enough. We conclude that (1 d)r(iF B ) iF B > 0 is a necessary, but not necessarily
su¢ cient condition for the horizontal structure to be chosen.

    Proof of Result 13
    As shown in the proof of result 12, the unconstrained optimal investment in the pyramid (bi) is larger than iF B ,
                                                    P                                              P
and actual investment is iP = min(bi; imax ) where R (imax ) = imax . If iF B c + (1 d)r(iF B ) = R (iF B ), we know
that imax iF B , and thus iP    iF B .




                                                                                                               0
  31
    Notice that in order for the …nancing constraint to bind at an investment level i we must have that (1 d)r (i) < 1,
such that it is not possible to relax the …nancing constraint simply by increasing the level of investment. Under this
condition, if the the …rm cannot …nance an investment level i1 , feasible investment will be necessarily lower than i1 .


                                                                     48
i, RH ,RP




i2

 i
                                                                                                      RH
i1



                                                                                                  RP
                                                                                                       ω
                                         ω2   P                 ω1   P
                    ω2H                               ω                          ω1H
Figure 1: Determination of the ultimate ownership concentration as a function of the required investment i.
