                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DOES CORPORATE OWNERSHIP MATTER?
                     SERVICE PROVISION IN THE HOSPITAL INDUSTRY

                                              Jill R. Horwitz

                                          Working Paper 11376
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11376


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




I thank Allan Brandt, Suzanne Cooper, David Cutler, Karen Eggleston, Don Herzog, Jim Hines, Mary Beth
Landrum, Barbara McNeil, Ellen Meara, Nolan Miller, Martha Minow, Carl Morris, Joseph Newhouse, Ted
Parson, Jon Skinner, Richard Zeckhauser, and seminar participants at the National Bureau of Economics,
Harvard University Program in Health Policy, Harvard Center for Ethics and the Professions, Hauser Center
for Nonprofit Organizations, and faculty seminars of the Detroit College of Law, Berkeley Graduate School
of Public Policy, and University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health. Jia-Jia Ye and Austin
Nichols provided excellent research assistance. I also thank Bonnie Burns from the Pusey Library map
collection at Harvard University, Elizabeth Vigdor Richardson for sharing data, and Paula Payton for
administrative assistance. Funding from the Harvard PhD Program in Health Policy, Harvard Center for
Ethics and the Professions, Hauser Center for Nonprofit Organizations, National Institutes on Aging through
Grant Number T32-A600186 to the National Bureau of Economic Research, and University of Michigan Law
School John M. Olin Center for Law and Economics is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jill R. Horwitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Corporate Ownership Matter? Service Provision in the Hospital Industry
Jill R. Horwitz
NBER Working Paper No. 11376
May 2005
JEL No. I1, L3, L2

                                           ABSTRACT

Three types of firms    nonprofit, for-profit, and government      own U.S. hospitals, yet we do not

know whether ownership results in the specialization of medical service provision. This study of

over 30 medical services in urban, general hospitals (1988-2000) shows that ownership types

specialize in medical services according to the profitability of those services. The paper examines

three theories to explain the differences: 1) objectives, 2) capital prices, and 3) market

characteristics. The findings are best explained by differences in the objectives adopted by hospital

types rather than differences in capital constraints faced by them. Preliminary evidence suggests that

hospital behavior depends on the ownership form of neighboring hospitals.

Jill R. Horwitz
University of Michigan Law School
625 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1215
and NBER
jrhorwit@umich.edu
                                          I. Introduction

       The question of whether nonprofit firms differ from their for-profit counterparts has

presented a persistent puzzle for law and economics. The hospital industry, in which for-profit,

nonprofit, and government owned organizations operate side by side, has proved fertile ground

for study. Though the empirical evidence has been mixed, much of the research on hospitals has

found behavioral similarities. This is not surprising. Given that these organizations have so

much in common – they all offer medical care, use similar resources, operate under the same

healthcare regulations, employ doctors and nurses who are trained in the same institutions – one

would expect a convergence of behavior, if not firm types.

       The empirical results presented here are both new and surprising. Like previous studies,

this paper asks whether hospital types behave differently. Yet, previous research has focused

primarily on financial measures such as differences in costs, profits, billing, the value of

uncompensated care, and responsiveness to financial pressure (for review see Sloan, 2000).

Studying financial behavior yields an incomplete picture of hospital ownership. Scholarship on

medical care and ownership has generally considered single medical interventions. Here, I

examine whether and how organizational ownership is correlated with offering over thirty

hospital services (see Table 1 for service list). I find strikingly large behavioral differences.

       The results can be profitably used to examine economic theories on legal ownership.

Here I explore three categories of theories: 1) “objectives theories” that maintain objective

functions differ by ownership; 2) “capital prices theories” that maintain differences in capital

sources constrain firm types to behave differently; 3) “market theories” that suggest firms

respond to the ownership form of their competitors in the same market.




                                                  1
       I conclude that differences in firm objective functions better explain the behavioral

differences identified here than do differences in capital costs. For-profit hospitals are more

profit-seeking than either nonprofit or public hospitals. Government hospitals aim to provide

needed, but unprofitable, goods to a greater degree than the other types. Nonprofit hospitals are

often in the middle. To some extent, like for-profits, they pursue profits through offering

profitable services and avoiding unprofitable services; to some extent, like public institutions,

they provide for the public need by offering unprofitable, undersupplied services. Further, the

results suggest that nonprofit objectives may not be robust to competitive pressures since the

ownership status of a hospital’s neighbors is correlated with its own medical service offerings.

       Identifying differences among ownership types is of practical consequence, both because

of their potential relationship to health outcomes and the money at stake. Expenditures on

hospital care were $486.5 billion dollars (almost 5 percent of GDP) in 2002, and the average

annual percentage growth rate is back on the rise (Heffler et al., 2004). To justify -- or condemn

-- the billions of public dollars that are spent on nonprofit tax-exemptions and other subsidies we

need to know how these public resources are used. While policymakers care a great deal about

corporate ownership, taxation regimes and regulatory approaches have been mixed (for summary

see Horwitz, 2003).

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II summarizes contending

models of firm ownership. Section III presents the data and the empirical framework. Results

are presented in Section IV, and alternative explanations and sensitivity tests are presented in

Section V. Section VI concludes.




                                                 2
                  II. Nonprofit Hospital Behavior: Theories and Evidence

       Economists, health services researchers, and legal commentators have long debated the

question of whether corporate ownership results in behavioral differences and why. Ownership

models can be categorized into three groups – objective function theories, capital constraint

theories, and market interaction theories.



A. Objectives

       The primary theory of ownership status is that for-profits are profit-maximizers.

Compared to other firm types, they are most likely respond to incentives (Danzon, 1982). For

example, they may avoid low-paying patients by differentially locating near hospitals of last

resort (Barro, 1998) or up-coding to generate higher reimbursements (Silverman and Skinner,

2000). There is some evidence that for-profits have had the most success at profit-making. At

least during the 1990s, for-profit hospital margins were greater than those of government and

nonprofit hospitals (Frank and Salkever, 2000). On the contrary, some have claimed no

difference in objectives (Malani and Choi, 2004). Empirical studies have found little difference

regarding hospital costs (Sloan et al., 2001, Snail and Robinson, 1998), the exercise of market

power (Gaynor and Haas-Wilson, 1999), the adoption of technology (Sloan, Picone, Taylor Jr.

and Chou, 2001), or responsiveness to legislation rewarding charity care (Duggan, 2000).

       At least relative to for-profits, nonprofit and government hospitals may prioritize goals

other than profit-making. (but see Danzon, 1982). Government hospitals, many of which

descend from almshouses, are required by the agencies that control them to serve the poor

(Altman and Henderson, 1989). Duggan (, 2000), for example, has found few barriers between




                                                3
government hospitals in California and controlling public entities, which reduced public

subsidies in response to hospital revenue increases.

       According to most objectives theories, nonprofits, despite being private entities like for-

profit firms, are more likely than for-profits to adopt public goals. For example, they may

differentially respond to private (Salamon, 1987) and public (Weisbrod, 1988) market failures in

serving the needy, or maximize quality and quantity over profits (Newhouse, 1970). Rather than

specifying the content nonprofit objective functions, however, most theorists have identified the

mechanisms that cause nonprofits to adopt unique objectives. First, legal constraints, such as the

non-distribution constraint imposed by federal and state tax law (Hansmann, 1980) or charitable

trust and corporations law (Horwitz, 2003), may both encourage, or even force, nonprofit

hospitals to maximize non-financial ends, and signal those ends.

       Second, managerial behavior may differ among organizations. Perhaps because they are

not evaluated according to the profits they generate, managers guide firms in seeking rewards

based on criteria like quantity and quality (Newhouse, 1970). Alternatively, the form may attract

special kinds of people. These could be managers who wish to commit to donor preferences for

non-contractible aspects of quality (Glaeser and Shleifer, 2001) or those who hold particularly

altruistic goals (Rose-Ackerman, 1996), such as a desire to cross-subsidize (James and Rose-

Ackerman, 1986). Others suggest that the nonprofit form allows consumers to control the

mission of the institution directly (Ben-Ner, 1983, Ben-Ner and Gui, 1993, James and Rose-

Ackerman, 1986). Young (1981) outlines models in which physicians sort into different

hospitals, types of hospitals, or regions according individual preferences for philanthropic

behavior, among other preferences. That total monetary compensation of top hospital employees

is substantially higher in for-profit than not-for-profit hospitals lends support to this theory


                                                   4
(Roomkin and Weisbrod, 1999). A third and less benign theory of nonprofit objectives suggests

that employees, through physician cartels, capture nonprofit hospitals and meet their personal

interests through them (Pauly and Redisch, 1973).



B. Capital Price Constraints

       It may be that external financial constraints, rather than objectives that are adopted by

special kinds of organizations or the type of managers who choose to constrain themselves, cause

firm behavior. Because hospital types raise capital from different sources, they face different

capital costs (Gentry, 2002). The simple capital price theory that I consider follows from this

observation. One variant is that for-profit hospitals face lower costs of capital than do nonprofit

hospitals. The idea is that for-profit hospitals can respond to demand for services more quickly

than other corporations because equity financing is more readily available and less cumbersome

to manage than debt financing (Hirth, 1999). In the 1990s, over $100 billion was invested in

health care stocks (Manning, 1997), suggesting that it was easy for for-profit hospitals to raise

capital (Blecher, 1997). Further, for-profit hospitals may have more flexibility in timing

expenses because they may reinvest capital in hospital operations rather than paying interest. In

fact, some hospitals that have converted from nonprofit to for-profit form explain the change as

an attempt to obtain needed capital for operations as well as new equipment and buildings

(Cutler and Horwitz, 2000). An implication of this view is that for-profit hospitals should show

greater response to demand for capital-intensive services than other types of hospitals and,

therefore, should have higher levels of investment in such services.

       A contrary variant of the capital price theory proposes that for-profit firms are constrained

in investment relative to nonprofits because they face higher costs of capital. Nonprofit hospitals


                                                 5
have several advantages unavailable to for-profits. For example, they may issue more forms of

tax-exempt debt than for-profits1 and may receive tax-exempt, tax deductible donations. In

addition, for those nonprofit hospitals with endowments, borrowing tax-exempt debt and some

amounts of taxable debt2 generates a tax arbitrage unavailable to for-profit hospitals (Gentry,

2002, Wedig et al., 1996). Empirical evidence demonstrates that nonprofit hospitals had a lower

cost of capital than did for-profit hospitals during the 1970s, although the relationship reversed

during the early 1980s (Wedig et al., 1989). An implication of this view is that for-profit

hospitals should show greater response to demand for capital-intensive services than other types

of hospitals and, therefore, should have higher levels of investment in such services. Regardless

of which view is correct, if capital prices drive investment decisions, hospitals types should show

different patterns of investment in expensive technology.



C. Market Effects

         A third theory explaining differential firm behavior is that firms are influenced by the

ownership status of their neighbors, either through influencing the choice of objectives or

constraining behavior through competition, though the direction of the influence has been

debated. Hansmann (1980) reasons that the presence of nonprofit firms will deter profiteering

among for-profit health firms, while Cutler and Horwitz (2000) hypothesize that nonprofit and




1
  The relative cost of capital is a complicated issue. For example, for-profit hospitals borrow more than do nonprofit
hospitals and, after accounting for tax deductions, taxable debt can represent a less expensive source of capital than
tax-exempt debt (Frank and Salkever, 1994).
2
  Regulations limit the uses of tax-exempt debt available to nonprofit firms. Nonprofits, for example, must use tax-
exempt debt proceeds on physical assets. Between 1986 and 1997 there was a $150 million limit on outstanding
non-hospital, tax-exempt debt. (Gentry, 2002)




                                                          6
government hospitals copy the behavior of new for-profit entrants in a hospital market. Others

contend that there should be no influence of for-profits on nonprofits or vice versa because, with

higher operating costs and no endowments, for-profits are the marginal firm and, therefore, are

the only institutions responding to market changes (Lakdwawalla and Philipson, 1999).

       There are few empirical studies that test the market effects theories. Silverman and

Skinner (2000) show not only that for-profit hospitals up-code to generate revenues more than

other types, but that in heavily for-profit markets, nonprofit hospitals up-code at similar rates as

for-profit hospitals. Duggan (2000) demonstrates that nonprofit hospitals that faced for-profit

competition were more likely than other nonprofits to respond to financial incentives to treat

Medicaid patients under the California Disproportionate Share Program. In a case study, Cutler

and Horwitz (2000) find that nonprofit hospitals adopt the billing procedures of for-profit

hospitals in the same markets.



                                      III.    Data and Methodology

A. Data

       Hospital data are from the American Hospital Association’s Annual Surveys of Hospitals

(AHA), years 1988 – 2000. Demographic data are from the 1990 U.S. Census. The sample

includes all non-rural, acute-care hospitals that operate in Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs)

with at least two general medical and surgical hospitals, excluding military, uncategorized

federal, and prison hospitals. I excluded rural hospitals because there are relatively few rural,

for-profit hospitals and they provide a limited range of services. In 1995, for example, of the

roughly 2,500 rural hospitals, only slightly more than 8 percent were for-profit and only a handful

provided open-heart surgery.


                                                  7
       As Table 3 shows, over the study period slightly fewer than two-thirds of all hospitals

were nonprofit, with for-profit and government hospitals making up roughly equal shares of the

remainder. These shares were relatively stable over time. While there were conversions of

hospitals from one form to another, the net flows were much smaller than the gross flows. The

total number of hospitals fell over the time period.

       I included all acute care services in the AHA surveys, with the exception of a small

number for which the data were incomplete or the definition was too imprecise or inconsistent

over the relevant time period to make valid comparisons. (See Table 1). The AHA data include

variables for services provided, number of beds, ownership status, teaching status, admissions,

and location. (See Table 4).

       The AHA data have limitations. First, the data are self-reported and not independently

verified. However, there is no a priori reason to suspect that data reliability is correlated with

ownership. Second, the format of the survey changed slightly over the years. Hospitals were

asked to choose whether a specific service (e.g. emergency department) was offered at the

hospital, another hospital, or not available (1988-1993) or to answer “yes” if the service was

offered at a hospital or subsidiary, as opposed to another location in the system, network, or joint

venture (1994-2000). Because I am interested in hospital-based activities, I recoded the first

category in each year as “yes,” all other categories as “no,” with a separate category for non-

respondents.

       Finally, the data suffer from missing-values, particularly in the later years. Almost 20

percent of hospitals did not respond to the AHA survey and the non-respondents were

disproportionately for-profit. Of the sample used in this study, in 1988 approximately 3 percent

of nonprofit, 4 percent of government, and almost 18 percent of for-profit hospitals did not report


                                                  8
whether they offered emergency services. By 2000, those percentages were about 14 percent for

nonprofit, 20 percent for government, and 26 percent for for-profit hospitals.

       When hospitals did not report whether they offered a service, I imputed the values using

data from the years before and after the missing year. For the end years (1988 and 2000) I

imputed a value based on whether the hospital offered the service for the next or previous two

years. Where several years of values were missing, I excluded the observation from the analysis.

Generally, fewer than 4 percent of observations were imputed for each service.



B. Methodology

       I examine over thirty medical services singly to test whether individual service offerings

differ by hospital ownership. To assess the alternative explanations for offering patterns, I group

the services. First, to test the objectives theory, I examine whether hospital types differ in their

likelihood of investing in profitable services, unprofitable services with high public need, and

services with variable profits. Second, to test the capital prices theory I examine whether

different hospital types are more or less likely to offer services with high start-up costs and

whether those differences narrow over time. Finally, I investigate whether hospital types behave

differently in markets with high for-profit hospital penetration. Table 2 illustrates the behavior

predicted by each of the theories.




                                                  9
i. Objectives and Constraints

        To test my predictions, I estimated the following model:3

Probit(Prob(Service))it =      o   +   1   Formit +   2   Yeart +   3   Yeart*Formit +   4 Hit   +   5 Di       (1)

where FORM is a dummy variable for nonprofit, for-profit, or government ownership; Year is a

year dummy variable; H are hospital characteristic variables including hospital size (measured as

quartiles of admissions), teaching status (measured by teaching association membership), and a

dummy variable for location by region in the country; D are demographic variables of the

hospital’s vicinity (including percentages of the population by sex, white or African-American

race, ln household income, age categories (<1, 1-18, 18-30, 30-40, 40-50, 50-65, >=65, >=80)).

These were compiled from 1990 Census data arranged by aggregating census block groups that

fell within a 10-mile radius of the center (by longitude and latitude) of the zip-code where the

hospital operated. This distance is commonly used in the literature, and 10.4 miles is the mean

distance radius that captures 75 percent of discharges from acute care hospitals in urban settings

(Gresenz et al., 2004).

        Because the probability of a hospital offering a service is not independent from one year

to the next, I allowed for an arbitrary covariance matrix within each hospital over time. I also

adjusted the models for heteroskedasticity. By varying only the corporate form of the hospital

while holding the independent variables constant (at 1994 or next closest year levels), I predicted

the probabilities that each hospital in each year would offer a given service. Then I averaged the



3
  One might think about using fixed effects to examine ownership, but doing so makes the estimation depend only on
the experience of hospitals that switch form. The sample of switching hospitals is small and likely to be biased in
ways that are correlated with service offerings. For example, money-losing hospitals are more likely to change form
and also to forgo investment in services, plant, and equipment.




                                                            10
individual predicted probabilities to obtain the probability that a hospital type offers a service

each year. Using the Probit model, I have assumed that the binary variable follows a binomial

distribution.

        Determining what observed behavioral differences demonstrate about corporate intention

is more difficult than establishing these differences. Finding differences in behavior regarding

one or two services, for example, would not provide enough evidence to infer motivation.

However, by looking at many services, grouped by characteristics such as profitability, I am able

to infer differences in objectives. If, for example, one type of hospital differentially offers many

of the most profitable services and systematically avoids the services that are relatively

unprofitable (e.g. those that are often provided to an underinsured patient pool) that hospital’s

behavior is more consistent with profit-seeking than the behavior of hospitals that provide

money-losing services.

        Profitability, however, is not an inherent attribute of medical services, but depends on

institutional-specific factors such as management skills, case mix, and local input costs. Further,

within a single hospital, costs and charges differ, discounts vary by individual payer, and

allocation of joint costs blur the profitability picture. Despite these complications one can,

however, reasonably compare the relative profitability of services defined as bluntly as they are

in the AHA data.

        I sorted the medical services into three profitability categories (those with high, low, and

variable profitability) and then re-sorted the services according to the level of required initial

investment. Categories, reported in Table 1, are based on an exhaustive study of the relevant

peer-reviewed, academic literature (medical, business, finance, statistics, sociology, and public

policy), interviews with hospital administrators, doctors, and policy-makers, and analyses of the


                                                  11
socioeconomic or insurance status of patients likely to demand various services. Because

Medicare payments are the largest single source of hospital revenues, I also analyzed the

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPac) and Prospective Payment Assessment

Commission (ProPAC) reports to Congress for the relevant years. Further, because this project is

concerned primarily with hospital behavior and motivation, I checked the published, scientific

literature with a comprehensive review of trade publications, business magazines, and newspaper

reports. The qualitative evaluation of relative service profitability was critical to the project

because perceptions of whether a service would be profitable were likely as, possibly more,

important determinants of service investment choices than whether services turned out to be

profitable. Regardless, there was little disagreement among these sources. A full report is

available online (Horwitz, 2005).

       Highly Profitable Services Many of these services, such as cardiac care, are

predominantly provided to older patients, patients who are insured through Medicare; during the

early to mid-1990s, Medicare had a generous payment schedule relative to other types of

insurance (Grossman, 2002). By testing whether hospital types differentially provide services

according to relative profitability, I am able to determine the relative degree to which the

hospitals pursue profitability and, therefore, offer support for or against the objectives theory.

The highly profitable services include angioplasty, birthing rooms, cardiac catheterization,

diagnostic imagining equipment (computed-tomography scanner -- CT, diagnostic radioisotope

facility, magnetic resonance imaging -- MRI, positron emission tomography -- PET, single

photon emission computed tomography -- SPECT, and ultrasound), extracorporeal shock-wave

lithotripter (ESWL), fitness center, neonatal intensive care, open heart surgery, pediatric

intensive care, sports medicine, and women’s centers.


                                                  12
         Relatively Unprofitable Services for Needy Patients The services in this category often

answer public need, yet they are expensive to provide compared to available reimbursement or

patient payments. With the exception of emergency care,4 hospitals are not required to offer

these services. I examine these services to determine whether hospital types differentially offer

services that provide community benefits without the prospect of high profit. Analyzing this

group of services also helps evaluate one form of the objectives theory, one under which

nonprofit and public hospitals have goals of altruism or meeting public need. In this category, I

include AIDS/HIV services (outpatient, testing, general services, special unit), alcohol and

substance abuse inpatient and outpatient care, burn treatment, child and adolescent psychiatric

services, emergency rooms, obstetrics services (measured by beds and deliveries), inpatient adult

psychiatric care, psychiatric emergency services, and trauma centers.

         Services with Variable Profits This category of services, services for which the

opportunities for profit-making changed over the study period, includes the post-acute services

skilled nursing and home health. This category is particularly useful for testing relative

objectives since it shows how service provision tracks changes in profitability.

         Capital Intensive Services The final group of services is those for which capital costs are

relatively high. These include some diagnostic imaging equipment, cardiac services, birthing

rooms, burn treatment, emergency rooms, ESWL, neonatal and pediatric intensive care,

orthopedic surgery, and trauma centers. If capital constraints are operating on for-profit

hospitals, nonprofit hospitals should invest in capital-intensive services more than do others.



4
  Approximately half of the states require hospitals to have emergency care facilities as a condition of licensure or
funding (Showalter, 1999). And, hospitals must provide emergency care as a condition of participating in the




                                                          13
ii. Market Effects

        To test whether the mix of hospital types in a market affects individual hospital

operations, I test the interaction between corporate form and market.

     Probit(Prob(Service))it =      o   +   1Formit   +   2Yeart   +       3Yeart*Formit   +   4Marketit   +   5


     Formit*Marketit +      6Yeart*Formit*Marketit         +   7Hit    +    8Dit                                   (2)



where the market dummy variable identifies for-profit markets, defined as those metropolitan

statistical areas (MSAs) in which for-profits represent more than a given percentage of

admissions. As in model 1, the observations were clustered according to hospital identification

number, and I have assumed that the binary variable follows a binomial distribution.


                                                  IV. Results

        This section presents the findings for services that are representative of the four types –

consistently profitable (open heart surgery), consistently unprofitable (psychiatric emergency),

variably profitable (home health), and those with high capital costs (MRI and ESWL).



A. Objectives Theories

i. Consistently Profitable Service: Open Heart Surgery

        Although I focus on open-heart surgery in this section, the results for cardiac

catheterization labs and angioplasty are remarkably similar. Open heart surgery (coronary artery



Medicare program if the service area in which the hospital operates does not have adequate emergency care access.




                                                          14
bypass graft or CABG) refers to one of two revascularization procedures used to improve blood

supply to the heart after a patient suffers a heart attack by splicing a piece of vein or artery from

another part of the body around the blocked artery. Cardiac services -- including cardiac

catheterization, angioplasty, and open-heart surgery – are, and are widely known to be, hospital

profit centers (Stout, 2001, Wagner, 1991). During the study period, for-profit corporations

opened single-service cardiac surgery centers, while neighboring hospitals expected to lose

profitable business (Dang, 2002, Devers et al., 2003, Gallagher, 1998, Ginsburg, 2000, Meyer,

1998, Romano, 2004, Winslow, 1999).

       There is considerable evidence that cardiac care’s reputation as a money maker is

justified. As surgical services, heart attack treatments are typically well-reimbursed by insurers

(Brennan, 2002, Cutler et al., 2000). Since most are Medicare beneficiaries, patients receiving

open-heart surgery are unusually well insured. Insurers typically reimburse heart attack

treatments at high rates; patients receiving CABG are unusually well insured since most are

covered Medicare; and, there is high and increasing spending on cardiac care (Cutler, McClellan

and Newhouse, 2000). From 1984 to 1994, the real price for bypass surgery among Medicare

patients increased by 2.3 percent annually from $29,176 to $36,564 (1991 dollars) while the

share of patients receiving the treatment increased by one percentage point annually from 5 to 15

percent (Cutler et al., 2001). The costs of supplying CABG in real terms were either flat or fell

during the same period (Cutler and Huckman, 2003). In 1991, because spending on bypass

surgery was so high, the Health Care Financing Administration ran a pilot program in which

hospitals and physicians negotiated bypass surgery prices (Cromwell et al., 1997).

       Appendix A reports estimates from the basic specification of the probability of offering

open heart surgery by ownership type, controlling for hospital and demographic characteristics.


                                                  15
These results demonstrate that for-profits are more likely to offer open heart surgery than

nonprofits, which in turn are more likely to do so than government hospitals. Specifically, the

null hypotheses that for-profit, nonprofit, and government provision of open heart surgery are

jointly equal5 to each other (the coefficients on the corporate form and corporate form * year

interaction variables for one form are jointly equal to those of another form) can be rejected at

the .01 level.

         The magnitude of these differences is large. The differences can be seen best in Figure 1,

which plots the Probit predicted probabilities of service offerings by hospital type, controlling for

the hospital and demographic characteristics discussed above. For-profits are, on average, 13

percentage points more likely than government hospitals (40.9% v. 27.9%, P<0.001) and 7.3

percentage points more likely than nonprofit hospitals (40.9% v. 33.6%, P<0.001) to offer open-

heart surgery (See Table 7 for hypothesis tests).

         Over the study period, the probability of offering open heart surgery increased for all

three types of hospitals. Again, this is easiest to see in Figure 1. The relationship can also be

seen by the positive, significant, and increasing coefficients on the year dummies, and the mostly

small and insignificant coefficients on the year*gov and year*fp interactions, which indicate that

the relationship between the forms remained stable over time (See Appendix A).

         The pattern of service provision for open heart surgery supports the theory that the

hospital types have different objectives. This evidence alone, however, does not help



5
  I conducted two sets of hypothesis tests: 1) tests on whether the coefficients on the corporate form and corporate
form * year interaction variables for one form (e.g. for-profit) are jointly different those of another form (e.g.
nonprofit) and 2) tests on whether the average of these coefficients are different among forms. These hypothesis
tests, which I refer to as the Joint Tests and the Average Tests, are presented in Table 7.




                                                          16
differentiate among two possible goals. For-profits may be more interested than other types in

offering either all medical services or profitable services.



ii. Consistently Unprofitable: Psychiatric Emergency

       Conversely, hospital-based, psychiatric emergency services are relatively unprofitable for

several reasons. First, the emergency room is generally an unprofitable setting, which attracts

patients whose admissions are relatively expensive (Deloitte & Touche, 1990, Gentry and

Penrod, 2000, Melnick et al., 1989). During the study period, many providers believed that

emergency care was unprofitable, in part, because public reimbursement did not include

additional payments for emergency care that precedes inpatient care and, therefore, did not cover

costs such as licensing and standby costs (Eisenberg, 1990). Whether reimbursements are

actually sufficient to cover the costs of emergency care prior to admission, however, depends on

the total level of reimbursement for the admission.

       Second, psychiatric care reimbursement is uncertain and often low relative to cost

(Woodward et al., 1997). Psychiatric emergency patients are dominated by two groups of

patients characterized as “bad payers” – the Medicaid population and the uninsured (Gottlieb,

2002). During the 1990s, both private and public payers sought methods to control mental health

costs. State Medicaid programs facing budget shortfalls often cut mental health services,

including services previously available in state psychiatric hospitals, to balance budgets (BNA

Health Care Daily, 1995). The rapid expansion of mental health carve-out programs and other

cost-control methods also led to low provider payments in private settings.

       Third, mental health services attract a poor, poorly insured, sick, and difficult to manage

population (Woodward, Epstein, Gfroerer, Melnick, Thoreson and Wilson, 1997). The patients


                                                 17
that use psychiatric emergency care, for example, are particularly underprivileged (Dhossche and

Ghani, 1998). Young adults, who are disproportionately uninsured are overrepresented as mental

health patients, while the elderly, who are insured by Medicare, are underrepresented (Ellison et

al., 1986). One studied demonstrated that mental health patients are disproportionately sick,

uninsured, and difficult to manage (Shwed, 1980, Tye, 2001). Further, approximately 7 to 18

percent of psychiatric emergency patients and one-third of the visits are difficult-to-treat, repeat

visitors with chronic conditions (Ellison, Blum and Barksy, 1986).

           Finally, not offering psychiatric emergency capacity may protect hospitals from liability

under the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA). EMTALA requires

hospitals that both have emergency rooms and serve Medicare beneficiaries to stabilize

emergency patients, including emergency psychiatric conditions,6 before transferring them to

another hospital.7 Emergency rooms, however, are only required to screen and stabilization

patients with conditions that fall within the emergency room’s capabilities. If a hospital does not

offer psychiatric treatment or have mental health professionals on staff, EMTALA does not

require it to stabilizing emergency psychiatric patients before transferring them,8 thus making it

easier to transfer a class of poorly insured, high-risk patients.

           Appendix A contains estimates from the basic specification. These results demonstrate

that, unlike open heart surgery, for-profits are less likely than nonprofits, which in turn are less

likely than government hospitals to offer this unprofitable service (See Figure 2). Specifically,

the null hypotheses that, for all thirteen years, 1) for-profit and government hospitals and, 2)



6
    Psychiatric disturbances may constitute an emergency condition. 42 C.F.R. § 489.24(b)(i) (2000).
7
    Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA) 42 U.S.C.A. § 1395(d)(d).




                                                          18
nonprofit and government hospitals are equally likely to offer the services can be rejected at the

.001 level. The null hypothesis that the for-profit and nonprofit hospitals are jointly equal cannot

be rejected (See Table 7).

           On average from 1988 to 2000, 41 percent of for-profit hospitals were predicted to offer

psychiatric emergency services, compared to 48 percent of nonprofit hospitals and 56 percent of

government hospitals. The null hypotheses that these averages are equal can be rejected at the

.001 level (See Table 7 for details). The magnitude of these differences is large – for-profits are

15 percentage points more likely to offer psychiatric emergency services than are government

hospitals. This can be seen best in Figure 2, which plots the Probit predicted probabilities of

offering psychiatric emergency care by hospital type.

           In addition, the probability of offering psychiatric emergency services remained flat over

time, and the relationship among types remained approximately constant. It is easiest to see this

in Figure 2. The relationship can also be seen by the mostly small and insignificant coefficients

on the year dummies and on the year*gov and year*fp interaction terms in Appendix A, which

indicate that the relationships among hospital types remained stable over time.

           The investment patterns for psychiatric emergency care also lend support to the objectives

theory. Government hospitals appear relatively more willing to invest in a service that is needed

by the public than are nonprofits which are, in turn, more willing to provide the service than are

for-profit hospitals. This evidence, coupled with the evidence from open heart surgery, supports

the view that hospital types differ according to their interest in pursuing profits rather than the




8
    Baker v. Adventist Health, Inc. 260 F.3d 987 (9th Cir. 2001).




                                                           19
view that hospital types differ according to their interest in pursuing more or fewer services per

se.



iii. Service with Variable Profitability: Home Health Care

         Changes in the profitability of post-acute services, such as home health and skilled

nursing,9 make them particularly useful services to test the relative responsiveness of hospitals to

financial incentives in their service investments and, therefore, to infer the goals they pursue.

With the implementation of the prospective payment system in 1984, post-acute services became

very profitable. Unlike acute services payments for which hospitals receive a single per-episode

payment for each patient, Medicare paid a cost-related reimbursement for post-acute services.

For example, home health services were reimbursed according to cost, up to 112 percent of the

national mean cost per visit (Newhouse, 2002b). In addition, the payment system was

particularly generous to entrants, exempting skilled nursing facilities and home health services

from cost limits for the first three to four years of operation (Newhouse, 2002a).

         These generous reimbursements coupled with the fixed payment built into the Medicare

payment system made post-acute services particularly valuable for acute care hospitals. Rather

than receiving a single payment for an inpatient, hospitals could increase reimbursements by

unbundling the services and transferring a patient to a post-acute bed at the end of their hospital

stay. There is considerable evidence of these transfers. Between 1988 and 1996 acute care

lengths of stay fell 27 percent for Medicare patients and only 15 percent for all patients; during



9
  I have eliminated rehabilitation services from the analysis because the AHA survey does not specify the
rehabilitation unit type, which strongly affects service profitability.




                                                         20
the same period post-acute service usage and payment rose rapidly (Newhouse, 2002b). Finally,

the hospital could allocate joint costs to these units, increasing the total reimbursement to the

hospital. The rapid increase in Medicare spending on and utilization of post-acute services

reflects response to these incentives. Home health payments grew from $3.9 billion to over

$18.3 billion between 1990 and 1996 (Liu et al., 1999). Although the incentives for providing

post-acute services were in place in the early-1980s, it was not until the late 1980s that eligibility

and coverage guidelines were clarified in federal court decisions.10

         The potential profitability of these services was widely understood by hospital

administrators, consultants, and regulators alike (Geriatric Health Ventures Incorporated, 1992,

Helbing and Cornelius, 1992, Helbing et al., 1992, Scharmach, 1990, Wagner, 1989). One article

in the trade press, for example, urged hospital administrators to view skilled nursing facilities as

a “higher reimbursement category, not necessarily a geographic location” (Deangelis, 1987). In

the early 1990s, regulators searched for solutions to contain post-acute service spending, which

they believed was unnecessary (Vladeck and Miller, 1994). Observers predicted that these

services would remain profitable even if capitated (1993, Fowler, 1992, Lutz, 1992, O'
                                                                                     Donnell,

1993).

         The profit-making opportunities of post-acute care plummeted with the 1997 Balanced

Budget Act (BBA). Medicare payments were reduced, the Health Care Financing Agency

developed a prospective payment system for post-acute services, and spending on home health

care fell by a factor of two.



10
  Duggan v. Bowen 691 F.Supp. 1487 (1988), effective 1989, made patients who would be stabilized by home
health services, in addition to patients who would be improved by the services, eligible for the services.




                                                      21
       Appendix A contains estimates from the basic specification. Not only did the

probabilities of offering home health care vary by ownership, the relative differences among

types varied over time. The probabilities of offering home health services when the service was

profitable increased for all three hospital types. As can be seen in Figure 3, however, the growth

of home health care when profitable and the decline when unprofitable among for-profit hospitals

were particularly dramatic. From 1988 to 1996, the probability of a for-profit hospital offering

home health services more than tripled (17.5 percent to 60.9 percent). During the same period,

the probability of offering home health care only grew slightly over 10 percentage points (40.9

percent to 51.7 percent) for nonprofit and 14 percentage points (38.1 percent to 51.9 percent) for

government hospitals.

       From 1997 to 2000, as home health care became relatively unprofitable with the BBA’s

implementation, the probability of offering it fell a striking 37.5 percentage points among for-

profits, 7.7 percentage points among nonprofits, and 1.5 percentage points among government

hospitals. All relevant null hypotheses can be rejected at the 0.01 level. This finding provides

important evidence regarding the magnitude (large) and speed (fast) of for-profit responsiveness

to incentives.



B. Capital Prices Theory

       This section discusses two representative services, Extracorporeal Shock Wave

Lithotripsy (ESWL) and Magnetic Resonance Imagining (MRI), to test the capital constraint

theory. In 1984, the Food and Drug Administration approved the use of Extracorporeal Shock

Wave Lithotripters, machines that uses shock waves to shatter kidney stones or gallstones.

Because the typical lithotripter costs about $1 million, only approximately 240 hospitals in the


                                                22
country had them in the early 1990s but, in 1991, there were reports that a new, much less

expensive machine was being developed (1991).

       MRI allows technicians to determine tissue types by looking at a map of how hydrogen

nuclei in different parts of the body respond to the magnetic field generated by the machine. Like

all diagnostic imaging equipment, magnetic resonance imaging technology is very expensive; a

typical machine, excluding installation and licensing fees, costs approximately $1.5 million

(Anonymous Interviewee, 2002).

       Appendix A contains estimates from the basic specifications. Consistent with theories

about technology diffusion, all types of hospitals were more likely to have MRIs and ESWLs

over time. The patterns of adoption, however, were quite different. As can be seen most easily

in Figure 4, for-profit hospitals were always more likely to offer ESWL services during the years

studied. On average, 22 percent of for-profit hospitals, 17 percent of nonprofit hospitals, and 13

percent of public hospitals were likely to offer ESWL. These differences are significant at, at

least, the 0.003 level (Table 7).

       On the other hand, for-profits were only slightly more likely than nonprofit hospitals to

have MRIs. On average, 51 percent of for-profit hospitals and 48 percent of nonprofit hospitals,

controlling for hospital and demographic characteristics, were predicted to have MRIs. The

difference is insignificant (See Table 7). Further, the relative probability of offering the service

changed over time. Between 1988 and 1992, nonprofit hospitals were predicted to be more likely

than for-profit hospitals to have MRIs; between 1993 and 1998, for-profits were more likely than

nonprofits to offer the service. Government hospitals were, on average, approximately 7 to 10

percentage points less likely than either of the other types to offer MRI (See Figure 5). Neither

of these services demonstrated either hypothesized pattern of the capital constraint theory -- a


                                                 23
pattern of investment in which either for-profit or nonprofit hospitals consistently invest more in

these services.



C. Looking Across all the Technologies

       Table 5 summarizes the results for all tested services. Although for-profit hospitals were

only somewhat more likely than nonprofits to offer profitable services, both for-profit and

nonprofit hospitals were considerably more likely than government hospitals to offer profitable

services. For-profits were less likely than nonprofits, which in turn were less likely than

government hospitals, to offer unprofitable services. The objectives theory is further supported

by the patterns of offering services with variable profits. As can be seen in Table 6, for-profits

exhibited dramatic responsiveness to financial incentives, particularly in terms of investing in

post-acute services as they became profitable and divesting from them as they became

unprofitable.

       The services examined in the study demonstrated neither pattern predicted by the capital

prices theory. For-profits were less likely than nonprofits to have birthing rooms, a capital

intensive service, during the early years of the study (in 1988 F=64% v. N=70%), but by 2000

that gap shrank (F=75% v. N=77%). Government hospitals were less likely than the other types

to have CAT scanners, another capital intensive service, during the early years of the study (e.g.,

in 1988 F=88%, G=80%, N=87%), but by 2000 they were more likely to have them (F=93%,

G=96%, N=95%). From these results it appears that access to equity capital did not lead for-

profit hospitals to consistently make greater investments in expensive technology than

nonprofits. (See Table 5, services with high initial capital needs in italics). Nor did access to




                                                 24
tax-exempt debt, endowment, or tax arbitrage opportunities lead nonprofit hospitals to

consistently make greater investments in expensive technology than for-profits.



D. Market Results

       To appraise the market theory, I asked whether hospital types offered different services

depending on the for-profit penetration in the local markets. To do this, I tested the interactions

between ownership form and a dummy variable for for-profit markets, defined as metropolitan

statistical areas with greater than or equal to 20 percent for-profit admissions. I chose this

breakpoint because few hospitals operate in markets with higher for-profit penetration, though

tests of markets with greater than or equal to 10 percent for-profit admissions on a more limited

data set yielded similar results. Measured by the share of hospital admissions in an MSA, the

mean for-profit share market share was 0.115, the median was 0.045, and the standard deviation

was 0.149.

       The market regressions support the theory that hospitals, particularly for-profit and

nonprofit hospitals, learn from or compete with neighboring hospitals. The results also support,

albeit with limited evidence, the idea that nonprofit hospitals copy the profit-making techniques

of their for-profit neighbors. Again, I focused on three representative services to determine

whether hospital types offered different services in for-profit and other markets.

       All hospital types were more likely to offer open heart surgery, a very profitable service,

in markets with at least 20 percent for-profit market share than in other markets (See Appendix B

and Figures 6, 7, 8). Nonprofit hospitals, for example, were on average 5.4 percentage points

more likely to offer open heart surgery in markets with at least 20 percent for-profit penetration

than in other markets (differences significant at 0.05 percent level, See Table 8 for hypothesis


                                                 25
tests). For-profit and government hospitals followed a similar pattern, offering open heart

surgery at a greater rate in for-profit markets than in other markets (See Figure 6). Although the

results for for-profit hospitals were not statistically significant for the full study period, excluding

the most recent two years of data (1999 and 2000), there were large and significant differences.

At least for this profitable service, having for-profit neighbors matters.

        The results for home health were similar for nonprofit hospitals. Nonprofit hospitals

were more likely to offer home health in for-profit markets than in other markets during almost

the entire period (See Figure 7). These results, coupled with open heart surgery, might seem to

suggest that hospitals are more likely to offer all services in for-profit markets than in other

markets. However, there is reason to reject this theory. First, though nonprofits were more likely

to offer home health in for-profit markets throughout the study period, the largest gap came

during the particularly profitable period for investment from 1993 through 1996. Further, for-

profit hospitals were only more likely to provide home health in for-profit markets than in other

markets during this profitable period (See Figure 8). There was no statistically significant

difference between government hospitals in for-profit and other markets during this period.

        On the contrary, on average over the thirteen years studied, for-profit hospitals were

equally likely to offer psychiatric emergency services in both types of markets (See Figure 8).

However, government hospitals were 4.6 percentage points more likely to provide psychiatric

emergency care in for-profit markets than in others, although the difference was not statistically

significant. Nonprofit hospitals were also 4.5 percentage points more likely to offer this

unprofitable service and the results were statistically significant at the 0.10 level. Interestingly,

during the later years of the study period, nonprofits in for-profit markets seem to be exiting the

psychiatric emergency business. While from 1988 to 1993 there was little difference in the


                                                  26
probability of offering the service in each type of market, from 1994 to 2000, nonprofits in for-

profit markets were approximately 7.1 percentage points less likely to have the service than those

in other markets. The null hypothesis that the probabilities were equal was rejected at the 0.05

percent level.

       These results, coupled, with the results for open heart surgery, support the claim that

nonprofit hospitals are influenced by the behavior of their for-profit neighbors. They are more

likely to offer profitable services and less likely to offer unprofitable services in markets with

relatively higher for-profit penetration.



                       V. Alternative Explanations and Sensitivity Tests

A. Alternative Explanations

       There are two alternative explanations to the results, both raising potential endogeneity

concerns with the model. First, as Wennberg (1999) and others have observed, medical service

provision varies considerably by small geographic region. Norton and Staiger (1994) have

further shown that relatively low uncompensated care provision at for-profit hospitals can be

explained, in part, by location. Using a case study approach for three markets, McClellan and

Staiger suggested that for-profit hospitals locate in areas with low hospital quality (McClellan

and Staiger, 2000). One might think, therefore, that firm types pick small areas in which to

operate based on the character of demand in those areas, such as patient demand or physician

preference for open heart surgery or medical management. Where demand for profitable services

is greatest, therefore, one would expect more for-profit firms than in other areas.

       I tested this alternative explanation for the results by using a fixed-effects approach,

including an indicator variable for the year 2000 Hospital Referral Regions (HRR) in which each


                                                 27
hospital operates. The coefficient implications produced by additional analyses of the three

representative services described above (open heart surgery, psychiatric emergency care, and

home health care) remained the same. The relevant differences remained significant at the one

percent level with one exception. The average difference between nonprofit and for-profit

hospitals offering open heart surgery was significant at the one percent level, however tests for

the joint difference lost significance.

        These results are not only quantitatively reassuring; they make sense. First, medical

services differ in important ways from uncompensated care, the good studied by Norton and

Staiger in 1994. It is likely easier for hospitals to avoid locations in which there is likely to be

considerable demand for uncompensated care than demand for a bundle of unprofitable medical

services. In fact, the early wave of hospital purchases by for-profit chains were in relatively

wealthy suburban areas, where there are comparatively few uninsured patients. To predict the

demand for a large number of services, potential hospital purchasers would need to know details

about patient population risk and insurance characteristics that are hard to find and, moreover,

change over time. A much easier strategy for a hospital wishing to earn profits would be to limit

offerings of unprofitable services. Second, based on how hospital conversion markets work, the

objectives explanation is more plausible than the geographic selection story. For-profit chains

have typically bought hospitals that were for sale, often because they were failing financially

(Picone et al., 2002).

        A second alternative explanation is that individual hospitals choose ownership form

based on their financial status. Profitable hospitals choose for-profit status, unprofitable

hospitals choose nonprofit status. This explanation, however, is at odds with conversion

experience. Failing hospitals, not profitable hospitals, typically convert from nonprofit to for-


                                                  28
profit status (Picone, Chou and Sloan, 2002). In addition, hospital reimbursement and financial

margins are uncertain and fluctuate considerably over relatively short time periods (See, e.g.,

Commission, 2004). Even if hospitals could reasonably predict reimbursement and profitability,

changes in ownership are costly in several respects. Legal permissions are difficult to secure and

challenges likely, professional legal and consulting costs are high, and reputational effects can be

large.



B. Propensity Scores and Other Sensitivity Tests

         The results were robust to several other sensitivity tests on the three representative

services. Because size is the best predictor of offering any service, I restricted the regressions to

the observations in the top two quartiles, bottom two quartiles, and middle two quartiles of

hospitals measured by number of admissions to the hospital. Restricting the tests to the smallest

hospitals, those in the bottom two admissions quartiles, the finding that nonprofit hospitals were

more likely than government hospitals to offer open heart surgery was not significant. This result

is not surprising because so few small hospitals offer open heart surgery at all. Like open heart

surgery, among the smallest hospitals, the finding that nonprofit hospitals were more likely than

for-profit hospitals to offer psychiatric emergency services was not significant.

         To test the sensitivity of the results to demographic characteristics, I added age-squared

categories for percentage of the population over 65 years and over 80 years. Because state

payment policies for mental health services vary considerably, I included state dummies and

state-year interactions for the psychiatric emergency service probit estimations. To test variation

within the government hospital category, I excluded veterans’ hospitals. The probability that

nonprofit and non-veteran government hospitals were equally likely to offer psychiatric


                                                  29
emergency services could not be rejected at the 0.10 level. In addition, because firm types tend

to cluster in different regions I altered the region variable to account for areas of high for-profit

penetration (e.g. south11 and southwest12) and included dummy variables for all nine regions

listed in the AHA dataset.

         Finally, I reanalyzed the three services using propensity scores, a method used to make

causal inferences when assignment to a group, such as corporate ownership, is not random

(Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983, 1984). This method allowed me to ensure that I had compared

hospitals that differed primarily by ownership and not other characteristics such as hospital size.

More specifically, I determined the conditional probability of corporate ownership (nonprofit v.

for-profit; nonprofit v. government, government v. for-profit) given the observed characteristics

used in the Probit estimates (the propensity scores), created five subcategories defined by the

estimated propensity score, and predicted the probability of a hospital type offering a service in a

given year controlling for the propensity grouping. These tests did not change the results

reported above in any meaningful way.13 The null hypothesis that nonprofit and government

hospitals were equally likely to offer open heart surgery could not be rejected at the 0.05 level

(p=0.078).




11
   Southern region includes: Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Arkansas, Louisiana, Tennessee,
Alabama, Mississippi, and Kentucky.
12
   Southwestern region includes: Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and Nevada.
13
   The predicted probabilities of offering a service were slightly different than those produced by the Probit tests
because the predictions were generated only from subsets of the data (e.g. only nonprofits and for-profits; only
public and nonprofits). The relationships among the hospitals, however, were consistent with the Probit results.




                                                           30
                                         VI. Conclusion

       The empirical findings – that different hospital types offer different services, varying

systematically with their profitability – challenge an emerging view that there are few differences

among the nonprofit and for-profit forms (Sloan, 2000). The magnitude and robustness of the

findings are striking in themselves, particularly given the blunt nature of the dependent variables

and hospitals’ regulatory context.

       Plausible ownership theories should account for all three firm types. These results

undermine two reasonable hypotheses about behavioral differences. Neither (1) the divide

between government and private (both for-profit and nonprofit) institutions, nor (2) the divide

between profit-distributing and non-distributing (both nonprofit and government) institutions can

explain the differences described here. Although nonprofits are similar to for-profit hospitals

because they are both private entities, they differ in their responsiveness to incentives. Although

nonprofits are similar to government hospitals because they are legally prohibited from

distributing profits to owners, nonprofits are not substitutes for government hospitals in the

provision of unprofitable services that are disproportionately demanded by needy patients.

       The results also undercut the simple capital prices theory. There is no clear pattern that

relative access or costs of capital constrain hospitals by type. More work on the question,

however, is needed. These results may be because there are many factors that contribute to the

decision and ability to invest in technology, capital costs only representing one. Licensing

requirements under certificate-of-need programs, for example, could prevent hospitals from

investing in a service despite easy access to low cost capital. Or, differences in the sources of

capital may be over estimated. With increasing hospital consolidation and the growth of hospital

chains, nonprofit hospitals may operate internal capital markets that make them more similar to


                                                 31
for-profit capital markets than this theory suggests. Likewise, the greater flexibility of equity

capital may also be overestimated since, for example, for-profits may issue certain forms of tax-

exempt debt and nonprofits have access to flexible funds such as endowment (Frank and

Salkever, 2000, 1994).

       In light of this evidence, the objectives theories seem more plausible than the capital

prices theories. Although specifying non-financial objective functions is difficult, the evidence

bolsters the theory that government hospitals are hospitals of last resort. They are more likely

than other types to offer unprofitable services that are generally needed by poor, underinsured

patients. Nonprofit hospitals are the intermediate type. They are less responsive to financial

incentives than for-profit and mores so than government hospitals, both in offering profitable and

avoiding unprofitable services. They are also less likely than government hospitals to offer

unprofitable, undersupplied services.

       The results shed some light on the content of the nonprofit objective function as well.

While profit-making must be in the objective function of all hospitals, it is likely lower on the list

for nonprofits than for-profits. Controlling parties – be they managers, directors, doctors, or

consumers – are making different choices that vary systematically by ownership. Further, the

evidence presented here challenges the capture models, at least in their extreme forms, of

nonprofit organizations (see, e.g., Pauly and Redisch, 1973). If doctors or other powerful

nonprofit hospital employees were effectively maximizing their incomes, nonprofit hospitals

would not offer unprofitable services. Perhaps hospital directors or regulations constrain

employee capture, but the evidence presented here is consistent with a story of employee

altruism.




                                                 32
        Interestingly, despite notoriously weak enforcement mechanisms, the results are

consistent with law which requires nonprofits to act in the public interest (for detail on nonprofit

law see Horwitz, 2003). More concretely, nonprofits are not required to offer unprofitable

services but they choose to do so. Aside from the few jurisdictions in which attorneys general

had and used their power to control hospital behavior during the study period, nonprofit and for-

profit hospitals had the same opportunities to open and close units, and they faced the same

public relations problems in doing so.

        The results raise two further puzzles that need more attention. First, why do for-profits

offer any unprofitable services? Businesses trying to maximize profits should not offer

unprofitable product lines. For-profit hospitals, unlike other businesses however, maximize

profits subject to a series of constraints having to do with the goods they provide. In addition,

there are important, perhaps life-saving complementarities among health services. Institutions

that provide surgical services, for example, need expensive and, often unprofitable, emergency

support systems. In fact, opponents of single service specialty hospitals, such as freestanding

cardiac centers, argue that specialty hospitals with limited emergency facilities jeopardize patient

safety (Devers, Brewster and Ginsburg, 2003). Also, offering some unprofitable services such as

obstetrical care is necessary to signal to doctors, patients, and insurers that the hospital is a full-

service institution. Finally, some services are loss-leaders. Unprofitable obstetric care, for

example, attracts female patients who bring their families’ profitable business to the hospital.

        Second, why don’t nonprofit hospitals offer all the profitable services as well as some

unprofitable services? After all, nonprofits must value profits to some degree, even if less than

for-profit hospitals, and they could use the proceeds to cross-subsidize. There are several

plausible answers. For example, nonprofit hospitals may stick to core services like obstetrics and


                                                   33
emergency care. The evidence here is mixed, showing that although nonprofits are less likely

than for-profits to have a women’s center or home health care, they are also more likely to have

peripheral services like fitness centers.

       Another plausible answer, following Newhouse’s model, is that nonprofits differentially

value quality. The evidence presented here is consistent with the quality explanation. It is

unlikely that the most profitable mix of services is the most medically appropriate mix. Public

payment rates are set through a complex and changing process based on, among other factors, the

evolving judgment or reacting to past errors of rate-setters, imperfect adjustments for

demographic and geographic characteristics of hospital markets, and the political strength of

interested parties. Private payment rates also result from complex negotiations and relative

bargaining power. This messy process does not inspire faith that regulators have found the right

price in terms of medical quality. For these reasons, the rapid and large responses to changes in

post-acute care profitability raise doubts that those changes were initiated for quality reasons.

We need more study on how and, indeed, whether these processes produce incentives for

hospitals to provide a medically appropriate service mix.

       The preliminary results also suggest that hospital behavior depends on the ownership of

its neighbors. Nonprofits and for-profits are both more likely to offer a profitable service and

less likely to offer an unprofitable service in for-profit markets than in other markets.

Government hospitals, however, appear to be relatively robust to outside influence; while they

were more likely to offer a profitable service in for-profit markets than other markets, the results

did not extend to unprofitable or variable profit services. The sensitivity tests related to

geography, particularly the HRR fixed effects tests, suggest that there is a neighboring hospital

effect rather than a market demand effect. And, given the breadth of services tested, an


                                                 34
alternative theory based on market demand heterogeneity would require the unlikely scenario that

an entering hospital could to gather information on and make choices about complex bundles of

good. With only these results, however, it is difficult to differentiate between causal

explanations such as isomorphism, local culture, competition, or market segmentation.

       These results have practical implications for tax policy and health care regulatory policy

which are worth noting, though are discussed in detail elsewhere (Horwitz, 2003). First, theory

supports subsidizing nonprofit organizations on efficiency grounds based on the positive

externalities they create (e.g. medical research, education, and disease control) or the agency

problems they solve (e.g. they are more trustworthy decision-makers), which could be tested in

many ways (Gentry and Penrod, 2000). These findings suggest that in measuring community

benefit, policymakers should consider more than the provision of uncompensated care.

       For example, in addition to public goods such as relatively unprofitable care for the poor,

nonprofits provide private goods such as the availability of medically appropriate services for

insured patients. To the extent that well-insured or wealthy patients want unprofitable services,

they may not be able to buy them because of distortions caused by regulations forcing hospitals

to take all comers. Well-insured patients, for example, may want and be willing to pay for a

local trauma center. Under normal market conditions, a for-profit hospital would meet this

demand. But, because hospitals must stabilize nonpaying, emergency patients before transferring

them to other hospitals, trauma centers can become big money losers. Nonprofits and

government hospitals can address this allocative inefficiency because they decide which services

to provide on grounds other than profit maximization.

       Finally, ownership might be used helpfully to regulate. When purchasing goods such as

healthcare, where payers cannot specify the goods they want to buy nor monitor their supply,


                                                35
payment incentives should be low-powered to avoid under-serving needy patients (Newhouse,

2001). Complicated reimbursement systems have been developed to combat the risks of

contracting under these circumstances, namely selection and skimping. With evidence that the

responsiveness to financial incentives differ by form, payers could adjust rates by or selectively

contract with different firm types.




                                                36
References

 "Hospitals Continue Move into Home Care: Coming Changes in Reimbursement Expected to
Promote Development of Programs Offering Continuum of Care," Modern Healthcare. 1993,
28.

 "Jackhammer Could Crush Cost of Treating Kidney Stones," Modern Healthcare. 1991, 19.

Altman, Stuart H. and Henderson, Mary G. "Introduction," S. H. Altman, C. Brecher, M. G.
Henderson and K. E. Thorpe, Competition and Compassion. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Health
Administration Press, 1989,

Anonymous Interviewee. "Ge Medical Systems Sales Representative," Telephone Interview,
Needham, Massachusetts, 2002.

Barro, Jason R. "Hospital Conversions to for-Profit Status: Causes and Consequences." 1998,
pp. 38.

Becker, Cinda. "Imaging: The Next Generation," Modern Healthcare. 2000, 48.

Ben-Ner, Avner. "Nonprofit Organizations: Why Do They Exist in Market Economies?," New
Haven: Yale Program on Non-Profit Organizations, 1983.

Ben-Ner, Avner and Gui, Benedetto. The Nonprofit Sector in the Mixed Economy. Ann Arbor,
Michigan: University of Michigan Press, 1993.

Blecher, Michele Bitoun. "Capital: Who'
                                      s Got It? How to Get It!," Hospitals & Health
Networks. 1997.

BNA Health Care Daily. "Medicaid: Louisiana Gov. Edwards Proposes 12 Percent Cut in
Program Spending," 1995.

Brennan, Troyen. "Telephone Interview with President, Brigham and Women'
                                                                       s Hospital
Physician Organization," Boston, Massachusetts, 2002.

Commission, Medicare Payment Advisory. "Report to Congress: Medicare Payment Policy,
Section 3a," Washington: Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, 2004, 69-101.

Cromwell, Jerry; Dayhoff, Debra and Thoumaian, Armen H. "Cost Savings and Physician
Responses to Global Bundled Payments for Medicare Heart Bypass Surgery." Health Care
Financing Review, 1997, 19(1), pp. 41-57.

Cutler, David and Huckman, Robert S. "Technological Development and Medical Productivity:
The Diffusion of Angioplasty in New York State." Journal of Health Economics, 2003, 22, pp.
187-217.



                                             37
Cutler, David M. and Horwitz, Jill R. "Converting Hospitals from Not-for-Profit to for-Profit
Status: Why and What Effects?," D. M. Cutler, The Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing
Not-for-Profit and for-Profit Institutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000, 45-79.

Cutler, David M.; McClellan, Mark and Newhouse, Joseph P. "How Does Managed Care Do
It?" RAND Journal of Economics, 2000, 31(3), pp. 526-48.

Cutler, David M.; McClellan, Mark; Newhouse, Joseph P. and Remler, Dahlia. "Pricing Heart
Attack Treatments," D. M. Cutler and E. R. Berndt, Medical Care Output and Productivity.
Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 2001, 305-62.

Dang, Shirley. "Ground Broken for Heart Hospital," Milawaukee Journal Sentinel. Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, 2002, 1d.

Danzon, Patricia M. "Hospital "Profits": The Effects of Reimbursement Policies." Journal of
Health Economics, 1982, 1(1), pp. 29-52.

Deangelis, Peter. "Hospital Based Snfs an Alternative to Empty Beds." Health Care Financial
Mangement, 1987, 41(8), pp. 60-68.

Deloitte & Touche. "U.S. Hospitals and the Future of Health Care," Boston, Massachusetts:
Deloitte & Touche, 1990.

Devers, Kelly J.; Brewster, Linda R. and Ginsburg, Paul B. "Specialty Hospitals: Focused
Factories or Cream Skimmers?," Washington, D.C.: Center for Studying Health System Change,
2003.

Dhossche, Dirk M. and Ghani, Shareh O. "A Study of Recidivism in the Psychiatric Emergency
Room." Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 1998, 10(2), pp. 59-67.

Duggan, Mark G. "Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending." Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2000, 115(4), pp. 1343-73.

Eisenberg, Jeffrey S. "Ers on Critical List," Focus. 1990.

Ellison, James M.; Blum, Nancy and Barksy, Arthur. "Repeat Visitors in the Psychiatric
Emergency Service: A Critical Review of the Data." Hospital & Community Psychiatry, 1986,
37(1), pp. 37-41.

Fowler, Frances J. "Subacute Care Offers Flexibility, Revenue," Modern Healthcare. 1992, 50.

Frank, Richard and Salkever, David. "Market Forces, Diversification of Activity, and the
Mission of Not-for-Profit Hospitals," D. M. Cutler, The Changing Hospital Industry:
Comparing Not-for-Profit and for-Profit Institutions. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago
Press, 2000, 195-215.




                                               38
____. "Nonprofit Organization in the Health Sector." The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
1994, 8(4), pp. 129-44.

Gallagher, Mike. "Bitter Medicine: Presbyterian Plans Painful for Doctor," Albuquerque
Journal. Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1998.

Gaynor, Martin and Haas-Wilson, Deborah. "Change, Consolidation, and Competition, in
Health Care Markets." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1999, 13(1), pp. 141-64.

Gentry, William M. "Debt, Investment, and Endowment Accumulation: The Case of Not-for-
Profit Hospitals." Journal of Health Economics, 2002, 21(5), pp. 845-72.

Gentry, William M. and Penrod, John R. "The Tax Benefits of Not-for-Profit Hospitals," D. M.
Cutler, The Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing Not-for-Profit and for-Profit Institutions.
Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press, 2000, 285-324.

Geriatric Health Ventures Incorporated. "Subacute Skilled Nursing," Modern Healthcare. 1992,
29.

Ginsburg, Paul B. "Are Focused Factories the Wave of the Future?" Frontiers of Health
Services Management, 2000, 16(3), pp. 41-46.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Shleifer, Andrei. "Not-for-Profit Entrepreneurs." Journal Of Public
Economics, 2001, 81(1), pp. 99-115.

Gottlieb, Gary. "Telephone Interview, President, Brigham and Women'
                                                                  s Hospital," Telephone
Interview, February 14, 2002. Boston, Massachusetts, 2002.

Gresenz, C.R.; Rogowski, J. and Escarce, J.J. "Updated Variable-Radius Measures of Hospital
Competition." Health Services Research, 2004, 39(2), pp. 417-30.

Grossman, Jerome H. "An Economic History of Healthcare in Massachusetts: 1990-2000,"
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Center for Business and Government, Kennedy School of
Government, Harvard University, 2000.

____. "Telephone Interview, Chairman Emeritus, New England Medical Center," Telephone
Interview, June 14, 2002. Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2002.

Hansmann, Henry. "The Role of Nonprofit Enterprise." Yale Law Journal, 1980, 89, pp. 835-
901.

Heffler, Stephen ; Smith, Sheila; Keehan, Sean; Clemens, M. Kent; Zezza, Mark and Truffer,
Christopher. "Health Spending Projections through 2013." Health Affairs, 2004, (Web
Exclusive), pp. w4,79-w4,93.

Helbing, Charles and Cornelius, Elizabeth S. "Snfs." Health Care Financing Review, 1992,
14(Supplement), pp. 97-123.



                                             39
Helbing, Charles; Sangl, Judith A. and Silverman, Herbert A. "Home Health Agency Benefits."
Health Care Financing Review, 1992, Annual Supplement, pp. 125-48.

Hirth, Richard A. "Consumer Information and Competition between Nonprofit and for-Profit
Nursing Homes." Journal of Health Economics, 1999, 18, pp. 219-40.

Horwitz, Jill R. "Research Note: Relative Profitability of Acute Care Hospital Services," Health
Affairs Online Supplement, content.healthaffairs.org/cgi/content/full/24/3/790/DC1, 2005.

____. "Why We Need the Independent Sector: The Behavior, Law, and Ethics of Non-for-Profit
Hospitals." UCLA Law Review, 2003, 50(6), pp. 1345-411.

James, Estelle and Rose-Ackerman, Susan. The Nonprofit Enterprise in the Market Economics.
Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers, 1986.

Lakdwawalla, Darius and Philipson, Tomas. "The Nonprofit Sector and Industry Performance."
1999.

Liu, Korbin; Gage, Barbara; Harvell, Jennie; Stevenson, David and Brennan, Niall. "Medicare's
Post-Acute Benefit: Background, Trends, and Issues to Be Faced," The Urban Institute, 1999.

Lutz, Sandy. "Home Care Pps Holds Promise of Profits," Modern Healthcare. 1992, 44.

Malani, Anup and Choi, Albert. "Are Non-Profit Firms Simply for-Profits in Disguise?
Evidence from the Executive Compensation in the Nursing Home Industry." The University of
Virginia John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper Series, 2004.

Manning, David L. "Investing in the Twenty-First Century Hospital." Health Affairs, 1997,
16(2), pp. 108-11.

McClellan, Mark and Staiger, Douglas. "Comparing Hospital Quality at for-Profit and Not-for-
Profit Hospitals," D. M. Cutler, The Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing Not-for-Profit
and for-Profit Institutions. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press, 2000, 93-112.

Melnick, Glenn; Serrato, Carl and Mann, Joyce. "Prospective Payments to Hospitals: Should
Emergency Admissions Have Higher Rates?" Health Care Financing Review, 1989, 10(3), pp.
29-39.

Meyer, Harris. "Focused Factories: Are You Ready for the Competition?," Hospitals & Health
Networks. 1998.

Newhouse, Joseph P. "Interview with John D. Macarthur Professor of Health Policy and
Management and Director of the Division of Health Policy Research and Education Harvard
University," Interview, April 2, 2002. Boston, Massachusetts, 2002a.

____. "Medicare," J. A. Frankel and P. R. Orszag, American Economic Policy in the 1990s.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2002b, 899-955.



                                              40
____. "Medicare Policy in the 1990s," Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research,
2001.

____. "Toward a Theory of Nonprofit Instiutions: An Economic Model of a Hospital." The
American Economic Review, 1970, 60(1), pp. 64-74.

Norton, E.C. and Staiger, Doug. "How Hospital Ownership Affects Access to Care for the
Uninsured." RAND Journal of Economics, 1994, 25, pp. 171-85.

O'Donnell, Kevin. "Home Care Shaping up as Competitive Necessity," Modern Healthcare.
1993, 34.

Pauly, Mark V. and Redisch, Michael. "The Not-for-Profit Hospital as Physicians'Cooperative."
American Economic Review, 1973, 63(March), pp. 87-99.

Picone, Gabriel A.; Chou, Shin-Yi and Sloan, Frank. "Are for-Profit Hospital Conversions
Harmful to Patients and to Medicare?" RAND J. of Econ., 2002, 33(3), pp. 507-23.

Romano, Michael. "The Week in Healthcare," Modern Healthcare. 2004, 10.

Roomkin, Myron J. and Weisbrod, Burton A. "Managerial Compensation and Incentives in for-
Profit and Nonprofit Hospitals." Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 1999, 15(3), pp.
750-81.

Rose-Ackerman, Susan. "Altruism, Not-for-Profits, and Economic Theory." Journal of
Economic Literature, 1996, 34, pp. 701-28.

Rosenbaum, Paul R. and Rubin, Donald B. "The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
Observational Studies for Causal Effects." Biometrika, 1983, 70(1), pp. 41-55.

____. "Reducing Bias in Observational Studies Using Subclassification on the Propensity
Score." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1984, 79(387), pp. 516-24.

Salamon, Lester M. "Partners in Public Service: The Scope and Theory of Government
Nonprofit Relations," W. W. Powell, The Nonprofit Sector. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale
University Press, 1987, 99-117.

Scharmach, Nancy J. "Diversifying into Skilled Nursing Care: It Can Fill Beds, Manage
Medicare Costs, and Meet a Need," Modern Healthcare. 1990, 30.

Showalter, J. Stuart. Southwick's the Law of Healthcare Administration. Chicago, Illinois:
Health Administration Press, 1999.

Shwed, H. "Teaching Emergency Room Psychiatry." Hospital & Community Psychiatry, 1980,
31(8), pp. 558-62.




                                              41
Silverman, Elaine and Skinner, Jonathan. "Are for-Profit Hospitals Really Different? Medicare
Upcoding and Market Structure," Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2000.

Sloan, Frank. "Not-for-Profit Ownership and Hospital Behavior," A. J. Culyer and J. P.
Newhouse, Handbook of Health Economics. Elsevier Science B.V., 2000, 1141-74.

Sloan, Frank A. ; Picone, Gabriel A.; Taylor Jr., Donald H. and Chou, Shin-Yi. "Hospital
Ownership and Cost and Quality of Care: Is There a Dime'   s Worth of Difference?" Journal of
Health Economics, 2001, 20(1), pp. 1-21.

Snail, T.S. and Robinson, J.C. "Organizational Diversification in the American Hospital."
Annual Review of Public Health, 1998, 19, pp. 417-53.

Stout, Heidi. "A Healthy Bottom Line," The Business Journal. Portland, 2001.

Tye, Larry. "Beth Israel to Keep Psychiatric Unit Most Beds to Stay," Boston Globe. Boston,
Massachusetts, 2001, B2.

Vladeck, Bruce C. and Miller, Nancy A. "The Medicare Home Health Initiative." Health Care
Financing Review, 1994, 16(1), pp. 7-16.

Wagner, Lynn. "Hospitals Seeing Benefit in Offering Long-Term Care," Modern Health Care.
1989, 40-42.

Wagner, Mary. "Cardiac Administration Taking Off at Hospitals," Modern Healthcare. 1991,
28.

Wedig, Gerard J.; Hassan, Mahmud and Morrisey, Michael A. "Tax-Exempt Debt and the
Capital Structure of Nonprofit Organizations: An Application to Hospitals." The Journal of
Finance, 1996, 51(4), pp. 1247-83.

Wedig, Gerard J.; Hassan, Mahmud and Sloan, Frank. "Hospital Investment Decisions and the
Cost of Capital." Journal of Business, 1989, 62(4), pp. 517-37.

Weisbrod, Burton A. The Nonprofit Economy. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University
Press, 1988.

Wennberg, John E. "Understanding Geographic Variations in Health Care Delivery." New
England Journal of Medicine, 1999, 340(1), pp. 52-53.

Winslow, Ron. "Coronary Bypass: Fed-up Cardiologists Invest in Own Hospital Just for Heart
Disease -- They'
               ll Regain Autonomy, but Critics See a Grab for Most-Profitable Care -- a
Showdown in Albuquerque," Wall Street Journal. New York, New York, 1999, A1.




                                             42
Woodward, Albert; Epstein, Joan; Gfroerer, Joseph; Melnick, Daniel; Thoreson, Richard and
Wilson, Douglas. "The Drug Abuse Treatment Gap: Recent Estimates." Health Care Financing
Review, 1997, 18(3), pp. 5-17.

Young, Dennis R. "Entrepreneurship and the Behavior of Nonprofit Organizations: Elements of
a Theory," M. J. White, Nonprofit Firms in a Three Sector Economy. Washington, D.C.: Urban
Institute, 1981.




                                            43
Table 1. Comparison of Services Offered at Study Hospitals, by Ownership, 1988-2000

                                                                     Relatively    Relatively               Capital
 Service                                            Percent          Profitable   Unprofitable   Variable   Intensive
 AIDS (Outpatient)                                        11                            X
 AIDS Services                                            54                            X
 AIDS Unit                                                04                            X
 Alcohol Beds                                             30                            X
 Alcohol/ Drug (Outpatient)                               33                            X
 Angioplasty                                              40             X                                     X
 Birthing Room                                            69             X                                     X
 Burn Treatment                                           05                            X                      X
 Cardiac Catheterization Lab                              54             X                                     X
 Computed Tomography Scanner (CT Scanner)                 92             X                                     X
 Child Psychiatric Services                               25                            X
 Diagnostic Radioisotope Facility                         81             X
 Emergency Room                                           96                            X                      X
 Extracorporeal Shock-Wave Lithotripter                   17             X                                     X
 Fitness Center                                           24             X
 HIV Test                                                 60                            X
 Home Health                                              44                                        X
 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)                         46             X                                     X
 Neonatal Intensive Care                                  35             X                                     X
 Obstetrics (beds)                                        73                            X
 Obstetrics (births)                                      71                            X
 Open Heart Surgery                                       34             X                                     X
 Orthopedic Surgery                                       92             X
 Pediatric Intensive Care Unit                            22             X                                     X
 Positron Emission Tomography                             06             X                                     X
 Psychiatric (inpatient)                                  49                            X
 Psychiatric Emergency Services                           48                            X
 Skilled Nursing                                          35                                        X
 Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography               45             X                                     X
 Sports Medicine                                          32             X
 Trauma Center                                            25                            X                      X
 Ultrasound                                               96             X
 Women’s Center                                           47             X

SOURCE: Author’s analysis of American Hospital Association Annual Surveys, 1988-2000.
NOTE: Includes all non-rural, general medical and surgical hospitals in MSAs >1 hospital.
 Table 2. Model Predictions

    Theory                                          Predictions

    Objectives Theories:                            Profitable Services:   F>N>G
    Profit-seeking v. Community Need                Unprofitable Services: G>N>F


    Capital Constraint Theories:                    Services with high capital costs: F>N or N>F
    Different capital sources explain different
    investment decisions


                                                    Profitable Services:   NF Markets > NOther Markets
    Market Theory:
                                                                           GF Markets > GOther Markets
    Firms behave differently in different market
                                                    Unprofitable Services: NF Markets < NOther Markets
    types
                                                                           GF Markets < GOther Markets

 NOTE: F = for-profit; N = nonprofit; G = government.




Table 3. U.S. General Surgical and Medical Hospitals –Urban


        Year            Gov               NFP            FP              Total
        1988              521             1863             530              2914
        1989              508             1843             518              2869
        1990              504             1830             494              2828
        1991              490             1829             478              2797
        1992              486             1803             470              2759
        1993              493             1783             469              2745
        1994              471             1760             467              2698
        1995              459             1713             483              2655
        1996              449             1680             487              2616
        1997              422             1634             506              2562
        1998              407             1642             481              2530
        1999              431             1692             473              2596
        2000              410             1682             470              2562
Total                   6,051            22,754          6,326            35,131
SOURCE: Author’s analysis of AHA Survey, 1988-2000.
NOTE: All federal hospitals except veterans’ hospitals are excluded. Nonprofit hospitals
include secular and religious hospitals. For-profit hospitals include proprietary
and corporate hospitals.
Table 4. Summary of Independent Variables

Variable                                                     Mean
Nonprofit                                                             0.65
Government                                                            0.17
For-Profit                                                            0.18
Admission Quartile 1 (mean total admissions = 1,950)                  0.25
Admission Quartile 2 (mean total admissions = 5,410)                  0.25
Admission Quartile 3 (mean total admissions = 9,930)                  0.25
Admission Quartile 4 (mean total admissions = 20,420)                 0.25
MSA Size 1 (population < 100,000)                                     0.02
MSA Size 2 (100,000 < population < 250,000)                           0.14
MSA Size 3 (250,000 < population < 500,000)                           0.16
MSA Size 4 (500,000 < population < 1,000,000)                         0.16
MSA Size 5 (1,000,000 < population < 2,500,000)                       0.27
MSA Size 6 (population >2,500,000)                                    0.25
Teaching Hospital                                                     0.13
Northeast                                                             0.21
South                                                                 0.35
Midwest                                                               0.23
West                                                                  0.21
% male                                                                0.49
% white                                                               0.79
% black                                                               0.13
ln (household income)                                               *10.35
% baby                                                                0.01
% age 1to17                                                           0.24
% age 18to29                                                          0.19
% age 30to39                                                          0.17
% age 40to49                                                          0.09
% age 50to 64                                                         0.13
% age 65                                                              0.12
% age 80                                                              0.03
Elementary education                                                  0.18
High school diploma                                                   0.22
Some college                                                          0.20
College degree                                                        0.15
* approximately $31,250
SOURCE: Author’s analysis of AHA Annual Survey, 1988-2000.
Figure 1. Probability of Offering Open Heart Surgery

                                                  Open Heart Surgery
                               0.50
                                                                                 NFP
 Probability of Offering

                               0.40                                              GOV
                                                                                 FP
                               0.30
        Service




                               0.20

                               0.10

                               0.00
                                  1988    1990    1992 1994 1996     1998 2000
                                                        Year




SOURCE: Author’s analysis of data from American Hospital Association Annual Surveys, 1988-2000.
NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general and surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs > 1 hospital. P
values are based on the chi-square test of the differences between average predicted probabilities of offering services
1988 – 2000 by hospital type. (NFP v. FP: P<0.001; NFP v. Gov: P=0.001; FP v. Gov: P<0.001).



Figure 2. Probability of Offering Psychiatric Emergency

                                                 Psychiatric Em ergency


                                   0.65
         Probability of Offering




                                   0.60
                                   0.55
                                                                                  NFP
                Service




                                   0.50
                                                                                  GOV
                                   0.45
                                                                                  FP
                                   0.40
                                   0.35
                                   0.30
                                      1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000
                                                        Year



SOURCE: Author’s analysis of data from American Hospital Association Annual Surveys, 1988-2000.
NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general and surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs > 1 hospital. P
values are based on the chi-square test of the differences between average predicted probabilities of offering services
1988 – 2000 by hospital type. (NFP v. FP: P= 0.001; NFP v. Gov: P<0.001; FP v. Gov: P<0.001).
Figure 3. Probability of Offering Home Health Service

                                            Hom e Health


                             0.70
   Probability of Offering




                             0.60
                             0.50
                                                                     NFP
          Service




                             0.40
                                                                     GOV
                             0.30
                                                                     FP
                             0.20
                             0.10
                             0.00
                                1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000
                                              Year



SOURCE: Author’s analysis of data from American Hospital Association Annual Surveys, 1988-2000.
NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general and surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs > 1 hospital. P
values are based on the chi-square test of the differences between average predicted probabilities of offering services
1988 – 2000 by hospital type. (NFP v. FP: P<0.001; NFP v. Gov: P=0.0705; FP v. Gov: P<0.001).
Figure 4. Probability of Offering Extra Corporeal Shockwave Lithotripter


                                                  ESWL


                               0.35
                               0.30
     Probability of Services




                               0.25
                               0.20                                    NFP
                                                                       GOV
                               0.15
                                                                       FP
                               0.10
                               0.05
                               0.00
                                  1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000
                                                 Year


SOURCE: Author’s analysis of data from American Hospital Association Annual Surveys, 1988-2000.
NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general and surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs > 1 hospital. P
values are based on the chi-square test of the differences between average predicted probabilities of offering services
1988 – 2000 by hospital type. (NFP v. FP: P<0.001; NFP v. Gov: P=0.003; FP v. Gov: P<0.001).



Figure 5. Probability of offering MRI

                                                   MRI


                               0.80
                               0.70
     Probability of Services




                               0.60
                               0.50                                    NFP
                               0.40                                    GOV
                               0.30                                    FP
                               0.20
                               0.10
                               0.00
                                  1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000
                                                 Year


SOURCE: Author’s analysis of data from American Hospital Association Annual Surveys, 1988-2000.
NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general and surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs > 1 hospital. P
values are based on the chi-square test of the differences between average predicted probabilities of offering services
1988 – 2000 by hospital type. (NFP v. FP: P=0.191; NFP v. Gov: P<0.001; FP v. Gov: P<0.001).
Table 5. Comparison of Services Offered by Ownership Type, 1988-2000

    Profitable Services                                                  F>N              F>G              N>G
    Angioplasty (1989-2000)                                              Y***             Y***             Y***
    Birthing Room@                                                       N*               N                Y
    Cardiac Catheterization Lab                                          Y***             Y***             Y***
    Computed Tomography Scanner (CT Scanner)                             N                Y                Y*
    Diagnostic Radioisotope Facility                                     N*               Y***             Y***
    Extracorporeal Shock-Wave Lithotripter                               Y***             Y***             Y***
    Fitness Center                                                       N**              N                Y**
    Magnetic Resonance Imaging                                           Y                Y***             Y***

    Neonatal Intensive Care@ (beds>0)                                    Y***             Y***             N***
    Open Heart Surgery                                                   Y***             Y***             Y***

    Orthopedic Surgery (1989-1993)                                       N                Y***             Y***

    Pediatric Intensive Care@(beds>1)                                    Y***             Y***             N***

    Positron Emission Tomography (1990-2000)                             Y                Y*               Y

    Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (1990-2000)               N**              Y                Y***
    Sports Medicine                                                      =                Y***             Y***
    Ultrasound                                                           N***             N                Y
    Women’s Center@                                                      Y***             Y***             Y*


    Unprofitable Services                                                F>N             F>G              N>G

    AIDS (Outpatient) (1988-1993)                                        N               N***             N***

    AIDS Services (1994-2000)                                            N***            N***             N***

    AIDS Unit (1988-1993)                                                Y**             N                N***
    Alcohol/Drug Inpatient (Beds>1)                                      Y***            Y*               N***
    Alcohol/ Drug Outpatient                                             N***            N***             N***
    Burn Treatment (Beds > 0)                                            Y               N*               N***
    Child/Adolescent Psychiatric @ (Beds > 0)                            N               N*               N
    Emergency Room                                                       N**             Y                Y***
    Emergency Room@                                                      N*              =                Y

    HIV Test (1988-1991)                                                 N               N*               N*
    Obstetrics (beds >2) @                                               N               N                N
    Obstetrics (births >= 100) @                                         N***            N**              N
    Psychiatric Inpatient (1989 – 2000, beds>1)                          Y**             N***             N***
    Psychiatric Emergency Services                                       N***            N***             N***
    Psychiatric Emergency Services@                                      N***            N***             N
    Trauma Center                                                        N**             N                Y
    Trauma Center@                                                      N**             N***              N***
    NOTE: (F = For-profit; N=Not-for-Profit, G=Government. @ excludes veterans’ hospital. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05,
    *p<0.10; “=” if difference between firms < .003. 1988 – 2000 unless noted. High initial capital investment services in
    italics.
Table 6. Comparison of Probability of Offering Services With Variable Profits, by
Ownership Type
                                   Profitable (1992-1996)              Unprofitable (1997-2000)

                               F             N              G         F            N           G



   Home Health                + 39.3       + 9.7       + 12.7       - 37.6        - 7.7     - 1.5


   Skilled Nursing            + 28.1       + 15.4      + 4.9        + 2.8         + 4.7       + 9.7


SOURCE: Author’s analysis of data American Hospital Association Annual Surveys 1988-2000.
NOTES: F = For-profit; N=Not-for-Profit, G=Government. Values are the percentage point change in
probability of offering service during the years indicated.
Table 7. Hypothesis Tests

Services, years 1988 --                                Hypothesis Test (Average All
2000                                Means                        Years)                Hypothesis Test (Joint All Years)
(unless otherwise noted)   NFP      GOV      FP      FP/NFP GOV/NFP FP/GOV             FP/NFP GOV/NFP FP/GOV

ESWL                        0.169    0.131   0.217     12.630       8.850     29.020     21.820        17.390     42.600
                                                        0.000       0.003      0.000      0.058         0.182      0.000

Home Health                 0.468    0.459   0.330     63.100       0.160     34.800    226.550        21.130    205.570
                                                        0.000       0.688      0.000      0.000         0.071      0.000

Home Health                 0.421    0.391   0.205     89.740       1.720     47.880     96.040         6.600     59.670
(1988--1993)                                            0.000       0.190      0.000      0.000         0.359      0.000

Home Health                 0.525    0.518   0.595      7.750      40.590     61.730     11.130         1.260      7.210
(1995 -- 1997)                                          0.005       0.000      0.000      0.011         0.738      0.065

Home Health                 0.495    0.539   0.262     79.000       2.680     72.640     85.490         3.570     81.750
(1998 -- 2000)                                          0.000       0.102      0.000      0.000         0.312      0.000

MRI                         0.484    0.409   0.507      1.710      20.440     24.240     22.510        35.980     38.910
                                                        0.191       0.000      0.000      0.048         0.001      0.000

Open Heart Surgery          0.336    0.279   0.409     20.630      11.090     38.190     29.300        30.460     54.910
                                                        0.000       0.001      0.000      0.006         0.004      0.000

Psychiatric ER              0.475    0.559   0.408     12.310      20.190     41.610     16.960        34.790     47.790
                                                        0.001       0.000      0.000      0.201         0.001      0.000
 Figure 6. Open Heart Surgery, Market Penetration

                          Open Heart Surgery - FP Hospitals                               Open Heart Surgery Government Hospitals
                           => 20% For-Profit Penetration                                       => 20% For-Profit Penetration


                  0.5                                                              0.45
                 0.45                                                               0.4
                  0.4                                                              0.35
                 0.35                                                               0.3




                                                                     % Hospitals
   % Hospitals




                  0.3                                                              0.25
                 0.25                                                               0.2
                  0.2
                                                                                   0.15
                 0.15
                  0.1                                                               0.1
                 0.05                                                              0.05
                    0                                                                 0
                        88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00                            88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00
                                             Year                                                               Year

                                    Other Market       FP Market                                       Other Market      FP Market


 NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general and     NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general
 surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs >1 hospital. P values are   and surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs >1 hospital. P
 based on the chi-square test of the differences between average   values are based on the chi-square test of the differences
 predicted probabilities of offering services 1988 – 2000 by       between average predicted probabilities of offering services
 hospital type. (FP v other: not significant).                     1988 – 2000 by hospital type. (FP v other: P<0.01).


                          Open Heart Surgery - NFP Hospitals
                            => 20% For-Profit Penetration


      0.45
       0.4
Figure0.35
       5b.              Home Health, Market Penetration
       0.3
   % Hospitals




      0.25
       0.2
      0.15
       0.1
      0.05
         0
                        88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00
                                             Year

                                    Other Market       FP Market


 NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all beneral and
 surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs >1 hospital. P values are
 based on the chi-square test of the differences between average
 predicted probabilities of offering services 1988 – 2000 by
 hospital type. (FP v other: P<0.05).
Figure 7. Home Health, Market Penetration

                             Home Health - FP Hospitals                                          Home Health - Government Hospitals
                            => 20% For-Profit Penetration                                          => 20% For-Profit Penetration


                 0.7                                                                     0.7
                 0.6                                                                     0.6
                 0.5                                                                     0.5
  % Hospitals




                                                                           % Hospitals
                 0.4                                                                     0.4
                 0.3                                                                     0.3
                 0.2                                                                     0.2
                 0.1                                                                     0.1
                  0                                                                       0
                       88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00                                  88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00
                                            Year                                                                    Year

                                   Other Market       FP Market                                            Other Market      FP Market


NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general and            NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general
surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs >1 hospital. P values are based    and surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs >1 hospital. P
on the chi-square test of the differences between average predicted      values are based on the chi-square test of the differences
probabilities of offering services 1988 – 2000 by hospital type. (FP v   between average predicted probabilities of offering services
other: P<0.01 (1994-1997)).                                              1988 – 2000 by hospital type. (FP v other: not significant).



                            Home Health - NFP Hospitals
                             20% For-profit Penetration


                 0.7
                 0.6
                 0.5
   % Hospitals




                 0.4
                 0.3
                 0.2
                 0.1
                   0
                       88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00
                                           Year

                                  Other Market       FP Market

NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general and
surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs >1 hospital. P values are based
on the chi-square test of the differences between average predicted
probabilities of offering services 1988 – 2000 by hospital type. (FP v
other: P<0.05).
Figure 8. Psychiatric Emergency, Market Penetration

                         Psychiatric Emergency - FP Hospitals                               Psychiatric Emergency - Government Hospitals
                            => 20% For-Profit Penetration                                           => 20% For-Profit Penetration


                 0.5                                                                  0.7
                0.45
                                                                                      0.6
                 0.4
                0.35                                                                  0.5
  % Hospitals




                                                                        % Hospitals
                 0.3                                                                  0.4
                0.25
                 0.2                                                                  0.3
                0.15                                                                  0.2
                 0.1
                                                                                      0.1
                0.05
                   0                                                                   0
                       88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00                               88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00
                                             Year                                                                  Years

                                    Other Market        FP Market                                          Other Market      FP Market
                                                                       NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general
NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general and          and surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs >1 hospital. P
surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs >1 hospital. P values are        values are based on the chi-square test of the differences
based on the chi-square test of the differences between average        between average predicted probabilities of offering services
predicted probabilities of offering services 1988 – 2000 by hospital   1988 – 2000 by hospital type. (FP v other: not significant).
type. (FP v other: not significant).


                         Psychiatric Emergency - NFP Hospitals
                             => 20% For-Profit Penetration


                0.6

                0.5

                0.4
  % Hospitals




                0.3

                0.2

                0.1

                 0
                       88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00
                                             Year

                                    Other Market       FP Market


  NOTES: Probit predicted probabilities include all general and
  surgical, non-rural hospitals in MSAs >1 hospital. P values are
  based on the chi-square test of the differences between average
  predicted probabilities of offering services 1988 – 2000 by
  hospital type. (FP v other: P<010).
Table 8. Hypothesis Test for Market Effects Tests

                     FP Market >= 20% Share
       Service         Other    FP 20%      Chi2/Pr>Chi^2
Open Heart Surgery
   NFP Hospitals          0.32     0.374                    5.045
                                                            0.025
   Gov Hospitals         0.255     0.347                    7.313
                                                            0.007
   FP Hospitals          0.391     0.431                     1.39
                                                            0.239

Psychiatric ER
    NFP Hospitals        0.481     0.436                 3.262
                                                         0.071
   88-93                 0.477     0.463                 0.216
                                                         0.642
   94-00                 0.484     0.413                18.119
                                                         0.011

   Gov Hospitals         0.546     0.592                    1.641
                                                            0.200
   FP Hospitals          0.392       0.4                    0.044
                                                            0.835

Home Health
   NFP Hospitals         0.457     0.516                    4.119
                                                            0.042

   Gov Hospitals         0.472     0.418                    1.233
                                                            0.267
   FP Hospitals          0.326     0.333                    0.009
                                                            0.923
   88-93                 0.231     0.188                    1.673
                                                            0.196
   94-97                   0.5     0.613                    8.089
                                                            0.004
Appendix A. Selected Probit Coefficients for Representative Services
(controlling for hospital, region, and demographic characteristics)

Service                   Open Heart Surgery          Psychiatric ER        Home Health
Observations                      32231                    32058                31980
Log Likelihood                  -11667.26                -18060.59            -19975.22
                          Coef.       Std. Err.      Coef. Std. Err.      Coef. Std. Err.
Gov                        -0.420            0.098    0.247       0.070   -0.077       0.068
Fp                          0.397            0.100   -0.172       0.082   -0.745       0.088
y1989                       0.040            0.020   -0.019       0.021    0.010       0.019
y1990                       0.116            0.023   -0.003       0.026    0.016       0.023
y1991                       0.198            0.028   -0.007       0.028    0.024       0.026
y1992                       0.240            0.030    0.038       0.031    0.031       0.028
y1993                       0.315            0.034    0.065       0.033    0.119       0.029
y1994                       0.336            0.037    0.027       0.036    0.223       0.034
y1995                       0.330            0.038    0.001       0.037    0.279       0.035
y1996                       0.330            0.040    0.008       0.038    0.289       0.037
y1997                       0.352            0.043    0.003       0.040    0.365       0.038
y1998                       0.343            0.045    0.005       0.040    0.299       0.039
y1999                       0.453            0.046   -0.012       0.040    0.235       0.039
y2000                       0.436            0.047    0.016       0.041    0.160       0.040
govy1989                    0.085            0.053    0.020       0.050   -0.044       0.038
govy1990                    0.100            0.061    0.011       0.057   -0.002       0.045
govy1991                    0.146            0.067    0.055       0.062    0.034       0.052
govy1992                    0.116            0.071   -0.039       0.069   -0.001       0.055
govy1993                    0.130            0.084   -0.056       0.073   -0.024       0.058
govy1994                    0.164            0.089   -0.077       0.078   -0.021       0.068
govy1995                    0.156            0.090   -0.022       0.081    0.040       0.071
govy1996                    0.190            0.091   -0.014       0.085    0.081       0.076
govy1997                    0.090            0.102    0.044       0.090    0.050       0.081
govy1998                    0.131            0.105    0.062       0.093    0.163       0.085
govy1999                    0.070            0.108    0.042       0.093    0.206       0.086
govy2000                    0.242            0.108    0.125       0.093    0.216       0.088
fpy1989                     0.003            0.050    0.046       0.059   -0.003       0.062
fpy1990                    -0.042            0.062   -0.007       0.071    0.014       0.072
fpy1991                    -0.076            0.069   -0.038       0.080   -0.019       0.084
fpy1992                    -0.055            0.082   -0.055       0.089    0.125       0.092
fpy1993                    -0.056            0.087   -0.061       0.092    0.325       0.093
fpy1994                    -0.015            0.091   -0.033       0.096    0.748       0.100
fpy1995                    -0.047            0.095   -0.066       0.098    0.923       0.102
fpy1996                    -0.051            0.102   -0.077       0.101    0.992       0.108
fpy1997                    -0.058            0.106   -0.070       0.103    0.882       0.108
fpy1998                    -0.011            0.109   -0.073       0.105    0.242       0.111
fpy1999                    -0.088            0.116   -0.094       0.110   -0.034       0.114
fpy2000                    -0.013            0.111    0.036       0.103    0.014       0.114
Cons                        8.364            5.493    0.077       3.992    6.350       3.846
Robust standard errors.
Appendix A (cont). Selected Probit Coefficients for Representative Services
(controlling for hospital, region, and demographic characteristics)
Service                           MRI                   ESWL
Observations                     31972                  32118
Log Likelihood                 -16964.80              -12145.15
                          Coef.    Std. Err.     Coef.     Std. Err.
Gov                        -0.383        0.082    -0.142         0.105
Fp                         -0.195        0.091     0.322         0.106
y1989                       0.120        0.025     0.161         0.035
y1990                       0.241        0.033     0.156         0.043
y1991                       0.356        0.036     0.277         0.046
y1992                       0.514        0.039     0.356         0.048
y1993                       0.697        0.041     0.491         0.050
y1994                       0.989        0.043     0.578         0.050
y1995                       1.107        0.044     0.633         0.051
y1996                       1.172        0.046     0.648         0.053
y1997                       1.221        0.047     0.704         0.054
y1998                       1.288        0.048     0.736         0.056
y1999                       1.397        0.049     0.830         0.055
y2000                       1.438        0.048     0.954         0.055
govy1989                    0.057        0.059     0.022         0.078
govy1990                    0.117        0.075     0.037         0.097
govy1991                    0.176        0.080     0.003         0.107
govy1992                    0.181        0.085    -0.060         0.112
govy1993                    0.166        0.091     0.031         0.117
govy1994                    0.088        0.097    -0.092         0.123
govy1995                    0.051        0.097    -0.187         0.126
govy1996                    0.066        0.100    -0.153         0.126
govy1997                    0.139        0.104    -0.138         0.131
govy1998                    0.215        0.108    -0.009         0.132
govy1999                    0.196        0.108    -0.032         0.130
govy2000                    0.256        0.109    -0.025         0.131
fpy1989                     0.031        0.077    -0.090         0.072
fpy1990                     0.159        0.095    -0.105         0.101
fpy1991                     0.184        0.103    -0.078         0.112
fpy1992                     0.109        0.108    -0.146         0.119
fpy1993                     0.282        0.105    -0.117         0.123
fpy1994                     0.393        0.112    -0.037         0.121
fpy1995                     0.365        0.114    -0.007         0.123
fpy1996                     0.374        0.116    -0.119         0.126
fpy1997                     0.376        0.118    -0.178         0.122
fpy1998                     0.410        0.119    -0.142         0.127
fpy1999                     0.377        0.121    -0.113         0.127
fpy2000                     0.353        0.118    -0.239         0.126
Cons                       -4.802        3.504    -2.536         4.133
Robust standard errors.
Appendix B. Selected Probit Coefficients, Market Effects Tests
Controlling for hospital, region, and demographic characteristics; excluded category is NFP hospitals in 1994.

 Service                     Open Heart Surgery               Home Health                    Psychiatric ER
 Log Likelihood            -11816.168                    -19961.012                     -18084.506
 No. of Obs.                 32231                         31980                          32058
 Variables                    Coef.      Std. Err.          Coef.    Std. Err.             Coef.       Std. Err.
 NFP*1988                      -.390         .0358           -.187          .0351           -.0212         .0383
 NFP*1989                      -.334         .0355           -.198          .0346           -.0548         .0371
 NFP*1990                      -.258         .0318           -.191          .0348           -.0338         .0357
 NFP*1991                      -.181         .0308           -.188          .0339           -.0440         .0332
 NFP*1992                      -.104         .0227           -.181          .0316           .00258         .0319
 NFP*1993                     -.0172         .0206           -.107          .0271            .0247         .0310
 NFP*1995                     -.0231         .0255          .0485           .0201           -.0195         .0215
 NFP*1996                     -.0185         .0312          .0528           .0265           .00199         .0292
 NFP*1997                     .0163          .0371           .137           .0317           .00264         .0329
 NFP*1998                     .0260          .0354          .0912           .0354            .0176         .0379
 NFP*1999                      .155          .0449          .0187           .0369           -.0111         .0341
 NFP*2000                      .123          .0450          -.0608          .0451            .0244         .0386
 GOV*1988                      -.808          .131           -.221          .0720             .128         .0838
 GOV*1989                      -.640          .131           -.273          .0718             .168         .0848
 GOV*1990                      -.628          .131           -.209          .0750             .172         .0827
 GOV*1991                      -.496          .131           -.140          .0776             .218         .0811
 GOV*1992                      -.447          .127           -.186          .0751             .201         .0858
 GOV*1993                      -.388          .134           -.159          .0774             .196         .0846
 GOV*1994                      -.306          .132          -.0731          .0858             .111         .0825
 GOV*1995                      -.328          .137          .0683           .0855             .122         .0810
 GOV*1996                      -.295          .137           .136           .0955             .199         .0900
 GOV*1997                      -.355          .144           .213            .107             .227         .0951
 GOV*1998                      -.346          .137           .201            .107             .227          .107
 GOV*1999                      -.246          .146           .257            .101             .201          .106
 GOV*2000                      -.111          .137           .135            .104             .312          .103
 FP*1988                       .105           .145           -.767           .129            -.278          .148
 FP*1989                      .0866           .152           -.814           .131            -.198          .119
 FP*1990                      .0723           .147           -.772           .115            -.310          .126
 FP*1991                      -.0517          .163           -.770           .130            -.387          .135
 FP*1992                       .216           .133           -.786           .113            -.296          .116
 FP*1993                       .253           .152           -.450           .114            -.352          .129
 FP*1994                       .357           .135           -.238           .103            -.292          .110
 FP*1995                       .366           .155          .0969            .117            -.255          .128
 FP*1996                       .314           .156           .178            .127            -.270          .116
 FP*1997                       .284           .165           .187            .100            -.224          .142
 FP*1998                       .488           .124           -.355           .102            -.232          .179
 FP*1999                       .498           .168           -.583           .142            -.230          .162
 FP*2000                       .546           .161           -.729           .142            -.346          .143
 NFP*FPMarket*1988             .113           .159           -.282           .102            -.172          .105
 NFP*FPMarket*1989            .0969           .146           -.134          .0962           -.0917          .124
 NFP*FPMarket*1990             .171           .139           -.130          .0976            -.110          .101
 NFP*FPMarket*1991             .259           .145          -.0871          .0975           -.0641         .0946
 NFP*FPMarket*1992             .336           .178          .0143            .140          -.00320          .101
 NFP*FPMarket*1993             .246           .153           .192            .128            .0644          .103
 NFP*FPMarket*1994             .306           .164           .281            .122           -.0892          .128
 NFP*FPMarket*1995             .262           .125           .303            .102            -.127          .102
 NFP*FPMarket*1996             .214           .117           .310           .0859            -.179         .0893
 NFP*FPMarket*1997             .171           .110           .347            .106            -.207          .103
 NFP*FPMarket*1998            .0811           .132           .187            .105            -.344         .0982
 NFP*FPMarket*1999            .0899           .115           .155           .0942            -.251         .0981
 NFP*FPMarket*2000             .144           .132           .133            .125            -.317          .102
 GOV*FPMarket*1988             -.324          .207           -.452           .162             .500          .150
 GOV*FPMarket*1989             -.333          .243           -.416           .155             .352          .144
 GOV*FPMarket*1990           -.00551          .208           -.422           .146             .358          .133
 GOV*FPMarket*1991             .125           .185           -.480           .153             .373          .132
 GOV*FPMarket*1992             .126           .219           -.468           .174             .217          .158
 GOV*FPMarket*1993             .277           .210           -.201           .176             .274          .138
Appendix B (cont). Selected Probit Coefficients, Market Effects Tests

GOV*FPMarket*1994        .246       .217       -.0196        .177       .310    .165
GOV*FPMarket*1995        .186       .262       .0187         .178       .373    .150
GOV*FPMarket*1996        .137       .224       .0197         .168       .186    .129
GOV*FPMarket*1997       .0217       .234       -.0270        .180       .311    .139
GOV*FPMarket*1998        .123       .222        .176         .182       .406    .158
GOV*FPMarket*1999      -.00914      .197       .0113         .153       .291    .121
GOV*FPMarket*2000        .207       .183       .0563         .158       .420    .143
FP*FPMarket*1988         .170       .144        -1.04        .120       -.225   .108
FP*FPMarket*1989         .252       .163        -1.00        .136       -.228   .130
FP*FPMarket*1990         .308       .154        -.987        .128       -.220   .138
FP*FPMarket*1991         .407       .146        -1.03        .122       -.241   .152
FP*FPMarket*1992         .458       .159        -.778        .127       -.231   .141
FP*FPMarket*1993         .547       .170        -.524        .116       -.159   .137
FP*FPMarket*1994         .584       .170        .264         .104       -.210   .134
FP*FPMarket*1995         .494       .133        .367         .125       -.330   .124
FP*FPMarket*1996         .514       .134        .436         .116       -.328   .107
FP*FPMarket*1997         .556       .134        .378         .111       -.348   .105
FP*FPMarket*1998         .514       .158        -.413       .0934       -.345   .104
FP*FPMarket*1999         .554       .142        -.800       .0914       -.394   .114
FP*FPMarket*2000         .609       .154        -.780        .101       -.116   .104
