                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             RELIGIOUS MARKET STRUCTURE,
                        RELIGIOUS PARTICIPATION, AND OUTCOMES:
                               IS RELIGION GOOD FOR YOU?

                                             Jonathan Gruber

                                          Working Paper 11377
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11377


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




I am grateful to Max Farrell, Mike Frakes, Liz Jiminez, Liz Oltmans and David Seif for excellent research
assistance. I am also grateful to Mark Chaves, Roger Finke, Larry Iannaccone, and Dan Olson for educating
me on the economics and sociology of religion, and to them, Ed Glaeser, Larry Katz, and seminar participants
at Harvard, MIT, NBER the University of Alabama-Birmingham, and George Mason University for helpful
comments on this project. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jonathan Gruber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Religious Market Structure, Religious Participation, and Outcomes: Is Religion Good for You?
Jonathan Gruber
NBER Working Paper No. 11377
May 2005
JEL No. H3, N4

                                             ABSTRACT

Religion plays an important role in the lives of many Americans, but there is relatively little study

by economists of the implications of religiosity for economic outcomes. This likely reflects the

enormous difficulty inherent in separating the causal effects of religiosity from other factors that are

correlated with outcomes. In this paper, I propose a potential solution to this long standing problem,

by noting that a major determinant of religious participation is religious market density, or the share

of the population in an area which is of an individual's religion. I make use of the fact that exogenous

predictions of market density can be formed based on area ancestral mix. That is, I relate religious

participation and economic outcomes to the correlation of the religious preference of one's own

heritage with the religious preference of other heritages that share one's area. I use the General Social

Survey (GSS) to model the impact of market density on church attendance, and micro-data from the

1990 Census to model the impact on economic outcomes. I find that a higher market density leads

to a significantly increased level of religious participation, and as well to better outcomes according

to several key economic indicators: higher levels of education and income, lower levels of welfare

receipt and disability, higher levels of marriage, and lower levels of divorce.

Jonathan Gruber
MIT Department of Economics
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
         Religion plays an important role in the lives of many Americans. Over two-thirds of

Americans belong to a church or other religious organization, and this has risen substantially

over time. Two-fifths of Americans attend church in a typical week, and 95% profess belief in

“the existence of God or a universal spirit” (Iannaccone, 1998). Giving to religious causes

accounts for more than two-thirds of all reported individual charitable contributions. Religiosity

is not confined to particular income groups, racial groups, or locations in the U.S.: religious

adherence and participation is widespread among all demographic groups.

         Given this important role, there is relatively little study by economists of the implications

of religiosity for economic outcomes. This is certainly not the case in other disciplines. There

are hundreds of articles in sociology, psychology, and medicine that overwhelmingly document

the positive impacts of religiosity on a wide variety of outcomes. Those few studies by

economists have also found that religiosity, and in particular religious participation, is strongly

associated with positive outcomes such as reduced frequency of socially deviant activities among

youth.

         The small literature on this topic in economics likely reflects the heightened sensitivity in

our profession to the enormous difficulty inherent in separating the causal effects of religiosity

from other factors that are correlated with outcomes. Most factors which determine the

religiosity of any given individual are likely correlated with their outcomes through other

channels as well. This is true of both short run factors which may cause fluctuations in religious

devotion, such as particularly good or bad shocks to personal well-being, and long run factors

which cause heterogeneity across individuals, such as correlation between religiosity and

ambition or ability.

         In this paper, I propose a potential solution to this long standing problem, by drawing on
                                                    2

the literature on the sociology of religion. Starting with the influential work of Finke and Stark

(1988), this literature has posited and tested a host of hypotheses about how the structure of

religious markets influences religiosity, and in particular religious participation. One factor that

has been suggested as a determinant of religious participation is market density, or the share of

the population in an area which is of an individual’s religion. If a larger percentage of the local

population shares your religion, there may be easier access to religious observation (a “distance”

effect) or other social interactions that are related to religious participation.

        I investigate the impact of market density on both religious participation and economic

outcomes. The key insight that makes the analysis possible is that exogenous predictions of

market density can be formed based on area ancestral mix. For a Catholic person of Italian

extraction, living near persons of Polish extraction or living near persons of Swedish extraction is

likely irrelevant for any aspect of life except for the distribution of religious preference in the

area; there will be a higher percentage Catholic if the neighboring group is Poles rather than

Swedes. Thus, Italians who live near Poles will have a higher religious market density than

Italians who leave near Swedes, yet they should be otherwise identical.

        To model impacts of market density on religious participation, I rely on the General

Social Survey (GSS), a nationally representative survey which collects data on religious

preference and religious participation. For the outcomes analysis, I use the IPUMS sample of the

1990 Census. Of course, the Census in the U.S. does not ask about religious preference. But I

can form a strong prediction of religious preference based on one’s ancestral heritage, so that I

can model outcomes as a function of the correlation of the religious preference of one’s own

heritage with the religious preference of other heritages that share one’s area.
                                                 3

       My results are striking. I find that a higher market density leads to a significantly

increased level of religious participation, and as well to better outcomes according to several key

economic indicators: higher levels of education and income, lower levels of welfare receipt and

disability, higher levels of marriage, and lower levels of divorce. These results are robust to a

variety of specification checks.

       The paper proceeds as follows. In Part I, I review the literature on religiosity and

outcomes, and on religious market structure and religiosity. In Part II, I describe the data sources

and empirical strategy for the analysis. Part III presents the main results, and Part IV assesses

their robustness to alternative interpretations. Part V concludes.



                                       Part I: Background

Religiosity and Outcomes

       There is an enormous literature which documents a positive cross-sectional association

between religious participation, or other measures of “religiosity”, and outcomes. The earliest

claim of such a relationship is likely Durkheim’s 1897 study of the role of religiosity and suicide

rates. Durkheim found that suicide rates were lower in the more socially integrated Catholic

communities than in less integrated Protestant areas. He attributed this difference not to Catholic

teachings on suicide, but rather to the “tendency of Catholicism to promote integration through

ritual and community, and to regulate standards of faith, piety, and moral conduct” (Ellison, Burr

& McCall, 1997). Another early contributor was Weber, whose 1908 work (as referenced by

Iannacconne, 1998), which claimed that the industrial revolution was made possible by the

Protestant Reformation.
                                                   4

        There have been a large volume of subsequent studies of the impact of religiosity on

many different outcomes, which I can review only incompletely; I provide some sample citations

here. One area of significant focus is deviant behaviors, with more frequent religious

participation and increased religiosity being associated with lower levels of adult criminal

behavior, at both the individual level (e.g. Evans, Cullen, Dunaway, and Burton, 1995) and the

area level (Lipford, McCorkmick, and Tollison, 1993; Hull and Bold, 1995), and with lower

levels of substance abuse (e.g. National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, 2001). There

is a parallel literature showing the retarding effects of religious participation and religiosity on

deviant behavior of many types among youths (e.g. Bachman et al, 2002; Wallace and Williams,

1987). A notable contribution to this literature among economists is Freeman (1986), who finds

that churchgoing among young black males favorably affects the allocation of time, school

attendance, work activity, and the (in)frequency of socially deviant activity. Freeman highlights

the problems with interpreting causally these types of results, but he notes that “the pattern of

statistical results suggests that at least some part of the churchgoing effect is the result of actual

causal impact”

        Another major area of emphasis of the existing literature is health impacts of religious

participation and religiosity on health status. Levin and Vanderpool (1987) and Hummer,

Rogers, Nam and Ellison (1999) review this literature, documenting a consistently strong

relationship between religiosity, usually proxied by religious participation, and health

status/outcomes. Hummer et al. extend this literature by using matched death record data at the

individual level to show a negative relationship between religious participation and mortality.

Levin’s (1994) more critical review concludes that while these associations are valid, there is no
                                                  5

convincing evidence that they are causal.

       There is also a literature documenting a very strong correlation between religiosity and

self-reported measures of well-being (Ellison, 1991; Hout and Greeley, 2003). Gruber and

Mullainathan (2002) find that the effect on self-reported happiness of moving from never

attending to attending weekly is comparable to happiness effect of moving from bottom to top

income quartile. In addition, religiosity is associated with more marital stability (e.g. Lehrer and

Chiswick, 1993).

       There have been fewer studies of measures of the impact of religiosity on more standard

economic measures of outcomes. There is a large literature on religious preference and earnings

(Tomes, 1985). This literature concludes that there is a large advantage for Jews in terms of both

earnings and return to human capital, with mixed rankings for other religions. I am not aware of

any work on religious participation and earnings or other income measures.

       While this large literature has often recognized the difficulties of assigning causal

interpretations to these positive impacts of religiosity, there has not been any fully satisfactory

resolution to this problem. Those articles that are most sensitive to this issue try to address it

using either rich background controls or longitudinal analysis of changes in religious

participation, but neither of these approaches is entirely satisfactory.



Religious Market Structure and Religiosity

       The literature on religious market structure and religiosity, which is almost exclusively

found in sociology, owes it origins to Adam Smith. In a largely ignored chapter in The Wealth of

Nations, “Smith argued that self-interest motivates clergy just as it does secular producers; that
                                                 6

market forces constrain churches just as they constrain secular firms; and that the benefits of

competition, the burdens of monopoly, and the hazards of government regulation are as real for

religion as for any other sector of the economy” (Iannaccone, 1998). This line of argument has

formed the basis for a number of analyses by the sociologists Finke and Stark (e.g. Finke and

Stark, 1988, 1992), who argued that there is empirical evidence for the proposition that more

religious competition promotes religiosity.

       A large subsequent literature has evaluated these claims, with mixed results.1 Recent

critical reviews in Chaves and Gorski (2001) and Voas, Olson and Crockett (2002) question the

contention that more competition leads to more religiosity. Voas et al., in particular, question the

entire empirical framework that has been used to test this contention, highlighting the

mathematical linkage between the church membership data used to measure religious

competition and the same (or similar) data used to measure rates of religious adherence.

       There is a smaller literature which has focused on the question of how religious densities

affect religiosity. There are only three studies which directly model church attendance as a

function of density; Phillips (1998) and Olson (1998) find that higher density is associated with

more attendance, while Perl and Olson (2000) find no significant association. Other studies

which model religious charitable giving as a function of religious market density find a negative

association (Zaleski and Zech, 1995; Perl and Olson, 2000). This is very consistent with the

findings in Gruber (2004), who shows a negative association between religious attendance and

religious charitable contributions. If attendance and contributions are substitutes, and more



       1
       This literature has mostly focused in sociology, with notable exceptions such as
Iannaccone (1991) and Iannaccone et al. (1997).
                                                   7

density raises attendance, it may lower contributions. Thus, this set of findings is consistent with

a positive effect of religious market density on religious attendance.



                              Part II: Data and Empirical Strategy

Data

        I rely on two data sources for this analysis. The first is the General Social Survey (GSS),

a nationally representative survey carried out in most years from 1973 through 2000, with

roughly 1500-2000 households interviewed in each year. These data have information on

location (PSU, which is roughly equivalent to MSA), religious participation/religiosity, ethnic

heritage, demographics, and economic/social outcomes. For this analysis, I rely on all non-

hispanic whites age 25 or older. I focus on non-hispanic whites only because there is very strong

evidence of racial segregation in church going, so that the density of hispanics or nonwhites in a

religion in some area is not likely to be relevant for the religious participation of whites in that

area.

        There are many possible definitions of religious affiliation, ranging from very general to

very detailed. I use a fairly broad categorization for this work, dividing individuals into seven

groups: Catholics, Jews, Liberal Protestants, Moderate Protestants, Conservative Protestants,

Other, and None. This is the finest breakdown that is feasible, given the empirical strategy

described below. The GSS reports data on roughly 150 denominations and subdenominations,

and I use the classification from Roof & McKinney (1987) to divide the sample into these
                                                 8

groups.2 The questions on religious affiliation have changed over time in the GSS, with a major

revision in 1984, when detail was added on a host of Protestant denominations. I therefore rely

on data from 1984 forwards for this analysis.

       The main dependent variable in the GSS for this analysis is religious attendance. The

GSS asks respondents about their frequency of religious attendance, with nine possible

responses: never; less than once per year; about once or twice a year; several times a year; about

once a month; two to three times a month; nearly every week; every week; and several times a

week. For the basic analysis below, I simply use the linear index formed by these responses

(with values 0 through 8), thereby implicitly assuming that there are equal impacts of each unit

change in the attendance index. Since each unit is roughly twice the previous unit in time terms,

this is roughly equivalent to a log scale in time attending. But I show as well the effects of

alternative formulations below.

       The second is the Integrated Public Use Microdata Sample (IPUMS) of the 1990 census.

These data contain information for a 5% sample of the population on a variety of socioeconomic

characteristics. I once again use a sample of non-hispanic whites ages 25 and older for this

analysis. I use several measures of economic well-being as the dependent variable: the log of

household income; the log of the ratio of household income to the poverty line (using the

poverty-line normalization for family size); years of education; categories of educational

attainment (high school dropout, high school graduate, some college, college graduate); whether



       2
       Liberal Protestants include, for example, Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and the United
Congregational Church/Unitarian-Universalists. Moderate Protestants include Methodists,
Lutherans, and Non-Southern Baptists. Conservative Protestants include Southern Baptists,
Pentecostals, and other Evangelical denominations.
                                                  9

the respondent is working; whether the respondent’s spouse is working; whether the family

receives welfare payments; whether the respondent is disabled; whether the respondent is married

or divorced; and the number of children in the respondent’s household.



Empirical Strategy - GSS Religious Attendance Estimates

         I initially estimate models of religious attendance as a function of religious market

density:

(1)      Ria =   + RELIGDENSia + ANCESDENSia + AGESDENSia + ANCESia +

                  AGESia + RELIGia + AREAa + YEARt +

where:           i indexes persons, a indexes areas, and t indexes years
                 R is religious attendance
                 RELIGDENS is the % of the population in the area that is of individual i’s
                 religion
                 ANCESDENS, AGESDENS are parallel measures of density of ancestry group
                 and age/sex group3
                 ANCES, AGES, and RELIG are fixed effects for the individual’s ancestry,
                 age/sex, and religion
                 AREA and YEAR are fixed effects for area and year

         This specification provides a “differences-in-differences” estimate of the impact of

religious market density on own participation. Market density is simply the percentage of each

PSU in the GSS that is of each of the seven religious groups. By including market and religious

preference fixed effects, I can control for differences across groups and areas in their religiosity.

Area-wide factors which causes differences in religious participation (history, weather, etc.) are



         3
        I divide the data into 28 age/sex groups, using five year age groupings fully interacted
with sex. In the GSS, this age/sex density is attached to individuals based on their actual age/sex
groups. In the IPUMS data, we match this to individuals before collapsing the data into
ancestry/MSA cells, and we then use the mean for the ancestry/MSA cell.
                                                   10

held constant, as are any religion-wide factors that are associated with religious participation

(level of “devotion”). Such a regression asks, for example: are Catholics more religious when

there is a higher percentage Catholic in an area, relative to Protestants in the same area, and

relative to Catholics in other areas with a lower percentage Catholic? A positive effect of

religious density on religious participation would be indicated by a positive coefficient on .

        Even in this differences-in-differences framework, there are three potential problems with

the analysis. The first is classical measurement error; given the small GSS sample sizes, I am

measuring denominational density in an area fairly imprecisely. Second, in addition, there could

be systematic measurement error in market density. If individuals who participate more in

religious activities are also more likely to report their religious affiliation in a survey (e.g. as

opposed to saying that they are not religious), then there will be a direct spurious link between

religious participation and religious density. Third, even conditional on these fixed effects,

market density may be capturing majority status effects. That is, it could be that it is not being

part of a large religious group, but rather being part of a large group per se, that determines

religious attendance.

        My approach to addressing these problems is to create an instrument for religious density

which is based on one’s ancestry, and the ancestries of others in the area, rather than on religion

per se. In particular, the instrument takes the following form:

(2)             PRDENna =       r [Prn * ( n Prn*ANCESna)]

where           n indexes ancestries, r indexes religions, and a indexes areas
                PRDENna is predicted density for ancestry group n in area a
                Prn is the distribution of religious preferences r within each ancestry n
                ANCESna is the density of each ancestral group n in each area a
                                                  11

       This measure, PRDEN, is formed in two steps. First, for each ancestry, I multiply the

density of that ancestry in an area times the probability that the ancestry is of a given religion.

Summing these, the final term in expression (2) gives me the predicted density of each religion in

each area; that is, based on the ancestral distribution in an area and the religious distribution of

each ancestry, this final term gives the predicted distribution of each religion in each area.

Second, I take a weighted average of this expression across religions within an ancestry, to

measure the predicted religious density for any ancestral group n in an area a. That is, I am

modeling directly the outcome of an ancestral group in an area as a function of the shared

religious preferences of other ancestral groups that reside in an area. So Italians that live with

Poles and Irish will have a high value; Italians that live Swedes and French will have a low value.

The Appendix provides a detailed example to illustrate this methodology.

       This approach solves the problems of measurement error noted above, since this

predicted religious density is not based on actual stated religious preferences, bur rather on the

ethnic makeup of the area. By including own ancestral density and age/sex density in the

regression, I also address the concern about identifying solely the impacts of majority status. Of

course, I am only including own ancestry density linearly in the regression, while it enters

nonlinearly into the computation of PRDEN, so this linear control may not be sufficient. To

address this, I actually exclude one’s own ancestral group when I compute PRDEN. That is,

PRDEN measures, given your area and ancestral group, the likelihood that you live with others of

your same religion, based on the other (but not own) ancestral groups in that area.

       Both the GSS and Census ask respondents for a single ancestry, and, if that is not

possible, for a primary and secondary ancestry. I define the primary ancestry as either the single
                                                   12

ancestry or the primary ancestry given. To address issues of segregation, I only use data on those

ancestries from Europe or Canada in the analysis. That is, I exclude from the analysis any

individual whose ancestry is not European or Canadian.4

         To measure ancestral densities by area as precisely as possible, I use the STF 3A files

from the census. These files provide, for each county, the demographic characteristics for the

full sample of individuals who filled out the census long form. I use the counties in the STF 3A

files to build up the MSAs in the census, and the PSUs in the GSS. For each MSA and PSU, I

compute the share of the area that is of each ancestral group, and the share of the area that is of

each age/sex group. To measure the religious distribution of each ancestral group, I use the GSS

data to compute the percentage of each ancestry that is of each of the seven religious categories

used.5



Empirical Strategy - Outcomes

         While the GSS data are ideal for examining effects on religious participation, they are not

ultimately useful for modeling the impact of religiosity on outcomes in this market structure

approach. The sample is sufficiently small that the estimates from doing so are very imprecise.



         4
         I divide non-hispanic white GSS respondents into 25 ancestral groupings: Austrian;
Belgian; French Canadian; Other Canadian; Czech; Danish; Dutch; English; Finnish; French;
German; Greek; Hungarian; Irish; Italian; Lithuanian; Norwegian; Polish; Portugese; Romanian;
Russian; Scottish; Swedish; Swiss; and Yugoslavian. This is the largest set of ancestries that can
be jointly defined in the GSS and the IPUMS files.
         5
         It is possible that it is not just the religious preferences of ancestral groups, but also their
degree of religious participation that matters. I have created a measure that accounts for this
alternative, by weighting each ancestral group by their frequency of religious attendance in
making PRDEN. This has no effects on the results.
                                                 13

       Therefore, to model outcomes, I turn to the IPUMS data. Of course, in IPUMS, there is

no information on religious preference. But, there is data on ancestry, akin to the data provided

in the GSS. And the instrument in the GSS, PRDEN, does not ultimately rely on religious

preference, but rather only on ancestry and area. Thus, I use the data the religious preferences of

each ancestry from the GSS, and on ancestral densities by MSA from the STF 3A data, to

compute PRDEN for each ancestry/MSA combination in the Census. That is, one benefit of this

identification strategy is that I need not have actual religious preference data; having information

on ancestry is sufficient to identify the model. The Census regression is therefore just the

reduced form version of the GSS instrumental variables regression. These regressions model

outcomes (e.g. income) as a function of whether individuals live near other ancestries that share

their religious preference.

       The relevant level of variation for the IPUMS data is at the ancestry/MSA level. Thus, I

collapse these data into ancestry/MSA cells for the analysis, and weight the regression by the

number of observations in the cell.

       In the context of the outcomes analysis, there are two plausible interpretations of the

coefficient . The first is that an increase in market density of one’s religion in one’s area

changes one’s level of religious participation. The second is that those who are more religious

move to areas where there is a higher density of their religion. In terms of finding a valid

instrument for the impacts of religious participation on outcomes, the exact causal mechanism is

not relevant; what is critical is simply that both mechanisms are otherwise independent of

outcomes. But this may not be true with the selection mechanism. In particular, it may be that

those who move to areas where there is a higher density of their religion (or those who don’t
                                                 14

move out of such areas) are different, on average, then those who do not. This could arise, for

example, if everyone desires to live with those of their religion, but moving is costly, so only

higher income individuals can undertake such a move on the margin. In this case, there would be

a systematic bias towards finding a positive correlation between religious market density and

income.

        Of course, the opposite story is also plausible, with the lowest income individuals being

the ones who move to be with others of their religion. Indeed, based on the past literature on

ethnic agglomeration, this opposite story seems the natural alternative. As reviewed in Edin et

al. (2003), past studies tend to find that those who live with others of their same ethnic group are

worse off than those who are not “ghetto-ized” in this way. Edin et al. propose a novel solution

to this problem, using the random assignment of refugee groups in Sweden, to show that there is

a true positive causal effect of ethnic agglomeration on outcomes. But, in a cross-section, the

past literature would suggest a negative selection bias to the estimates. Thus, the effect of

potential selection bias on the estimates is not clear. I discuss below an approach to addressing

the sign of this bias using individuals who do and do not move from their state of birth.



Means

        The means from the GSS and IPUMS data sets, at the PSU or MSA level, are presented

in Table 1. In the GSS, the typical respondent lives in an area where roughly one-quarter of the

population shares his general religious preference, although the variance is large. The

instrument, PRDEN, has a slightly lower mean of 0.195, with a much smaller standard
                                                 15

deviation.6 Roughly one in six persons in the typical persons area shares their same ancestry, and

fewer than one in twenty shares the same age/sex grouping. The mean of the attendance index

(on a scale from 0, no attendance, to 8, attend more than once per week) is 3.83. In the IPUMS

data, the mean and variance of PRDEN is similar to the GSS, as are ancestral densities; the

age/sex density is somewhat higher.



                                         Part III: Results

GSS Results

       Table 2 presents the results for the impacts of market density on religious attendance in

the GSS. The Table shows only the coefficients of interest, those on RELIGDENS,

ANCESDENS, and ASDENS, from regressions that include all the controls shown in equation

(1) above. The first column shows the OLS relationship, which is strongly positive: increases in

the density of one’s religion in one’s area increases the frequency of religious attendance. The

point estimate suggests that each ten percentage point increase in religious density is associated

with a 0.013 unit increment in the attendance index. Recall that the attendance index is roughly a

log scale, so that one unit represents a doubling in frequency of attendance. This implies that a

10 percentage point rise in religious density raises religious attendance by 1.3%.

       The second column shows the impact of instrumenting religious density using PRDEN

the prediction for religious density based on area ancestral mix. Doing so substantially increases

the coefficient to 0.845; that is, each 10 percentage point increase in density raises attendance by



       6
        The mean of PRDEN is lower than the mean of religious density since own ancestral
group is excluded in computing PRDEN.
                                                  16

0.085 index point, or 8.5%.

        The next two rows show the impact of area ancestral density and age/sex density on

religious attendance. There is a very modest and statistically insignificant effect of ancestral

density; having more individuals around of your ancestry group does not much impact

attendance. This is striking, given the strong IV results in the second column, which are based

on the density of other ancestral groups in the area. That is, living with others of your own ethnic

group has little effect on religious attendance, but living with others of complementary ethnic

groups that share your religion has a large positive effect.

        This finding suggests that there are particular effects of having more individuals around

of your own ancestry, as opposed to “complementary” ancestries that share your religion, that

offset the positive effects of religious density. For example, for Italians, having more Poles and

more Italians in the area increases the density of Catholics and thereby increases participation.

But the additional Italians also reduce participation, perhaps because there are other cultural

functions that are served outside of the religious setting. This is consistent with the census

outcomes results which show negative effects of higher own ethnic density in the area. There is a

much stronger effect of age/sex density; having more individuals in your age/sex group

significantly increases the rate of religious participation.

        One concern with the results presented thus far is that some individuals in the GSS report

their religion as “none”. While about one-third of this group does report attending religious

services, it is not clear if they should be included in the regression. I exclude them in the bottom

panel, and the results are very similar to those reported above.

        An additional concern is that the measure of religious participation is a crude one. In
                                                 17

Table 3, I therefore explore two alternative measures. First, I replace the index values with their

time-weighted counterparts.7 As the first row of Table 3 shows, the effect remains significant

with this alternative formulation, implying that each 10 percentage point increase in density leads

to 0.95 more days of church attendance. Second, I estimate separate IV (linear probability)

models for each of the individual attendance category dummies. While few of these coefficients

are significant, there is a clear and consistent pattern of reductions in the low attendance

categories, and increases in the high attendance categories. There is a particularly strong

reduction in the odds of never attending, and a particularly strong increase in the odds of

attending at least weekly.



IPUMS Results

       Table 4 presents the results for outcomes using the IPUMS data, which is, as noted,

collapsed to the ancestry/MSA level. Each row shows the coefficients on PRDEN (religious

density for own ancestry, predicted based on own ancestries religious distribution and the

religious distribution of other ancestries in the area), as well as the density of own ancestry and

own age/sex group in the MSA.

       The results show a very strong positive correlation between predicted own religious

density and positive economic outcomes. The coefficient shows that each ten percent increase in

predicted own religious density leads to a 0.91 percent increase in household income.

Normalized by the poverty scale, a ten percent increase in predicted own density leads to a 0.55


       7
        That is, I convert the values as follows: no attendance = 0; less than annual attendance =
1; once or twice a year = 2; several times a year = 4; monthly = 12; two or three times per month
= 30; almost every week = 40; weekly = 52; two or three times per week = 130
                                                  18

percent increase in income as a fraction of poverty. The lower result in the second row implies

that density is positively associated with family size, as we will see to be the case below.

        The results from the GSS analysis can be used here to form an implicit IV estimate of the

effects of religious attendance on outcomes. The coefficient on PRDEN in a reduced form model

of attendance in the GSS is 1.077 (0.351); that is moving from a PRDEN of 0 to a PRDEN of 1

doubles the frequency of attendance (a one unit increase in the attendance index). Putting this

together with the census results, it implies that doubling the frequency of attendance leads to a

9.1% increase in household income, or a rise of 5.5% as a fraction of the poverty scale.

        This implicit IV estimate is an overstatement, however, to the extent that there are other

aspects of religiosity that are affected by religious density, and affect outcomes. For example,

more religious density may lead not only to more attendance, but also more fervent religious

beliefs, which themselves impact outcomes. Indeed, in the GSS, there are strong positive effects

of density on the intensity of religious beliefs (IV coefficient of 0.133 (0.054)), and on belief in

the afterlife (IV coefficient 0.128 (0.076)). These effects may be an outcome of increased

participation, or they may be a direct impact of being in an environment where more individuals

share your religion. To the extent that the latter is the case, then the implicit IV calculations

presented here are overstating the effects of attendance per se (since they also build in the effects

of religious beliefs as well).

        The coefficient on ancestry density in these regressions is negative, suggesting that a

higher density of own ancestry leads to lower, not higher, incomes. This is consistent with the

literature on ethnic concentration reviewed earlier, which reported that, in standard observational

models, ethnic segregation is associated with worse outcomes. Once again, this makes it even
                                                 19

more striking that I find positive effects of PRDEN: while being near others of your own

ancestral group is negatively associated with outcomes, being near others of ancestral groups that

share your religion is positively associated with outcomes. Being near others of the same age/sex

group is also negatively associated with outcomes.

       The next five rows explore the impact of predicted religious density on education. I first

examine total years of education, and find a highly significant positive effect, whereby each 10

percentage point increase in predicted religious density is associated with 0.05 more years of

education. Thus, once again using the result from the GSS, this finding suggests that doubling

religious participation raises education by roughly 0.5 years. This result arises from large

reductions in the odds of being a high school dropout or only having a high school degree, and

increases in some college attendance or (particularly) college graduation.

       The next two rows examine effects on own and spousal employment. There is no

noticeable effect on the odds that respondents are employed, although spousal employment is

significantly higher; this effect likely arises through the effects on marriage noted below (since

spousal employment is zero either if spouses do not work or individuals are unmarried). The

odds of the family receiving welfare income are significantly reduced; this effect is quite large,

implying (given the GSS findings) that doubling the rate of attendance is associated with a 0.4%

reduction in the odds of receiving welfare, or 16% of baseline receipt rates. There is a negative,

but only marginally significant, reduction in the odds of being disabled.

       The next two rows examine marital status. There is a significant positive association

between predicted religious density and the odds of being married, and a significant negative

association with the odds of being divorced. The former implies that doubling the rate of
                                                 20

attendance leads to a 4.4% increase in the odds of being married; the latter implies that this same

doubling leads to a 4.0% reduction in the odds of being divorced. Finally, there is a strong

positive association with the number of children, which is consistent with the rise in the odds of

marriage.

       Overall, these IPUMS results are very consistent with a positive effect of religious

participation on economic measures of well-being. Higher religious density, which is associated

with more religious attendance, is also associated with higher incomes, more education, higher

family labor supply, lower rates of welfare receipt, a higher odds of marriage, and a lower odds

of divorce.



                              Part IV: Alternative Interpretations

       The results thus far have shown that there is a very strong positive correlation between

religious market density, as proxied by ancestral densities in an area, and both religious

attendance and positive census outcomes. Given the striking nature of these findings, I turn now

a host of specification tests designed to explore the robustness of my finding to alternative

explanations.

       Before doing so, it is important to recall the wide set of alternative interpretations that are

already ruled out by the results to this point. The models estimated above include area fixed

effects, so that any explanation based on general differences across areas is controlled for in the

analysis. That is, these findings do not simply indicate that more religious areas have better

outcomes, but rather that outcomes are better for groups that have more individuals of their

religion (through complementary ancestries) in their area, relative to other groups in that same
                                                 21

area with fewer individuals of their religion.

       The model includes own ethnic density (which is also excluded from the computation of

PRDEN), so that any explanation based on within-ethnic group spillovers is controlled for in the

analysis. Moreover, the coefficient on own ethnic density is generally opposite-signed from the

coefficient on PRDEN. The only alternatives which can explain these results, therefore, are ones

where the density of other ancestral groups that share one’s religion, but not the density of one’s

own ethnic group, cause positive outcomes.



Spillovers from “Nearby” Ancestral Groups

       One such alternative is that, even though I control for own religious density, there are

other spillover effects from “nearby” ancestry groups. That is, even controlling for the number of

Swedish in an area, the number of Norwegians in the area may affect behavior in manners

beyond religious spillovers, e.g. through other sources of Scandinavian group interaction.

       I address this in two ways. First, just as I control for own group density in the model, I

can also control for density of groups in your region of the world. I divide the ancestral groups

into four for this exercise: Commonwealth/English-speaking nations; Northern Europe; Western

Europe; and Eastern Europe. The results of including this control in the model are shown in the

third column of Table 2 for the GSS. Adding this control has little effect on the estimated

coefficient on religious density. The control itself is negative, but insignificant. The effect of

adding this control in the IPUMS is shown in the second and third columns of Table 5; the first

column provides the base case results from Table 4 for comparison. It is clear that adding this

control has little substantive effect on the results; if anything, they become somewhat stronger.
                                                   22

The area density itself is typically opposite signed from PRDEN, which is similar to the own

ancestry coefficient.

          A more rigorous approach is to define religious density exclusive of all ancestries in

one’s region of the world. That is, I recompute density based only on that set of ancestries that

are not in a given ancestry’s region (akin to excluding one’s own ancestry from the original

computation of PRDEN). This provides a measure of density which is completely independent

of not only of a group’s own ancestry, but also of the ancestries of all (geographically) nearby

groups.

          The results of this exercise are shown in the final column of Table 2 (for GSS), and the

fourth column of Table 5 (for IPUMS). Once again, even this more rigorous approach to dealing

with potential spillovers has little impact on the findings in either data set.



Do Results Reflect Religious Participation Only?

          The results thus far indicate fairly strongly that living near complementary ancestral

groups is associated with a higher rate of religious participation, and with better economic

outcomes. These findings, however, do not necessarily establish that the mechanism translating

higher complementary ancestral density to outcomes is through religious participation. It may

be, for example, that higher complementary ancestral density leads to more civic participation in

general, not only through religious participation.

          This alternative seems unlikely, since the key regressor is based on groups that share a

group’s religious makeup, not other factors that drive civic participation. Nevertheless, I can

explore this alternative in the GSS, by using the available data on other measures of “social
                                                  23

capital”. The GSS collects data on whether the respondent is a member of one of a set of

organizations. I use as a dependent variable both a dummy variable for belonging to any

organization, and the count of the number of organizations to which the individual belongs. If

PRDEN is simply capturing some unobserved source of social capital in an area, then we would

expect these coefficients to be positive, as we see for attendance.

       In fact, as Table 6 shows, both coefficients are negative, although neither is significant. I

also show in this table the means and number of observations for these variables. These

estimates are fairly imprecise, relative to the sample means. But there is certainly no evidence of

increases in other social capital. Indeed, if I estimate separate models for every group

membership, the only two coefficients that are positive are for membership in a professional

organization and membership in a church group (although neither is significant); the other 12

membership coefficients are all negative.



Are Results Driven by Selection?

       As noted earlier, there are two possible explanations for the findings presented thus far:

that the evolution of density in one’s area changes religious participation and outcomes; and that

those who are more religious move to areas with a higher density of their religion. And, as

noted, in terms of finding a valid instrument for the impacts of religious participation on

outcomes, the exact causal mechanism is not relevant; what is critical is simply that both

mechanisms are otherwise independent of outcomes. But there is reason to believe that the

selection mechanism is not independent of outcomes. As noted, the bias is not obvious ex ante

       It is difficult to definitively rule out selection as an explanation for these results, but there
                                                  24

is one quite suggestive test: examining the results for movers. An implication of the selection

explanation for these results is that they should be found more strongly among those who are

moving into an area than for those already living in the area.

       An extreme thought experiment is helpful here. Suppose that individuals in the U.S. were

assigned randomly to a place to live many generations ago, and were not allowed to move.

Suddenly, for the current generation interviewed in the 1990 Census, individuals were allowed

one move at age 25. In this case, there would be a clean test for selection bias. Among movers,

any measured effect on outcomes at age 26 (immediately after moving is allowed) of an increase

in religious density, representing an improved match, would be pure selection. That is, a finding

that those who move to places with a better religious match have better outcomes could not

reflect the causal effect of the better match, since outcomes at age 26 are determined solely by

place of birth. Rather, such a finding would reflect the fact that higher quality individuals are

moving to where the match is better. In other words, if the effect of religious density is truly

causal, then any change in religious density for movers should be irrelevant to their outcomes,

since their outcomes at age 26 should be fully determined by their place of birth. If an increase in

religious density is associated with better outcomes, it occurs through selection.

       Of course, we do not have this type of clean experiment. In this section, I approximate

such a test by examining the correlation between outcomes and the change in religious density

for those who move from their state of birth to some new state. Such an approximation has two

offsetting biases relative to the thought experiment. First, if all selection has occurred in

previous generations (something ruled out by assumption in the thought experiment), then it will

not be reflected in a test on movers in the current generation, biasing the test statistic towards
                                                   25

zero. So long as some selection is ongoing with the current generation, however, the test will

still provide the correct sign, if not magnitude. Second, since movers have moved at some point

since birth, if there is a true positive causal effect of religious density, then the improved match

may be reflected in their ex-post outcomes even absent selection. This will bias the test towards

finding selection, and we cannot fix this problem since we don’t know the age that individuals

moved.

         To implement this test, I measure PRDEN at the state, rather than the MSA level. I then

reestimate the census models just for individuals who have moved from their state of birth,

modeling their outcomes as a function of the change in PRDEN between their state of birth and

their current state. The positive selection story would predict a strong positive coefficient on this

change: those who move to improved matches (higher PRDEN) would be those with the best

outcomes. I include in this model the change in ancestry and age/sex density between state and

birth and state of residence, as well as a full set of fixed effects for both state of birth and state of

residence.

         The result of these regressions is shown in the first column of Table 7. Strikingly, the

signs for virtually all of the regressions are now the opposite of those from the earlier

regressions: those who move from their birth state to another state with a higher PRDEN have

worse outcomes along most dimensions. There are significant negative coefficients for income,

education and employment, and significant positive coefficients for disability and welfare receipt.

The results for marriage and divorce are also opposite signed (negative effects on marriage,

positive on divorce), although not statistically significant. This suggests that there is actually

negative selection among movers: those who move to better matches in terms of religious density
                                                 26

are actually worse on average than those who do not.

       To confirm this point, the second column in Table 7 shows the results (at the state level)

for those who remain in their state of birth. Here, the results are generally positive and larger

than those found earlier. The exceptions is marriage, where the effect is not significant, divorce,

where the effect is significant but weaker than in Table 4, and number of children, where the

effect is now negative. Thus, consistent with the literature on ethnic segregation, there appears to

be negative selection at work among movers that leads us to understate the overall positive effect

of religious density on outcomes.



                                       Part IV: Conclusions

       Religion remains an important aspect of life in the U.S. Yet we know very little about the

impacts the religious participation has on economic outcomes. I have attempted to remedy this

shortcoming by instrumenting for religious density with the extent to which others in an area

share one’s religious heritage, and to study the impact of religious density on outcomes in the

Census IPUMS data.

       The findings of this analysis are striking: a higher density of your religion in your area, as

proxied by the ancestral mix of area residents, leads to significantly more religious participation,

and to better outcomes along a variety of dimensions, such as education, income, and marital

status. These effects are sizeable, and are robust to a variety of specification checks. And they

do not appear to be driven by selection of higher ability individuals into areas where there is

more density of their religion.

       This paper has not at all investigated the mechanisms behind these findings. There are
                                                  27

several candidate explanations that could be explored in future work. One is social capital

effects: being near those of one’s religion could increase the total number of social interactions,

and this can have positive effects of the kind emphasized by the social capital literature (e.g.

Glaeser, Laibson and Sacerdote, 2000; Putnam, 2000). Given the negative effects of being near

one’s own ethnic group, however, this must be a particular channel of social capital that works

through interactions in religious settings. A second and related channel could be insurance

provision. Religious institutions may operate as both financial and emotional insurers during

negative shocks, improving overall welfare through filling missing markets for capital or other

forms of support. This interpretation is supported in a developing country context by Chen

(2003), who finds that those most affected by the Indonesian financial crisis of the 1990s were

most likely to increase their degree of religious intensity, but that this effect was mitigated by the

availability of other forms of credit.

         A third channel could be through religious education: a higher religious density could

lead to more attendance at religious schools, and this could have a positive effect on long run

outcomes. Neal (1997) shows that Catholic children are more likely to attend Catholic schools if

there are more Catholics nearby. Whether this leads to better outcomes is a source of some

contention in the literature, as Altonji, Elder and Taber (2002) review.

         Finally, it is possible that more religious faith improves well-being directly. For example,

those with more faith may be less “stressed out” about daily problems that impede success in the

labor market and the marriage market, and are therefore more successful. Tests which could

separate out this and the other channels would be quite useful for explaining the results in this

paper.
                                              28

                                         References

Altonji, Joseph, Todd Elder and Christopher Taber (2002). “An Evaluation of Instrumental
        Variables Strategies for Estimating the Effects of Catholic Schools,” NBER Working
        Paper #9358.

Bachman, Jerald, Patrick O’Malley, John Schulenberg, Lloyd Johnston, Alison Bryant, and
     Alicia Merline (2002). The Decline in Substance Use in Young Adulthood: Changes in
     Social Activities, Roles, and Beliefs. Mahway, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
     Associates.

Chaves, Mark and Philip Gorski (2001). “Religious Pluralism and Religious Participation,”
      Annual Review of Sociology, 27, 261-281.

Chen, Daniel (2003). “Economic Distress and Religious Intensity: Evidence from Islamic
       Resurgence During the Indonesian Financial Crisis,” mimeo, MIT.

Edin, Per-Anders, Peter Fredriksson, and Olof Aslund (2003). “Ethnic Enclaves and the
       Economic Success of Immigrants - Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 329-357

Ellison, Christopher (1991). “Religious Involvement and Subjective Well-Being,” Journal of
        Health and Social Behavior, 32, 80-99.

Ellison, Christopher, J.A. Burr, and P.L. McCall, “Religious Homogeneity and Metropolitan
        Suicide Rates,” Social Forces, 76, 273-299.

Evans, T. David, Francis Cullen, R. Gregory Dunaway, and Velmer Burton (1995). “Religion
       and Crime Reexamined: The Impact of Religion, Secular Controls and Social Ecology on
       Adult Criminality,” Criminology, 33, 195-215.

Finke, Roger and Rodney Stark (1988). “Religious Economics and Sacred Canopies,” American
       Sociological Review, 53, 41-49.

Finke, Roger and Rodney Stark (1992). The Churching of America, 1776-1990: Winners and
       Losers in Our Religious Economy. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

Freeman, Richard (1986). “Who Escapes? The Relation of Churchgoing and Other Background
      Factors to the Socioeconomic Performance of Black Male Youths from Inner-City
      Tracts,” in Richard Freeman and Harry Holzer, eds. The Black Youth Employment Crisis.
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 353-76.

Glaeser, Edward, David Laibson and Bruce Sacerdote (2000). “The Economic Approach to
                                                29

       Social Capital”, NBER Working Paper #7728.

Gruber, Jonathan (2003). “Pay or Pray: The Impact of Charitable Subsidies on Religious
       Participation,” mimeo, MIT.

Gruber, Jonathan and Sendhil Mullainathan (2002). “Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers
       Happier?,” NBER Working Paper #8872, April 2002.

Hout, Michael and Andrew M. Greeley (2003). “Religion and Happiness,” paper prepared for
       the annual meeting of the American Sociological Association.

Hull, Brooks, and Frederick Bold (1995). “Preaching Matters - Replication and Extension,”
       Journal of Economic Behavior and Organizations, 27, 143-149.

Hummer, Robert, Richard Rogers, Charles Nam, and Christopher Ellison (1999). “Religious
    Involvement and U.S. Adult Mortality,” Demography, 35, 273-285.

Iannaccone, Laurence (1991). “The Consequences of Religious Market Structure: Adam Smith
       and the Economics of Religion,” Rationality and Society, 3, 156-177.

Iannaccone, Laurence, Roger Finke and Rodney Stark (1997). “Deregulating Religion: The
       Economics of Church and State,” Economic Inquiry, 35, 350-364.

Iannaccone, Laurence (1998). “Introduction to the Economics of Religion,” Journal of Economic
       Literature, 36, 1465-1496.

Lehrer, Evelyn and Carmel Chiswick (1993). “Religion as a Determinant of Marital Stability,”
       Demography, 30, 385-404.

Levin, Jeffrey S. (1994). “Religion and Health: Is There an Association, Is it Valid, and Is It
       Causal?,” Social Science and Medicine, 38, 1475-1482.

Levin, Jeffrey S. and Harold Y. Vanderpool (1987). “Is Frequent Religious Attendance Really
       Conducive to Better Health? Toward an Epidemiology of Religion,” Social Science and
       Medicine, 24, 589-600.

Lipford, Jody, Robert McCormick, and Robert Tollison (1993). “Preaching Matters,” Journal of
       Economic Beahvior and Organizations, 21, 235-250.

Olson, Daniel (1998). “The Influence of Religious Pluralism on Close Social Ties and Religious
       Involvement”. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Society for the Scientific
       Study of Religion.
                                               30

Perl, Paul, and Daniel Olson (2000). “Religious Market Share and Intensity of Church
        Involvement in Five Denominations,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 39, 12-
        31.

Phillips, Rick (1998). “Religious Market Share and Mormon Church Activity,” Sociology of
        Religion, 59, 117-130.

Putnam, Robert (2000). Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community.
      New York: Simon and Schuster.

National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse (2001). So Help Me God: Substance Abuse,
       Religion and Spirituality. New York: Columbia University.

Neal, Derek (1997). “The Effects of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Educational Attainment,”
       Journal of Labor Economics, 15, 98-123.

Roof, Wade Clark, and William McKinney (1987). American Mainline Religion: Its Changing
       Shape and Future. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press

Tomes, Nigel (1985). “Religion and the Earnings Function,” American Economic Review, 75,
      245-250.

Voas, David, Daniel Olson and Alasdair Crockett (2002). “Religious Pluralism and
       Participation: Why Previous Research is Wrong,” American Sociological Review, 67,
       212-230.

Wallace, John, and David Williams (1997). “Religion and Adolescent Health-Compromising
      Behavior,” in J. Schulenberg, J.L. Maggs, and K. Hurrelman, eds., Health Risks and
      Developmental Transitions During Adolescence. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
      Press, 444-468.

Zaleski, Peter and Charles Zech (1995). “The Effect of Religious Market Competition on
       Church Giving,” Review of Social Economy, 53, 350-367.
                                  31

                             Table 1: Means
                                 Mean         Standard Dev.
                                 GSS
    Religious Density            0.266           0.164
         PRDEN                   0.195           0.029
    Ancenstral Dens.             0.187           0.155
     Age/Sex Dens.               0.030           0.012
       Area Dens.                0.361           0.171
      Attend Index                3.83            2.73
      Number Obs                14,976
                                Census
         PRDEN                   0.197           0.029
     Ancestral Dens.             0.190           0.145
     Age/Sex Dens.               0.077           0.013
       Area Dens.                0.332           0.141
       HH Income                50,560           10,470
Percentage of Poverty Line       3.578           0.354
   Years of Education            13.3            0.721
       HS Dropout                0.132           0.060
      HS Graduate                0.323           0.071
      Some College               0.294           0.059
    College Graduate             0.248           0.093
        Employed                 0.652           0.066
    Spouse Employed              0.411           0.053
    Receive Welfare              0.024           0.013
        Disabled                 0.117           0.029
                                            32

           Married                         0.631                         0.050
          Divorced                         0.103                         0.026
       Number of Kids                      0.656                         0.136
         Number Obs                        5023

Notes: Table shows means and standard deviations from GSS and IPUMS data sets described in
text.
                                               33

                              Table 2: Attendance Results in GSS
                          OLS                  IV          IV, Area Control      IV, Exclude
                                                                                     Area
                                       All Observations
    Religious             0.125              0.845               0.911              0.951
     Density             (0.039)            (0.278)             (0.281)            (0.288)
     Ancestry             0.020             -0.054              -0.016             -0.065
     Density             (0.031)            (0.042)             (0.050)            (0.043)
 Age/Sex Density          0.282              0.243               0.243              0.236
                         (0.123)            (0.125)             (0.126)            (0.126)
   Area Density                                                 -0.101
                                                                (0.067)
 Number of Obs           14,976              14,976             14,976             14,976
                          Exclude Those with No Religious Preference
     PRDEN                0.101              0.853               0.928              0.983
                         (0.043)            (0.282)             (0.283)            (0.290)
     Ancestry             0.023             -0.055              -0.010             -0.069
     Density             (0.033)            (0.045)             (0.054)            (0.045)
 Age/Sex Density          0.264              0.258               0.262              0.256
                         (0.132)            (0.134)             (0.134)            (0.134)
   Area Density                                                 -0.119
                                                                (0.072)
 Number of Obs           13,606              13,606             13,606             13,606

Notes: Tables shows coefficients of interest from regressions such as equation (1) in text; in
addition to covariates shown, models include fixed effects for age/sex, ancestry, religious
preference, PSU, and year. Each column in each panel shows coefficients from a single
regression. Standard errors in parentheses. Top panel shows regressions including all
observations; bottom panel excludes those who report no religious preference. First column is
estimated by OLS; remaining columns by instrumental variables, where instrument is PRDEN.
Third column adds control for % of individuals in PSU that are from individual’s area of the
world; fourth column recomputes PRDEN to exclude those individuals.
                                                34

                  Table 3: Attendance Categories and Time Weighted Measure
      Dependent Variable                       IV                         IV, Exclude Area
  Time-Weighted Attendance                     9.46                             11.40
                                              (3.73 )                           (3.85)
         Never Attend                         -0.069                            -0.060
                                              (0.038)                           (0.039)
    Less than Once Per Yr.                    -0.026                            -0.024
                                              (0.031)                           (0.032)
          Once/Twice                          -0.002                            -0.026
           Per Year                           (0.038)                           (0.039)
         Several Times                        -0.026                            -0.040
           Per Year                           (0.037)                           (0.038)
            Once Per                          -0.032                            -0.025
             Month                            (0.028)                           (0.029)
          2 or 3 Times                         0.005                            -0.008
           Per Month                           (0.03)                           (0.031)
      Nearly Every Week                        0.018                             0.036
                                              (0.026)                           (0.026)
          Every Week                           0.101                             0.108
                                              (0.045)                           (0.046)
         Several Times                         0.029                             0.039
           Per Week                           (0.028)                           (0.029)

Notes: Tables shows coefficients of interest from regressions such as equation (1) in text; in
addition to religious density, models includes ancestral density, age/sex density, and fixed effects
for age/sex, ancestry, religious preference, PSU, and year. Each cell shows coefficient from a
separate regression. Standard errors in parentheses. First row shows regression where
attendance index is replaced by time weighted values. Remaining rows show individual linear
probability models of attendance frequency categories. First column shows basic PRDEN
results; second column shows results when PRDEN excludes individuals from that individual’s
part of the world.
                                                35

                                Table 4: Census Outcome Results
                                        PRDEN              Ancestry Density     Age/Sex Density
  Log of Household Income                 0.091                 -0.032               -0.000
                                         (0.012)                (0.001)              (0.014)
 Log of Percentage of Poverty             0.055                 -0.013               -0.027
             Line                        (0.007)                (0.001)              (0.008)
      Years of Education                  0.499                 -0.300               -0.302
                                         (0.064)                (0.008)              (0.075)
          HS Dropout                     -0.039                  0.022                0.011
                                         (0.006)                (0.001)              (0.007)
          HS Graduate                    -0.075                  0.021                0.031
                                         (0.007)                (0.001)              (0.008)
         Some College                     0.025                 -0.009                0.002
                                         (0.006)                (0.001)              (0.006)
       College Graduate                   0.088                 -0.035               -0.043
                                         (0.008)                (0.001)              (0.010)
           Employed                       0.003                 -0.003               -0.012
                                         (0.005)                (0.001)              (0.005)
       Spouse Employed                    0.032                 -0.000                0.014
                                         (0.005)                (0.001)              (0.006)
        Receive Welfare                  -0.0044                0.0007               0.0056
                                         (0.0018)              (0.0002)             (0.0021)
            Disabled                     -0.007                  0.002               -0.012
                                         (0.004)               (0.0005)              (0.004)
            Married                       0.044                  0.014                0.044
                                         (0.006)               (0.0006)              (0.006)
           Divorced                      -0.030                 -0.002               -0.015
                                         (0.004)               (0.0005)              (0.004)
        Number of Kids                    0.091                  0.007                0.434
                                         (0.011)                (0.001)              (0.013)


Notes: Tables shows coefficients of interest from regressions such as equation (1) in text; in
addition to covariates shown, models include fixed effects for age/sex, ancestry, religious
                                             36

preference, PSU, and year. Each row shows coefficients from a separate regression, where
dependent variable is outcome listed in first column. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                       37


                       Table 5: Census Specification Checks
                       Base Case        Control for Area Density     Exclude Own
                                                                         Area
                       PRDEN           PRDEN          Area Density     PRDEN
 Log of Household        0.091           0.101           -0.019         0.094
     Income             (0.012)         (0.012)          (0.002)       (0.011)
Log of Percentage of     0.055           0.061           -0.011         0.057
   Poverty Line         (0.007)         (0.007)          (0.001)       (0.006)
Years of Education       0.499           0.556           -0.103         0.525
                        (0.064)         (0.065)          (0.013)       (0.060)
    HS Dropout          -0.039          -0.044            0.010        -0.035
                        (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.001)       (0.006)
   HS Graduate          -0.075          -0.075            0.0004       -0.069
                        (0.007)         (0.007)          (0.0014)      (0.006)
   Some College          0.025           0.025           -0.000         0.013
                        (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.001)       (0.005)
 College Graduate        0.088           0.095           -0.011         0.092
                        (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.002)       (0.008)
     Employed            0.003           0.002            0.001         0.001
                        (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.001)       (0.004)
 Spouse Employed         0.032           0.031            0.001         0.026
                        (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.001)       (0.005)
  Receive Welfare      -0.0044         -0.0050            0.0010       -0.0044
                       (0.0018)        (0.0018)          (0.0004)      (0.0017)
     Disabled           -0.007          -0.008             0.002       -0.007
                        (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.0008)      (0.004)
      Married            0.044           0.042            0.003         0.042
                        (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.001)       (0.005)
     Divorced           -0.030          -0.032            0.002        -0.028
                        (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.001)       (0.003)
  Number of Kids         0.091           0.089            0.003         0.086
                        (0.011)         (0.012)          (0.002)       (0.011)
                                                38

Notes: Tables shows coefficients of interest from regressions such as equation (1) in text; in
addition to covariates shown, models include ancestral density, age/sex density, and fixed effects
for age/sex, ancestry, religious preference, PSU, and year. Standard errors in parentheses. First
column shows PRDEN coefficients from Table 4, for coefficient of interest; each row is a
separate regression. Second and third columns show PRDEN and area density coefficients from
regressions that adds control for % of individuals in PSU that are from individual’s area of the
world; fourth column recomputes PRDEN to exclude those individuals.
                                                39


                           Table 6: GSS Results for Other Participation
            Measure of Participation                               IV Coefficient
            Member of Any Group?                                       -0.056
                                                                       (0.089)
                                                                       [0.756]
                                                                        6,112
               Number of Groups                                        -0.629
                                                                       (0.503)
                                                                        [1.98]
                                                                        6,112

Notes: Tables shows coefficients of interest from regressions such as equation (1) in text; in
addition to religious density, models includes ancestral density, age/sex density, and fixed effects
for age/sex, ancestry, religious preference, PSU, and year. Each cell shows coefficient from a
separate regression, where dependent variable is listed in first column. Standard errors in
parentheses, variable mean in square brackets, and number of observations at bottom.
                                                40

                                  Table 7: Examining Selection
                                    Movers out of Birth State          State of Residence =
                                                                           State of Birth
  Log of Household Income                    -0.050                            0.219
                                             (0.011)                          (0.030)
    Log % of Poverty Line                     -0.010                           0.110
                                             (0.007)                          (0.017)
      Years of Education                     -0.354                            1.206
                                             (0.041)                          (0.130)
          HS Dropout                          0.034                           -0.101
                                             (0.004)                          (0.014)
         HS Graduate                         -0.001                           -0.070
                                             (0.006)                          (0.010)
         Some College                        -0.005                            0.021
                                             (0.005)                          (0.008)
       College Graduate                      -0.029                            0.150
                                             (0.006)                          (0.015)
           Employed                          -0.011                            0.016
                                             (0.005)                          (0.007)
       Spouse Employed                       -0.010                            0.014
                                             (0.005)                          (0.007)
        Receive Welfare                       0.0040                          -0.0055
                                             (0.0020)                         (0.0027)
           Disabled                           0.008                           -0.019
                                             (0.003)                          (0.006)

            Married                          -0.008                            0.008
                                             (0.005)                          (0.007)
           Divorced                           0.005                           -0.026
                                             (0.003)                          (0.005)
        Number of Kids                       -0.017                           -0.009
                                             (0.012)                          (0.016)

Notes: Tables shows coefficients of interest from regressions such as equation (1) in text; in
addition to covariates shown, models include ancestral density, age/sex density, and fixed effects
                                               41

for age/sex, ancestry, religious preference, PSU, and year. Standard errors in parentheses. First
column shows coefficient on change in PRDEN (state of residence minus state of birth PRDEN),
and second column shows coefficient on PRDEN for those still in state of birth; each row is a
separate regression.
                                                 42

                         Appendix: Illustrating PRDEN Computation

        This appendix provides an illustrative example of the computation of the PRDEN
measure that is the centerpiece of the empirical strategy used in this paper. I consider a very
simplified example of two ancestries (Italian and English), two religions (Catholic and
Protestant), and two areas.
        As the first row of Appendix Table 1 shows, 80% of Italians are Catholic, but only 10%
of English are. The first row in the second panel of the table shows, likewise, that 20% of
Italians are Protestant, and 90% of the English are. In this example, we consider two fictional
areas: 60% of the population in Area 1 is Italian, and 40% is English; in Area 2, 20% of the
population is Italian and 80% is English.
        This Table computes the terms in the last part of expression (2), by multiplying the
ancestral religious distribution times ancestral population distributions in an area to obtain a
predicted religious density. Thus, from these figures, we predict that 52% of Area 1 will be
Catholic, with 48% of the population Protestant; 24% of Area 2 is predicted to be Catholic, and
76% is predicted to be Protestant. That is, since Area 1 is slightly more Italian, it is predicted to
be slightly more Catholic; since Area 2 is much more English, it is predicted to be much more
Protestant.
        Appendix Table 2 then takes this information, and uses it to compute PRDEN, the
predicted religious density of each area for each ancestry. In Area 1, for example, 52% of the
population is predicted to be Catholic, and 80% of Italians are Catholic; 48% of the population is
predicted to be Protestant, and 20% of Italians are Protestant. As a result, for Italians in Area 1,
on average 52% of the population will be of their same religion. For the English in Area 1, on
average 48% of the population will be of their same religion. In Area 2, only 34% of the
population will be of the same religion as the Italians in that area, but 70% of the population will
be of the same religion as the English in that area.
        These results illustrate the sources of variation in PRDEN. The more highly segregated
areas are into ancestral groups that are themselves religiously segregated, the larger will be the
variance in PRDEN. So, there is much more variance in PRDEN in Area 2, since that location is
more heavily segregated, and the dominant group (English) are strongly segregated into
Protestantism.
                                     43

                             Appendix Table 1
                                 Catholics
                      Italians                 English   Total Predicted
                                                           Catholics
Ancestry Religion %    80%                      10%
Ancestry Density in    60%                      40%           52%
     Area 1
Ancestry Density in    20%                      80%           24%
     Area 2
                                 Protestants
                      Italians                 English   Total Predicted
                                                           Protestants
Ancestry Religion %    20%                      90%
Ancestry Density in    60%                      40%           48%
     Area 1
Ancestry Density in    20%                      80%           76%
     Area 2
                                            44


                                      Appendix Table 2
                           Italians                              English
              Predicted    % in           Product    Predicted    % in      Product
              % in Area   Ancestry                   % in Area   Ancestry
Area 1
 Catholic       52%         80%            42%           52%      10%         5%
 Protestant     48%         20%            10%           48%      90%        43%
 PRDEN                                     52%                               48%
Area 2
 Catholic       24%         80%            19%           24%      10%         2%
 Protestant     76%         20%            15%           76%      90%        68%
 PRDEN                                     34%                               70%
