                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   WHAT MATTERS FOR FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT?
                CAPITAL CONTROLS, INSTITUTIONS, AND INTERACTIONS

                                            Menzie D. Chinn
                                               Hiro Ito

                                          Working Paper 11370
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11370


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




Helpful comments were received from the co-editor Carlos Vegh, an anonymous referee, Joshua Aizenman,
Michael Hutchison, Carl Walsh, Frank Warnock, Tom Willett, participants at the Kennedy School Luncheon
on International Economic Policy, the USC development seminar, and the UCSC brown bag. We also thank
Ashok Mody and Dennis Quinn for providing data. Financial support of faculty research funds of UC Santa
Cruz are gratefully acknowledged.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Menzie D. Chinn and Hiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls, Institutions, and Interactions
Menzie D. Chinn and Hiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 11370
May 2005
JEL No. F36, F43, G28

                                            ABSTRACT

We extend our earlier work, focusing on the links between capital account liberalization, legal and
institutional development, and financial development, especially that in equity markets. In a panel
data analysis encompassing 108 countries and twenty years ranging from 1980 to 2000, we explore
several dimensions of the financial sector. First, we test whether financial openness can lead to
equity market development when we control for the level of legal and institutional development.
Then, we examine whether the opening of the goods sector is a precondition for financial opening.
Finally, we investigate whether a well-developed banking sector is a precondition for financial
liberalization to lead to equity market development and also whether bank and equity market
development complements or substitutes. Our empirical results suggest that a higher level of
financial openness contributes to the development of equity markets only if a threshold level of
general legal systems and institutions is attained, which is more prevalent among emerging market
countries. Among emerging market countries, a higher level of bureaucratic quality and law and
order, as well as the lower levels of corruption, increases the effect of financial opening in fostering
the development of equity markets. We also find that the finance-related legal/institutional variables
do not enhance the effect of capital account opening as strongly as the general legal/institutional
variables. In examining the issue of the sequencing, we find that the liberalization in cross-border
goods transactions is found to be a precondition for capital account liberalization. Our findings also
indicate that the development in the banking sector is a precondition for equity market development,
and that the developments in these two types of financial markets have synergistic effects.

Menzie D. Chinn                                        Hiro Ito
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin                                Portland State University
7470 Social Science Building                           1721 SW Broadway
1180 Observatory Drive                                 Portland, OR 97201
Madison, WI 53706-1393                                 ito@pdx.edu
and NBER
mchinn@lafolette.wisc.edu
1. Introduction
       Recent years have witnessed a surge of interest in issues surrounding globalization,
including financial globalization. A series of financial crises in the 1990s rekindled the debates
over the effects of removing capital controls, which led many observers to reconsider the balance
between the costs and benefits of financial liberalization (Kaminsky and Schmukler, 2001a,b,
2002; Schmukler, 2003).1
       Many studies have adopted the position that capital account liberalization can affect
economic development through financial development; specifically, liberalized financial markets
may contribute to developing financial markets that provide funds to borrowers who may have
productive investment opportunities.2 Theory suggests that capital account liberalization can lead
to development of financial systems through several channels. First, financial liberalization may
mitigate financial repression in protected financial markets, allowing the (real) interest rate to rise
to its competitive market equilibrium (McKinnon, 1973; Shaw, 1973). Second, removing capital
controls allows domestic and foreign investors to engage in more portfolio diversification. These
two points can be summarized as that financial liberalization may reduce the cost of capital and
increasing its availability for the borrowers. Stulz (1999) shows that financial globalization
reduces the cost of equity capital because of the reduction in the expected returns to compensate
risk as well as in agency costs (also, Henry, 2000; Bekaert et al., 2000, 2001). Third, not least, the
liberalization process usually increases the efficiency level of the financial system by weeding out
inefficient financial institutions and creating greater pressure for a reform of the financial
infrastructure (Claesens et al., 2001; Stulz, 1999; Stiglitz 2000). Such an improvement in financial
infrastructure may alleviate information asymmetry, decreasing adverse selection and moral
hazard, and further raising the availability of credit.
       The link between financial liberalization and financial development is not unequivocal,
however. It is often argued that to benefit from more open cross-border financial transactions,


1
  In this study we do not discuss the merits of capital controls in the context of financial crises. For a review, see
Aizenman (2002). Kletzer and Mody (2000) survey the debate in the context of “self-protection policies” for emerging
markets. Ito (2004) investigates the correlation between financial liberalization and the output performance of
crisis-hit economies.
2
   See for instance Leahy, et al. (2001) for OECD-specific results. Klein and Olivei (2001) document the linkage
between financial development and economic growth for developed countries, and its absence for less developed
countries. Spiegel (2001) examines an APEC sample, while Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2001) document the
fragility of many of these group-specific results. IMF (2001, Chapter 4) surveys both the growth and finance, and
finance and liberalization literatures. For the most recent review on finance and growth, refer to Quinn, et al. (2002)
                                                          1
financial systems need to be equipped with reasonable legal and institutional infrastructure.
       In economies where the legal system does not clearly define property rights or guarantee the
enforcement of contracts, the incentives for loan activities can be limited. Legal protections for
creditors and the level of credibility and transparency of accounting rules are also likely to affect
economic agents’ financial decisions.3 Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) investigate whether the
level of legal and regulatory determinants of financial development influences the development
financial intermediary sector. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (hereafter LLSV,
1997, 1998) argue that the national legal origin (whether English, French, German, or
Scandinavian) strongly affects the legal and regulatory environment in financial transactions and
explains cross-country differences in financial development. LLSV (1997, 1998) and Levine
(1998, 2003) show that low levels of shareholder rights are associated with poorly developed
equity markets (especially in French civil law countries). In contrast, Common law countries have
high levels of shareholder rights with correspondingly high levels of equity market development
(Claessens, et al., 2002 and Caprio, et al., 2003), and that greater creditor rights are positively
associated with financial intermediary development.4
       Clearly, the link between financial liberalization and financial development is of great
importance to emerging market policymakers, and naturally, one needs to examine the effect of
liberalizing cross-border financial transactions in the context the institutional setting. However,
very little investigation has been made to shed light on the link in such a context. This is the topic
of our study.
       In this article, we extend our work (Chinn and Ito, 2002) focusing on the links between
capital account liberalization, legal and institutional development, and financial development.
Since our study is motivated by the development of equity markets through financial liberalization
and its contribution to economic development among emerging market countries in the 1990s, our
focus is on the effect of capital account liberalization on the development of equity markets among
less developed and emerging market countries. We conduct a panel data analysis encompassing
108 countries (including 21 industrialized countries and 31 emerging market countries) and twenty

3
  For the analysis of legal development on financial development, see Beck and Levine (2004), Claessens, et al.
(2002), Caprio, et al. (2003), and Johnson, et al. (2002). For a general discussion on the importance of legal and
institutional foundations for financial development, see Beim and Calomiris (2001) and Stultz (1999).
4
  Rajan and Zingales (2003), on the other hand, question the link between legal origins and cross-country difference in
financial development, and instead stress the important role of political forces in shaping policies toward financial
markets and their development.
                                                          2
years ranging from 1980 to 2000. In addition to searching for the effects of each set of factors, we
examine the oft-discussed issue of the sequence of liberalization. It has been often argued that
countries need to liberalize their goods market prior to liberalizing financial sector (McKinnon,
1991). Also, in order for financial systems to reap the benefit of financial liberalization, the
systems themselves need to be developed up to a certain level, suggesting the importance of a
sequence of liberalization within the financial sector (Martell and Stulz, 2003). To test these
claims, we examine whether the opening of the goods sector is a precondition for financial
opening, and furthermore, investigate whether a well-developed banking sector is a precondition
for financial liberalization to lead to equity market development. Additionally, we explore whether
bank and equity market development complements or substitutes.
      Our empirical results suggest that a higher level of legal and institutional development
contributes both directly and in an interactive manner with financial openness to the development
of equity markets, but only if a country is equipped with a reasonable level of legal and
institutional development, which is more prevalent among emerging market countries than
developing countries. A higher level of bureaucratic quality and law and order, as well as the lower
levels of corruption, may enhance the effect of financial opening in fostering the development of
equity markets. We also find that, among emerging market countries, the overall level of
finance-related legal/institutional development increases stock market trading volumes and
enhances the effect of financial openness. However, the finance-related legal/institutional
variables do not exhibit as strong an effect as the general legal/institutional variables. In examining
the issue of the sequencing, we find that the liberalization in cross-border goods transactions is
found to be a precondition for capital account liberalization, in a result similar to that obtained by
Aizenman and Noy (2004). Our findings also indicate that the development in the banking sector is
a precondition for equity market development, and that the developments in these two types of
financial markets have interactive effects.


2. An Econometric Analysis of Openness, Institutions and Financial
   Development
     The link between capital account openness, financial development, and legal/institutional
environment has been investigated by Chinn and Ito (2002). In this study, we demonstrated that
financial systems with a higher degree of legal/institutional development on average benefit more

                                                  3
from financial liberalization than those with a lower one. Furthermore, the positive effect of
legal/institutional development seems to flow primarily from the degree of shareholder protection
and accounting standards. In what follows, we extend our previous study by employing updated
data and also exploring more questions related to the link between capital account openness and
financial development. More specifically, we will investigate the issues relevant to the sequence of
liberalization between financial and goods cross-border flows and the sequence of development in
banking and equity markets.

2.1 The Empirical Specification
       First, we reexamine the long-term effect of capital account openness on financial
development in a model that controls for the level of legal and institutional development. The
model is specified as:

(1) FDti − FDti− 5 = γ 0 + ρFDti− 5 + γ 1 KAOPEN ti− 5 + γ 2 Li + γ 3 ( Li × KAOPEN ti− 5 ) + X ti− 5 Γ + uti ,

where FD is a measure of financial development; KAOPEN is a measure of financial openness; X
is a vector of economic control variables; and Li refers to a measure of legal or institutional
development.
       For the capital openness variable, we use the Chinn-Ito index which is described in greater
detail in a later section and the data appendix. The vector X contains macroeconomic control
variables that include log per capita income in PPP terms, the inflation rate, and trade openness,
measured as the ratio of the sum of exports and imports to GDP. In this analysis, the set is kept
fairly small so as to retain some interpretability of the correlations. Log per capita income is
included as there is a long literature ascribing financial deepening, aside from the role of
regulation, to the increasing complexity of economic structures associated with rising income. The
inflation rate is included because it may distort decision-making.5 In particular, moderate to high
inflation may discourage financial intermediation, and encourage saving in real assets. Finally,
trade openness is included as an ad hoc control; many empirical studies find a correlation of trade
openness with any number of economic variables. The relationship between trade openness and
financial openness will be investigated more thoroughly in a later section.


5
  Since in most cases, the volatility of inflation rises with the inflation rate, the inflation rate could be proxying for
either or both of these effects.
                                                             4
      A series of regressions is conducted for each of the financial development variables (FD),
which include private credit creation (PCGDP), stock market capitalization (SMKC), stock market
total value (SMTV), all measured as a ratio of GDP, and stock market turnover (SMTO). Also for
the series of regressions with different financial development measures, we also include each of
the nine legal/institutional variables and its interactive term with the capital account openness
index. The nine legal/institutional variables include those which are pertaining to the general
development of legal systems or institutions as well as those pertaining particularly to financial
transactions. Further discussions about the legal/institutional variables are presented in the data
section.
      In order to avoid problems of endogeneity associated with short term cyclical effects, we
specify our model as a growth rate on levels regression, akin to a panel error-correction model with
non-overlapping data. That is, we only sample data every five years between 1980 and 2000, and
use the five-year average growth of the level of financial development as the dependent variable
and the “initial conditions” for time-variant explanatory variables, including the initial level of the
financial development indicator, for each five-year panel.6

2.2 The Data
      The data are drawn from a number of sources, primarily the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators, the IMF’s International Financial Statistics, and the databases
associated with Beck, Demirgüc-Kunt, and Levine (2000). The analysis is based upon data
originally recorded at an annual frequency, over the 1970-2000 period, covering 108 countries.
Details are reported in Appendix 1.

2.2.1 Financial Development Measures
        The measures of financial development are extracted from the dataset of Beck,
Demirgüc-Kunt, and Levine (2000). PCGDP, the ratio of private credit from deposit money banks
to the private sector, represents the overall development in private banking markets.7 While this
variable is examined for purposes of comparison, our focus is primarily on the development of
equity markets development, for which we use three variables as the measures: SMKC (stock
market capitalization), SMTV (total value of stocks traded), and SMTO (stock market turn over

6
 Time fixed effects are also included in the model to control for possible time-specific exogenous shocks.
7
 While many researchers use M2 or liquidity liabilities (M2Y and LLY in our data set), we only report results for
PCGDP as our focus is on equity market development, and also because the correlation between M2Y or LLY and

                                                         5
ratio). We can consider SMKC as the measure of the size of equity markets and SMTV and SMTO
as the measure of the activeness of equity markets.
         Regarding the measurement issues surrounding financial development, we must make two
more notes. First, in this study, we do not look into offshore markets as part of financial
development, and therefore, focus merely on the development of domestic equity markets.
Although we have witnessed through the Asian financial crisis that some emerging market
countries such as Korea and Thailand tried to complement their domestic markets by developing
offshore markets and allowing foreign investors, mostly hedge funds, to actively engage, there
have not developed so much literature regarding these issues, mainly owing to the recentness of
the development of hedge funds and offshore markets.8 Furthermore, the relationship between
onshore and offshore funds has not been rigorously investigated (except for Kim and Wei, 2002)
due to data unavailability.9 Hence, we do not attempt to link offshore funds to domestic equity
markets.
         Secondly, our analysis does not consider the effect of capital account liberalization on the
overseas listings by international firms. Several authors have discussed the process of emerging
market companies “migrating” to mature markets by listing their shares and trading in New York
or other major stock markets. The implications of this process is under debate. Claessens et al.
(2002) and Levine and Schmukler (2003) provide evidence that migration of trading from
domestic to international markets allows firms to reap from international portfolio diversification
gains, while contributing to the shrinkage of local markets. On the other hand, Karolyi (2003)
shows that cross-listings in the form of American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) neither facilitate
nor hinder local market development, but that it “may be an outcome of the declining market
conditions and not a cause of them.”10 Given the ambiguity of the effects, and data limitations, we
focus on the development of domestic equity markets.



PCGDP is quite high (84.9% and 81.9%, respectively),.
8
  The exceptions include Fung and Hsieh (2001), their other works, Brown and Goetzmann (2001), and Brown et al.
(1998).
9
  Kim and Wei study the behavior of the Korean offshore market, and find that the Korean offshore funds trade more
aggressively than onshore markets; but they do not engage in positive feedback trading unlike their onshore
counterparts; and that they do herd, but not so much as the onshore funds in the U.S. or U.K. which tends to herd more
during a crisis.
10
   Sarkissian and Schill (2002) show that internationalization of trading is constrained by geographical and
institutional/cultural familiarity, making the gains from international portfolio diversification small. Their analysis
shows that overseas listings are not conducted to “overcome investor home bias,” but “reflect the bias.”
                                                          6
         Table 1 reports the growth rates of financial development measured in the variables used in
this study. Inspection of the table reveals that during the 1990s, all subsample groups experienced
the most rapid development in equity markets, measured along several dimensions, including size
(SMKC) and transactions activity (SMTV and SMTO). This is true despite the retrenchment in the
equity markets of less developed and emerging market countries during the second half of the
decade. Hence, the development of equity markets has progressed – albeit in a halting fashion – for
the last three decades.

2.2.2 Capital Openness Index – the Chinn-Ito Index
       It is well known that it is extremely difficult to measure the extent of openness in capital
account transactions (e.g., Eichengreen, 2002; Edison et al., 2002). Although many measures exist
to describe the extent and intensity of capital account controls, the consensus is that such measures
fail to fully capture the complexity of real-world capital controls for a number of reasons.11
First, conventional measures of quantifying capital controls (or financial openness) sometimes fail
to account for the intensity of capital controls. The most prominent example of such measures
include binary variables based upon the IMF’s categorical enumeration reported in Annual Report
on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER).12 Second, IMF-based
variables are too aggregated to depict the intricacy of actual capital controls. Capital controls can
differ depending on the direction of capital flows (i.e., inflows or outflows) as well as the type of
financial transactions targeted.13 Thirdly, it is almost impossible to distinguish between de jure
and de facto controls on capital transactions. Capital control policies are often implemented
without explicit policy goals to control the volume and/or type of capital flows. Conversely, as
Edwards (1999) discusses, it is often the case that the private sector circumvents capital account
restrictions, nullifying the expected effect of regulatory capital controls. Therefore, researchers

11
   See Edison and Warnock (2001), Edwards (2001), and Edison et al. (2002) for discussions and comparisons of
various measures on capital restrictions. Dooley (1996) provides an extensive literature review and Neely (1999)
presents a descriptive overview of capital controls.
12
   There are binary variables created based on a set of “on-off” clarification, which includes an indicator variable for
the existence of multiple exchange rates (k1); restrictions on current account (k2); capital account transactions (k3); and
a variable indicating the requirement of the surrender of export proceeds (k4). k3 is the one often used for capital
controls. In 1996, the classification method in the AREAER changed and these four categories became more
disaggregated as an effort to reflect the complexity of capital controls policies.
13
   This issue is somewhat alleviated by the recent disaggregation in the AREAER of the k3 category into 13
subcategories. Johnston and Tamirisa (1998) created the time series of capital controls based on the new 13
disaggregated components in the AREAER. However, their data series are not sufficiently long; it only covers years
after 1996. Most recently, Miniane (2004) constructed a set of indices to measure the intensity of capital controls,
based on an approach akin to Johnston et al., but extending the data back to 1983 for 34 countries.
                                                            7
often refer to financial integration among countries and interpret it as de facto restrictions on
capital transactions (See De Gregorio (1998) and Rajan (2003)).
       In this study, we rely upon the capital account openness index, KAOPEN developed by
Chinn and Ito (2002). This index is the first principle component of the four IMF binary variables
discussed above.14 One of the merits of the KAOPEN index is that it attempts to measure the
intensity of capital controls, insofar as the intensity is correlated with the existence of other
restrictions on international transactions. By the nature of its construction, one may argue that the
KAOPEN index measures the extensity of capital controls because it may not directly refer to the
stringency of restrictions on cross-border transactions, but to the existence of different types of
restrictions. However, measuring the extensity of capital controls may be a good proxy to the
measure of intensity of capital controls.15 This point can be made more concrete by considering a
country with an open capital account. It may still restrict the flow of capital by limiting
transactions on the current account restrictions or other systems such as multiple exchange rates
and requirements to surrender export proceeds. Alternatively, countries that already have closed
capital accounts might try to increase the stringency of those controls by imposing other types of
restrictions (such as restrictions on current account and requirements for surrender of trade
proceeds) so that the private sector cannot circumvent the capital account restrictions. Another
merit of this index is its wide coverage (more than 100 countries) for a long time period (1970
through 2000).16 Appendix 2 explains how KAOPEN is constructed.
       Table 2 presents the averages of KAOPEN and IMF binary variables for the full sample
period of 1970 – 2000 and each decade. Not surprisingly, the group of industrialized countries
have maintained a high level of capital account openness over the full sample period while
emerging market countries seem to have slightly more open capital accounts than less developed



14
   For the extension of the four binary classifications after 1996, we followed Mody and Murshid (2005).
15
   One might think of the Quinn (1997) index as the measure of the intensity of capital controls. The Quinn index is a
composite measure of financial regulation that ranges from 0 to 14, with 14 representing the least regulated and most
open regime. The bulk of the index is based upon Quinn’s coding of the qualitative information contained in the
AREAER pertaining to k2 and k3, augmented by information regarding whether the country in question has entered into
international agreements with international organizations such as the OECD and EU. A complete tabulation for the
OECD members exists, but the coverage for the less developed countries is much less extensive. The correlation
between the Quinn index and the Chinn-Ito index is found to be 83.9%, suggesting that KAOPEN is proxying the
intensity of capital controls. The correlation between the aforementioned index by Miniane (2004), which is based on
more disaggregated AREAER information on capital controls, and the Chinn-Ito index is found to be 80.2%.
16
   The Quinn index is available for the OECD members between 1958 and 1997, but the coverage for the less
developed countries is limited to certain years (1958, 1973, 1982, 1988, and 1997).
                                                          8
countries.17 Interestingly, both industrialized and emerging market countries achieved much more
rapid financial liberalization between the 1980s and 1990s than less developed countries,
especially making the difference between emerging market and less developed countries in capital
account openness become quite large by the 1990s.

2.2.3 Measures of Legal/Institutional Development
        The legal/institutional variables can be categorized into two groups. The first group
contains the measures related to the general development of legal systems and institutions, namely
LEGAL1, Corrupt, LAO, and BQ. LEGAL1 is the first principal component of the other three
variables, and we treat this variable as a representative measure of the general level of
legal/institutional development.18 Corrupt, LAO, and BQ measure the level of corruption, law and
order, and the quality of the bureaucratic system, respectively. All of these data series included in
LEGAL1 are obtained from the ICRG database. In these indexes, higher values indicate better
conditions. The data series are available for the period of 1984 through 1997, but are included as
the period-average in order to maintain comparability with the LEGAL2 variables. The summary
statistics for the LEGAL1 variables are reported in Table 3. In the table, we can observe that the
wide gap in the level of legal and institutional development between industrialized and less
developed countries, and also that emerging market countries have achieved a higher level of legal
development within the group of less developed countries.
        The second group of legal variables – CREDITOR, ENFORCE, SHRIGHTS, and
ACCOUNT – pertain specifically to financial transactions, and are obtained from LLSV (1998).
CREDITOR refers to the level of creditor protection, while ENFORCE is an index of the
effectiveness of the legal system in enforcing contracts. SHRIGHTS is a measure of shareholder
protection, and ACCOUNT is an index of the comprehensiveness of company reports. LEGAL2 is
the first standardized principal component of the four variables, and therefore depicts the overall
development of the legal system governing financial transactions.19 The summary statistics for
these LEGAL2 variables are reported in Table 4.
        Before discussing the results, we make the following two observations. The first pertains to
the temporal nature of these institutional variables. Although we use panel data specifications in

17
   The cross-sectional average of KAOPEN for the full sample period is zero by construction.
18
   The first eigenvector for LEGAL1 was found to be (Corrupt, LAO,BQ)’ = (0.574, 0.580, 0.578)’, indicating that the
variability of LEGAL1 is not merely driven by any particular series.
19
   The first eigenvector for LEGAL2 was found to be (Creditor, Enforce, Shrights, Account)’ = (0.206, 0.670, 0.095,
                                                         9
the following analyses, the data on legal/institutional development are cross-sectional in nature,
i.e., they are time-invariant. However, the inclusion of these time-invariant factors do not pose a
substantial problem for our analysis, since these characteristics represented by the
legal/institutional variables are likely to change only very slowly.20 Moreover, we focus mainly on
the effect of financial openness on financial development, but not the effect of legal/institutional
development per se. In other words, rather than shedding light on how the development of
institutions and legal systems affects financial development, we examine how the effect of
financial openness changes depending upon the “environment” of institutions and legal systems.
Therefore, time-variation of the legal/institutional variables is not critical to our study.
        The second issue is sample size. While the original panel encompasses 108 countries, the
data set based on LLSV spans less than 50 countries.21 There is minimal impact on the coverage of
the industrialized countries, but the size of the LDC sample is substantially reduced.
Consequently, our LDC sample in this portion of the analysis essentially becomes the emerging
market group previously defined.22 Hence, for the regressions with the first group of
legal/institutional variables (i.e., LEGAL1, Corrupt, LAO, and BQ), we will present results for the
full sample and the subsamples for less developed countries (LDC) and emerging market countries
(EMG) whereas for those with the second group of legal variables, we report results for the full
sample and a subset titled the “LDC/EMG” category, which is mainly composed of EMG
countries.

2.3 Empirical Results
      The regression results for the model specified in equation (1) are reported in Tables 5-1
through 5-4. We focus on the coefficients of KAOPENt-5 (first row), the legal variable (second
row), and the interactive term between the legal variable and KAOPENt-5 (third row). Our
observations will mainly focus on the regressions with equity market development measures and



0.707)’.
20
   Stulz (1999) and Stiglitz (2000) argue that financial globalization puts pressure on governments to improve legal
systems and infrastructure for financial markets. However, to our knowledge, there is no empirical evidence for the
causality. Also, as previously mentioned, the ICRG legal variables are available since 1984, which also creates
practical data constraints for us to use time-varying variables for legal and institutional development.
21
   More specifically, the data set contains LEGAL data for 38 countries, CREDITOR for 46 countries, ENFORCE for
48 countries, SHRIGHTS for 47 countries, and ACCOUNT for 40 countries.
22
   The LLSV cross-sectional data set used for this paper includes only three countries which are not either
industrialized or emerging market countries by our definition.
                                                        10
especially those of less developed and emerging market countries.23

       Table 5-1 reports the regression results for the models with LEGAL1. We can see that when
the regressions are controlled for the general development of legal systems and institutions
(LEGAL1), financial openness (KAOPENt-5) contributes to financial development in equity
markets, measured by stock market total values, in both LDC and EMG subsamples. In these
models, the interactive effect between financial openness and legal development is also detected.
Significant coefficients for the interactive term are also found in the models with other measures of
equity market development for both LDC and EMG subsamples. However, we must be careful
about how to interpret the overall effect of capital account openness because it depends on the
level of legal development.24 That is, given equation (1), the total effect of financial openness can
be shown as:

       Total Effect of KA openness i = (γ 1 + γ 3 L )KAOPEN ti−5 ,

where L is the mean of a measure of legal development. For example, when we examine the
regression specifications for the financial development measured in stock market total value for
LDC and EMG groups in Table 5-1 (columns [7] and [11]), the total effect of a one-unit increase in
KAOPEN is calculated to be –0.0006 for less developed countries and 0.005 for emerging market
countries if we use each subsample’s average of LEGAL1, –0.74 for the former group and –0.28
for the latter. Thus, although the estimated coefficients for KAOPEN and the interaction terms are
not significantly different between LDC and EMG groups, the difference in the general level of
legal and institutional development makes the effect of KAOPEN on equity market development
quite different between the subsample groups; while opening capital accounts, on average, leads to
a lower rate of development in equity markets among less developed countries, it leads to a more
rapid rate of equity market development for emerging market countries. As another example, Peru,
an emerging market country in our sample, increased its financial openness level from –1.84 to
2.27 between 1990 and 1995. Given its LEGAL1 level of –1.65, the increase in financial openness

23
   The definition of emerging market countries relies upon the International Financial Corporation’s (IFC) indices.
The group of emerging market countries in this study refers to the countries which were included in either IFC’s
Global, Investible, or Frontier Index as of 1995. By this definition, there are 31 EMG countries in our sample.
However, as has been mentioned previously, for the regressions with the LEGAL2 (financial legal) variables, because
of data availability, there is no distinction between LDC and EMG, but there is a subgroup LDC/EMG.
24
   In case of the regressions with LEGAL1, the fact that the variable can be negative for a lower value (see Table 3) also
contributes to the complexity in the interpretation.
                                                           11
would reduce the growth rate of stock market total value by 4.1% point annually. Argentina,
another EMG country, experienced a smaller increase of 3.15 in its KAOPEN variable (from –1.16
to 2.00), but because its LEGAL1 level is –0.175, higher than Peru’s, its SMTV is predicted to grow
at an additional 1.9% annually. Given that SMTV grew at 3.00% annually for emerging market
countries during the 1990s (Table 1), this acceleration in the growth rate is significant. Thus,
opening capital accounts can be effective for financial development only if a country has attained a
threshold level of legal and institutional development.
      Table 6 makes this point clear. In this table, row [A] shows the total effect of a one-unit
increase in KAOPEN calculated using the estimates from the regression model with stock market
total value for the subsample of less developed countries, evaluated at the average values of the
legal variable for LDC and EMG (shown in row [B]). Row [C] shows the threshold level of the
legal variable, above which a one-unit increase in capital account openness has a positive impact
on equity market development. Thus we can conclude that, in order for capital account openness to
contribute to the development of equity markets, countries must be possessed of a level of
legal/institutional development greater than LEGAL1 = –0.68. Hence, emerging market countries
(whose average value of LEGAL1 –0.28 exceeds the –0.68 threshold), will on average benefit
from opening their capital accounts. On the other hand, less developed countries will hamper their
equity market development by opening capital accounts. In our dataset, Tunisia has a value of
LEGAL1 closest to the threshold level (its value is –0.683). The countries marginally above the
threshold level include India and Morocco (–0.561 and –0.566, respectively) among others, while
those closely below include Mexico and Iran (–0.793 and –0.738, respectively) among others.
      Figure 1 depicts this clear difference in the correlation between capital account openness and
equity market development. The upper scatter diagram (a) shows the relationship between the
five-year change in the KAOPEN level five years prior to the time period (i.e., change between
t-10 and t-5) and the level change in SMTV between t-5 and the contemporary time period (t) for
the countries whose LEGAL1 value is above the threshold level, while diagram (b) is for those with
lower LEGAL1 variables than the threshold. Not surprisingly, we can observe that, for the
countries with above-threshold levels of general legal or institutional development, KAOPEN and
SMTV have a positive relationship. For the countries with below-threshold levels of legal
development, there is no discernable relationship between capital account opening and equity
market development. Also, in these countries, equity markets appear to be far from active

                                                 12
regardless of the degree of financial liberalization.
       Table 5-2 summarizes the results from the regressions that are run with each of the
components of LEGAL1 (i.e., Corrupt, LAO, and BQ) included individually and interactively. For
the sake of brevity, the table shows only the coefficients of the financial openness variable, the
legal/institutional variable, and the interaction term. Across the different models with different
measures of financial development, the significance of the estimated coefficients appears to be
qualitatively the same as those of the regressions with LEGAL1. Table 6, again, helps our
interpretation of the overall effect of KAOPEN for the models with SMTV. Generally, we can
surmise that liberalizing capital accounts may lead to development in equity markets only when
the measures against corruption or law and order are higher than the threshold levels (52.2 and
54.5, respectively). In other words, their measures need to be as well-established as in emerging
market countries in order to reap the benefit of capital account liberalization. When we control for
the level of bureaucratic quality, financial openness seems to leads to financial development
among both less developed and emerging market countries (because of both subsample groups’
higher average values than the threshold level), but its effect is higher for the latter group.
Interestingly, we can observe that the coefficient of KAOPENt-5 alone has a negative sign wherever
the interactive term has a significant coefficient, suggesting that opening financial markets alone
may lead to underdevelopment of equity markets, but it can be avoided only if the countries are
equipped with a reasonable level of legal/institutional development.
       When we focus on the effect of legal development relating particularly to financial
transactions (LEGAL2 and LLSV variables), the findings are not as decisive as in the previous
cases (results shown in Tables 5-3 and 5-4).25 Using LEGAL2 as the legal/institutional variable
(Table 5-3) in the LDC/EMG subgroup, its interactive effect with LEGAL2, and the LEGAL2 level
term are significant in the determination of the development in stock market total value. Table 6
shows that the total effect of financial openness is positive on average in the LDC/EMG subgroup
(i.e., the subgroup’s average level of legal development is higher than the threshold level). In other
models for the LDC/EMG subgroup, however, neither financial openness nor its interactive term
seems to affect banking or equity market development in a significant fashion.
       Among the components of the financial legal development variable (LEGAL2), shown in


25
  As previously discussed, due to the data availability of the LLSV variables, there is only one subsample for
non-industrialized countries, which we call LDC/EMG.
                                                         13
Table 5-4 (which again only shows the coefficients of interest), the level of creditor protection
seems to be an important factor for financial development in both banking and equity sectors while
no interactive effect is detected. When contract enforcement is used as the legal/institutional
variable, in all models with equity market development, we can detect a positive interactive effect
and a negative solo effect of the level of financial openness.26 Among the models with shareholder
protection, the level of share holder protection seems to matter for stock market capitalization
while the level of financial openness contributes to stock market turnover. The models using
accounting standards as the legal/institutional measure do not indicate any effect of financial
openness on financial development.
      Our findings suggest that in order for financial openness to help develop equity markets, the
level of legal and institutional development is crucial. If a country tries to develop its equity
markets while it is not equipped with well-developed legal systems or institutions, opening capital
accounts may even harm the development of equity markets. Also, we find that it is the
development of general legal systems and institutions, not of those specific to financial
transactions, that is crucial for a country to benefit from opening its financial markets.

2.4 Robustness Checks
      Here, we examine whether our baseline results are sensitive to outliers. Concerns about the
impact of outliers flows from two issues. First, in addition to the usual measurement error present
in macroeconomic data, it is likely that the data for financial development is subject to even greater
measurement errors. Second, these financial development indicators may unintentionally capture
financial bubbles, although the use of five year changes may serve to mitigate this concern. As a
point of reference, it is useful to note that in many studies of lending booms as financial crises
indicators, changes in lending or stock market sizes over a shorter window, of between 2 to 4 years
are, often used.27 Nonetheless, we investigate whether the regression results are being distorted by
data outliers. In order to conserve space, we merely summarize the results and our observations
below.
      First, using the original annual data, we exclude the observations of financial development
variables if their annual growth rates are two standard deviations away from the mean in both

26
   The patterns of the significance of the coefficients are no coincidence. By construction, the components of
ENFORCE are closest to LEGAL1 variables as shown in data appendix.
27
   See Corsetti, Pesenti, and Roubini (1998), Chinn, Dooley and Shrestha (1999), Kaminsky (2003), Kaminsky,
Lizondo and Reinhart (1998), Kaminsky and Schmukler (2001b), and Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1996).
                                                       14
directions, and re-estimate the same sets of regressions.28 The exclusion of outliers shrinks the
observation size by a relatively small degree, about 0 – 11%.29 Generally, in the re-estimated
results (not reported), the magnitude of the estimated coefficients often becomes smaller, but so do
the standard errors, especially for the models with stock market related measures for the LDC and
EMG subgroups. Therefore, not only does the statistical significance of the coefficients remain
qualitatively unchanged, but in addition some of the coefficients which were previously
insignificant become significant.
       Interestingly, in many models the adjusted R-squared increases. This is most apparent in the
models with LEGAL2 and ACCOUNT. In this analysis for the LDC/EMG group, the coefficient of
LEGAL2 is now significant for the model with SMKC, and both the KAOPEN variable and the
interactive term are statistically negative and positive, respectively, for the models with SMKC and
SMTV. The same exercise is then repeated, but increasing the range of outlier exclusion by
dropping the observations if their annual growth rates are larger than one and a half standard
deviations away from the mean in both directions. This exclusion shrinks the sample size quite
substantially (sometimes as much as 40%), although the results are largely unchanged. The fit and
the significance of the coefficients even improves for the models for the LDC/EMG with LEGAL2
and ACCOUNT. Two conclusions flow from this exercise. First, the key findings of the analysis
are not driven by outliers. Second, some of the findings related to the legal/institutional variables
could have even been obscured by the effects of outliers.

2.5 Reverse Causality?
       One may reasonably ask if financial development is what allows countries to implement
financial liberalization policy, rather than the reverse. While we have worked with
non-overlapping, five-year window panels in order to mitigate problems associated with
simultaneity, it may still be worthwhile to investigate whether countries need to develop their
financial systems before undertaking capital account liberalization. Conversely, if we can show
that reverse causality is irrelevant, that will be evidence that countries can develop their financial
markets by exogenously deciding to open their financial markets.

28
   Since we are dealing with a set of non-overlapping five year panels, in essence the only data for 1980, 1985, 1990,
1995, and 2000 are affected by the removal of outliers.
29
   Exclusion of the outliers takes place more for the models with stock market total value and stock market turnover
than those with private credit creation and stock market capitalization, which reflects that the former group are more
subject to market volatility than the latter. The rate of exclusion is generally higher for the subgroup of emerging

                                                         15
      To explore the above question, we change the specification in equation (1) by exchanging
the places of KAOPENt-5 and financial development measures (PCGDP, SMKC, SMTV, and
SMTO); the left-hand side variable is now the five-year average growth in KAOPEN while the
independent variables of our focus now becomes the financial development variable and the
interactive terms between the legal/institutional variables and the financial development variables.
We run regressions specified as follows, using non-overlapping data and including each of the
legal/institutional variables:

(2) KAOPEN ti − KAOPEN ti−5 = φ 0 + ϕKAOPEN ti−5 + φ1 FDti−5 + φ 2 Li + φ3 (Li × FDti−5 ) + X ti−5Φ + ν ti .


The coefficient of our interest is φ1 ; A significantly positive φ1 would indicate that the above OLS
regression results entail simultaneous causality, i.e., financial development leads to financial
openness. The regression results (not reported) show that across the regressions with different
financial development measures as well as legal/institutional variables, the coefficients, φ1 ’s, are
mostly statistically insignificant or significantly negative, either of which is against the null
hypothesis that financial development leads to financial openness. The significantly negative φ1 ’s
are found in the regressions that have the dependent variable of the equity market development
measures. One of the possible explanations for the negative φ1 may be that a rapid growth in
equity markets, in terms of the size of the markets (SMKC) or the liquidity of the markets (SMTV
or SMTO) is sometimes associated with financial crises, and that policy makers lower the degree of
financial openness during periods of crisis (Ito, 2004). At the very least, we can conclude that our
estimation results are not subject to obvious simultaneity issues (as in Bekaert, et al.,2001).



3. Investigating the Sequence of Liberalization

3.1 Trade and Capital Account Liberalization
      One suggestive result we must discuss is the frequent finding of statistically significant and
positive coefficients on the trade openness variable in the above estimation results based on
equation (2).30 To the extent that our trade openness variable reflects trade liberalization, our
results are germane to the question if trade openness is a precondition for financial opening. This is

market countries for the same reason.

                                                     16
the optimal sequence question, which has been raised by many, including McKinnon (1991). In
fact, liberalization in goods markets is often claimed to be a precondition for financial
liberalization policy (Tornell et al., 2004).
       We empirically explore this hypothesis by employing a simple model that accounts for the
determinants of financial openness or restrictions. As stated in equation (3), we model financial
openness is the function of government budget surplus, international reserves, trade openness, and
per capita GDP.31

       (3) KAOPEN t = ξ 0 + ξ1 KAOPEN t −5 + ξ 2TradeOpent −5 + Z t −1|t −5Ξ + ν t ,


where Zt-1|t-5 is a vector of macroeconomic control variables, namely, government budget surplus,
international reserves, and per capita GDP.32 The rationale for using these macro variables follows
the past literature. Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti (1995) showed that a higher level of restrictions on
capital flows is empirically linked to higher rates of inflation, a higher share of seigniorage in total
taxes, lower real interest rates, and a higher share of government consumption in GDP. Their
finding implies that capital controls appear to have strong fiscal implications, i.e., countries with a
less developed tax system tend to implement capital controls as the source of government revenue
as well as the remedy to capital flows caused by the inflation-driven distortions in the financial
markets. In investigating the empirical determinants of capital controls, Johnston and Tamirisa
(1998) find that countries tend to implement capital controls, the more prevalent the balance of
payments concerns are, the higher real interest rates and real exchange rates,33 and the larger the
size of the government deficit as a share of GDP. We select two variables – the government budget

30
   Again, due to space considerations, the regression results are not reported. They are available upon request.
31
   The empirical model also controls for regional differences by regional dummies. In Glick, Guo and Hutchison
(2004), an empirical model of capital account liberalization is proposed. Our set of explanatory variables overlaps, but
does not match, theirs. In part the difference arises from their more empirically oriented motivation for model
selection.
32
   The variable for gross international reserves is a proxy to the balance of payments situation of the countries and is
measured by gross international reserves in months of imports. The lower gross reserves in months of imports, the
higher prevalence of balance of payments concerns are. The data are extracted from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators. Others have used international reserves as a ratio to M2 as a proxy to the balance of payments
situation. The regression results shown in this paper are qualitatively unchanged if international reserves as a ratio to
M2 are used.
33
   Their theoretical prediction, which contrasts with that of Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti, is that countries use capital
controls to pursue inconsistent internal and external balances simultaneously such as the case where outflow controls
are implemented to avoid nominal currency deprecation pressures without tightening of monetary conditions. When
such a threat of currency crisis arises, the real interest rates or real exchange rates tends to be higher. See Leblang
(1997) for more discussions on the determinants of capital controls.
                                                          17
surplus and international reserves – since they are most commonly argued as the determinants of
capital controls.34 We also include per capita GDP to control for the level of development of the
economic system. Since these variables are supposed to control for the general trend of macro
variables, they are included as the 5-year average prior to the time period t (as shown as (t-1|t-5) in
the regression results table).
       With these macro variables, we test whether trade openness is a precondition for financial
opening by including a five-year lagged variable for the trade openness measure. Although we
used in the previous analyses, opn, the sum of exports and imports divided by GDP, as the trade
openness variable, we use a different variable to measure openness in trade flows. By construction,
the variable opn measures the openness in good transactions in terms of not only economic factors
but also regulatory measures such as tariffs and quotas. As such, we use another variable
TRADEOPEN which is a reciprocal of the duties imposed on both imports and exports.35
       In order to minimize the possibility of two-way causality, we employ a non-overlapping
panel data analysis as we did in previous analyses. While the macro variables are included as the
five-year average, both KAOPEN and TRADEOPEN are included as the initial conditions of each
five-year panel. In the empirical analysis, we focus on the coefficient ξ 2 to see if the openness in
goods trade can be a precondition for financial opening.
       The first three columns of Table 7 report the regressions results. While the average budget
surplus and GDP per capita enter significantly, but not international reserves, the trade openness
variable seems to contribute to the level of financial openness in the full sample and the subsample
for the less developed countries, indicating that the openness in goods transactions is a
precondition for financial openness. Columns (4) through (6) of Table 7 show the results when we
switch the places for KAOPEN and TRADEOPEN in the regression, in order to see whether the
reverse causality also holds.36 We can see that in both the full sample and the subsamples, the


34
   In addition to the above variables, we attempted to include variables that refer to the government engagement in
seigniorage, such as the inflation rate or the reserve ratio. However, these measures of seigniorage can cause
multicollinearity in regression analysis due to its correlation with the level of government budget surplus, the reverse
of which is often the reason for seigniorage. Therefore, we decided not to include seigniorage-related variables in our
regression model.
35
   Import and export duties as a ratio to imports and exports, respectively, are available from the World Bank’s WDI.
The weighted average of these variables is calculated using the share of imports and exports in total trade and then
subtracted from 100 to show the openness. Hence, the higher (or close to 100) TRADEOPEN is, the less duties
imposed on trade flows in both directions, i.e., the more open trade flows are by regulation. Note the variable is
included in log form.
36
   The variable for international reserves is not retained because it lacks a theoretical motivation.
                                                          18
financial openness variable does not enter significantly. Hence, we can safely conclude that the
more openness in goods transactions can lead to a more openness in capital account, but the
reverse causality does not appear to be present, a result consistent with Tornell et al. (2004).

3.2 Endogeneity and the Sequence of Liberalization
         Taking our cue from the results reported above, we implement two stage least squares
(2SLS) estimation instrumenting the KAOPENt-5 variable in equation (1) with the initial conditions
of financial and trade openness five years prior to the variable (i.e., 10-year lagged), as well as
government budget surplus and GDP per capita as the five-year average prior to t-5 and regional
dummies.37 If we can detect the effect of financial openness on financial development, we can
present evidence that financial opening which is preceded by trade opening leads to financial
development in a model where the level of legal/institutional development is controlled for.
         The results of applying 2SLS to a model that controls for the general development level of
legal systems and institutions (LEGAL1) are reported in Table 8. For the group of less developed
countries, we can see that both the magnitude and the statistical significance of the estimated
coefficients for the models with stock market capitalization (SMKC) and stock market total value
(SMTV) increase. For the SMKC, the levels of both legal development and financial openness seem
to be significant contributors to equity market development. When financial development is
measured by stock market total value, in addition to the level effects of both financial openness
and legal development, the interactive effect between the two is also identified. Similar results are
also found in the group of emerging market countries. Given these results, we may conclude that
financial opening succeeding trading opening leads to equity market development especially when
it takes place in an economy with a reasonably developed legal system.



4. Interactions of Banks and Equity Markets

         In this section, we investigate two questions. The first is whether the development of a
banking sector a precondition for the development of an equity market? Second, does the
development of one sector substitute or complement development in another?




37
     The international reserves variable is not included because of its insignificance in the previous analysis.
                                                             19
4.1 Sequencing in Financial Development
       We modify the basic regression model of equation (1) by adding a new term: the level of
financial development in the alternative mode. For the regressions with equity market
development, the initial level of banking development, private credit creation (PCGDP), in each
five-year panel is included in the regression model whereas the initial level of equity market
development, measured as stock market capitalization (SMKC), is included in the regressions for
banking development as a comparison. The new equation is now:


(4)
                                                                  (
      FDti − FDti−5 = γ 0 + ρFDti−5 + γ 1 KAOPEN ti−5 + γ 2 Li + γ 3 Li × KAOPEN ti−5   )
                                                                  + λ0OtherFint −5 + X ti−5Γ + ε ti

where OtherFin refers to PCGDP for the regressions on equity market development and to SMKC
for the regression with PCGDP. As with the basic model, the regression is repeated for each of the
financial development measures as the dependent variable and using different legal/institutional
variables. Given the results from the previous section, we will only use the legal/institutional
variables from the LEGAL1 group.
       The regression results are summarized in Table 9. This table contains only the estimated
coefficients for OtherFint-5 ( λ0 ). While SMKCt-5 never enters significantly for the models on
banking development in both the full sample and the subsamples, the coefficient for PCGDPt-5 is
always significantly positive in the models with SMKC and SMTV for the LDC subsample with all
the legal/institutional variables. These results suggest that banking development is an important
precondition for the development in equity markets among less developed countries, while, as
expected, the development in equity markets does not seem to be a precondition for banking
development in any countries.

4.2 Complements or Substitutes?
       We now investigate the question of whether banking and equity markets are complements or
substitutes. To do so, we make only one modification to the previous empirical model. Instead of
the initial level of a different type of financial development, we include a new variable
(OtherFD   t
            i
                            )
                − OtherFDti−5 which is the five-year average growth of financial development in
another sector.

                                                      20
(5)
                                                                   (
      FDti − FDti−5 = γ 0 + ρFDti−5 + γ 1 KAOPEN ti−5 + γ 2 Li + γ 3 Li × KAOPEN ti−5   )
                                                             +τ0   (OtherFD i
                                                                            t                   )
                                                                                − OtherFDti−5 + X ti−5Γ + ε ti

        As in the previous analysis, the regressions on equity market development includes the
                                                    (
five-year average growth of PCGDP as OtherFDti − OtherFDti−5 and those with PCGDP)
includes the five-year average growth of SMKC. The estimator of our focus is now τ 0 ; a
significantly positive (negative) coefficient estimate indicates that developments in equity and
banking sectors are complements (substitutes).
                                                               (                            )
        Table 10 displays the estimated coefficients for OtherFDti − OtherFDti−5 . Interestingly, in

                                                                     (
the LDC group with all the legal/institutional variables, both PCGDPt i − PCGDPt i−5 in the SMKC    )
              (                     )
model and SMKCti − SMKCti−5 in the PCGDP model are significantly positive. This means that
for the group of less developed countries, the development in banking sector and that in equity
markets are complementary to each other. Given the results in the previous section, while less
developed countries may well be able to develop their financial markets by opening capital
account if it is equipped with a reasonable level of legal/institutional development, banking
development and equity market development seem to have synergistic effects.


5. Concluding Remarks

        We began our empirical investigation by examining the nexus between capital account
liberalization and financial development. Our key empirical results suggest that financial openness
does contribute to equity market development, but only when a threshold level of general
development of legal systems and institutions has been attained. Financial development –
measured as activity of the stock market – appears to depend upon capital account openness both
individually and in interaction with the level of legal development. Interestingly, finance-specific
legal institutions do not seem to fulfill the same role. Hence, we conclude that the general level of
legal development matters more than the level of finance-specific legal/institutional development.
These results are robust to the presence of outliers in the data and simultaneity.
        We also obtain a series of other results. First, we find that the opening of goods markets is a
precondition for financial opening. When the financial openness variable is instrumented with
trade openness, the contribution of the general level of legal development still remains significant.
                                                        21
This finding could be interpreted as evidence that an increase in trade openness is a prolog to
financial openness, and thence to financial development.
     Second, using a specification that controls for the level of legal and institutional
development, we show that the development of the banking sector is a precondition for the
development in equity markets. Finally, developments in less developed country banking and
equity markets have interacting effects that work in both directions.




                                                22
References
Aizenman, Joshua (2002). “Financial Opening: Evidence and Policy Options,” NBER Working
   Paper No. 8900 (April).
Aizenman, Joshua and Noy, I. (2004). “Endogenous Financial Openness: Efficiency and Political
   Economy Considerations,” Manuscript, University of California, Santa Cruz.
Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen and Charles Wyplosz (2001). “When does capital account
   liberalization help more than it hurts?” NBER Working Paper No. 8414 (August).
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüc-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2000). “A new database on financial
   development and structure,” Policy Research Paper No. 2147 (Washington, D.C.: World
   Bank).
Beck, Torsten., and Ross Levine (2004). “Legal Institutions and Financial Development”, in:
  Claude Menard and Mary Shirley, eds., Handbook of New Institutional Economics, Kluwer
  Dordrecht (The Netherlands).
Beim, David, and Charles W. Calomiris (2001). Emerging Financial Markets, (New York:
   McGraw Hill).
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Lundblad, C (2001). “Does Financial Liberalization Spur
   Growth?” NBER Working Paper #8245.
_____________ (2000). “Emerging Equity Market and Economic Development,” NBER Working
   Paper No. 7763 (April).
Brown, Stephen J. and William N. Goetzmann (2001). “Hedge Funds With Style,” EFA 2001
   Barcelona Meetings; Yale ICF Working Paper No. 00-29.
Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, and James M. Park (1998). “Hedge Funds and the
   Asian Currency Crisis of 1997,” Yale School of Management Working Paper No. F-58.
Caprio, Gerald, Laeven, Luc, and Ross Levine (2003). “Governance and Bank Valuation.”
   University of Minnesota, mimeo.
Chinn, Menzie, Michael P. Dooley and Sona Shrestha (1999). “Latin America and East Asia in the
   Context of an Insurance Model of Currency Crises,” Journal of International Money and
   Finance 18(4) (August): 659-681.
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito, (2002). “Capital Account Liberalization, Institutions and Financial
   Development: Cross Country Evidence” NBER Working Paper #8967.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankv, Joseph Fan, Larry Lang (2002). “Expropriation of Minority
   Shareholders in East Asia,” Journal of Finance 57.
Claessens, Stijn, Daniela Klingebiel and Sergio L. Schmukler (2002). “Explaining the Migration
   of Stocks from Exchanges in Emerging Economies to International Centers,” Policy Research
   Working Paper Series #2816.
Claessens, Stijn, Asli Demirgüc-Kunt, and Harry Huizinga (2001). “How Does Foreign Entry
   Affect Domestic Banking Markets?” Journal of Banking and Finance. 25, pp. 891 – 911.


                                               23
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini (1998). “Paper Tigers? A Preliminary
   Assessment of the Asian Crisis. NBER Working Paper No. 6783 (November).
De Gregorio, José (1998), “Financial Integration, Financial Development and Economic Growth,”
   mimeo (Department of Industrial Engineering, Universidad de Chile, July).
Dooley, Michael (1996). “A Survey of Literature on Controls of International Capital
  Transactions,” IMF Staff Papers 43(4) (December): 639 – 87.
Edison, Hali J., Michael W. Klein, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sløk, (2002). “Capital Account
   Liberalization and Economic Performance: A Review of the Literature,” mimeo (Washington,
   D.C.: IMF, May).
Edison, Hali J. and Francis E. Warnock (2001). “A simple measure of the intensity of capital
   controls,” International Finance Discussion Paper #708 (Washington, D.C.: Board of
   Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).
Edwards, Sebastian (2001). “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging
  Economies Different?” NBER Working Paper No. 8076 (January).
__________ (1999). “How Effective are Capital Controls?” Journal of Economic Perspectives
   13(4) (Fall): 65-84.
Eichengreen, Barry (2002). “Capital Account Liberalization: What Do the Cross-Country Studies
   Tell Us?” The World Bank Economic Review (March).
Fung, William and David A. Hsieh (2001). “The Risk in Hedge Fund Strategies: Theory and
   Evidence from Trend Followers,” Review of Financial Studies, 14 (2001), 313-341.
Glick, Reuven, Xueyan Guo and Michael Hutchison (2004). “Currency Crises, Capital Account
   Liberalization and Selection Bias,” University of California, Santa Cruz Working Paper
   #04-14.
Grilli, Vittorio and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (1995). “Economic Effects and Structural
   Determinants of Capital Controls,” IMF Staff Papers 42(3) (September): 517 – 51.
Henry, Peter Blair (2000). “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform and Emerging Market
   Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance 55(2): 529-564.
International Monetary Fund (2001). World Economic Outlook (Washington, D.C.: IMF,
    September).
Ito, Hiro (2004). “Is Financial Openness a Bad Thing? An Analysis on the Correlation Between
    Financial Liberalization and the Output Performance of Crisis-Hit Economies” UCSC
    Working Paper Series.
Johnson, S., McMillan, J., and Woodruff, C. (2002) “Property Rights and Finance,” American
   Economic Review 92, 1335 – 56.
Johnston, R. Barry and Natalia T. Tamirisa (1998). “Why Do Countries Use Capital Controls?”
   IMF Working Paper WP/98/181 (Washington, D.C.: IMF, December).
Kaminsky, Graciela (2003). “Varieties of Currency Crises” NBER Working Paper Series, #10193.
Kaminsky, Graciela, Saul Lizondo, and Carmen Reinhart (1998). “Leading Indicators of
  Currency Crises,” International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 45, March, 1-48.
                                               24
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Sergio Schmukler (2002). “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The Effects
  of Financial Liberalization,” World Bank Working Paper No. 2912.
__________ (2001a). “Short- or Long-Run Integration: Do Capital Controls Matter,” Brookings
   Trade Forum 2000 (Washington, DC: Brookings), pp. 125-178.
__________ (2001b). “On Booms and Crashes: Financial Liberalization and Stock Market
   Cycles,” mimeo, World Bank.
Karolyi, Andrew (2003). “The Role of ADRs in the Development of Emerging Equity Markets,”
   Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Kim, Woochan and Shang-Jin Wei (2002). “Offshore Investment Funds: Monsters in Emerging
   Markets?, Journal of Development Economics, 2002, Vol. 848.
Klein, Michael and Giovanni Olivei (2001). “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth and
   Economic Growth,” mimeo (Medford, MA: Tufts).
Kletzer, Kenneth and Ashoka Mody (2000). “Will Self-Protection Policies Safeguard Emerging
   Markets from Crises?” Managing Financial and Corporate Distress : Lessons from Asia, in
   Charles Adams, Robert E. Litan, and Michael Pomerleano (editors) (Washington, D.C. :
   Brookings Institution).
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W. (1998). “Law and Finance,” Journal
   of Political Economy 106, p. 113 – 1155.
_________________ (1997). “Legal Determination of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52,
   1131 – 1150.
Leahy, Michael, S. Schich, G. Wehinger, F. Pelgrin, and T. Thorgeirsson (2001). “Contributions
   of financial systems to growth in OECD countries,” OECD Economic Department Working
   Papers No. 280.
Leblang, David A. (1997). “Domestic and Systematic Determinants of Capital Controls in the
   Developed and Developing World” International Studies Quarterly, 41, p. 435 – 454.
Levine, Ross, (2003). “Bank-based or market-based Financial Systems: Which is Better?” Journal
   of Financial Intermediation 11, 398 – 428.
__________________ (1998). “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,” American
   Economic Review 88, 537 – 58.
Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza and Thorsten Beck (2000). “Financial intermediation and growth:
   Causality and causes”, Journal of Monetary Economics 46: 31-77.
Levine, Ross and Sergio L. Schmukler (2003). “Migration, Spillovers, and Trade Division: The
   Impact of Internationalization on Stock Market Liquidity,” University of Minnesota Working
   Paper.
McKinnon, Ronald I. (1991). The Order of Economic Liberalization: Financial Control in the
  Transition to a Market Economy (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press).
__________________ (1973). Money and Capital in Economic Development (Washington, DC:
   Brookings Institution).
Martell, Rodolfo and René Stulz (2003) “Equity Market Liberalization as Country IPOs,” NBER
                                               25
   Working Paper #9481.
Miniane, Jacques (2004). “A New Set of Measures on Capital Account Restrictions,” IMF Staff
   Papers 51(2).
Mody, Ashoka and Antu Panini Murshid (2005). “Growing up with Capital Flows,” Journal of
  International Economics, 65, p. 249 – 266.
Neely, Christopher (1999). “An Introduction to Capital Controls,” Review, Federal Bank of St.
   Louis, November/December.
Quinn, Dennis (1997). “The correlates of change in international financial regulation," American
   Political Science Review 91(3): 531-551.
Quinn, Dennis, A. Maria Toyoda and Carla Inclan (2002). “Does Capital Account Liberalization
   Lead to Economic Growth?: An Empirical Investigation” mimeo (Washington, D.C.:
   Georgetown University).
Rajan, Kishen S. (2003). “Financial Integration in Asean and Beyond: Implications for Regional
   Monetary Integration,” presented at the ASEAN Roundtable 2003: “Roadmap to an ASEAN
   Economic Community,” organized by the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (Singapore:
   August 20–21).
Rajan, Raghuram G., Luigi Zingales (2003). “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
   Development in the 20th Century,” Journal of Financial Economics 69.
Sachs, Jeffrey, Aaron Tornell, and Andres Velasco (1996). “Financial Crises in Emerging
   Markets: The Lessons from 1995” NBER Working Paper No. 5576 (May).
Sarkissian, Sergei and Michael J. Schill (2002). “The Overseas Listing Decision: New Evidence of
   Proximity Preference,” McGill University Working Paper.
Schmukler, Sergio (2003). “Financial Globalization: Gains and Pain for Developing Countries,”
   World Bank.
Shaw, Edward (1973). Financial Deepening in Economic Development (New York: Oxford
   University Press).
Stiglitz, Joseph (2000). “Capital Market Liberalization, Economic Growth, and Instability,” World
    Development, 28:6, p. 1075 – 1086.
Stultz, René (1999). “Globalization, Corporate Finance and the Cost of Capital,” Journal of
   Applied Corporate Finance, v12(3), 8-25.
Spiegel, Mark (2001). “Financial development and growth: Are the APEC nations unique?”
   Pacific Basin Working Papers PB01-04 (Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June).
Tornell, Aaron, Frank Westermann, and Lorenza Martinez (2004). “The Positive Link Between
   Financial Liberalization, Growth, and Crises.” NBER Working Paper No. 10293 (February).




                                               26
Appendix 1: Data Definition and Sources
Key to abbreviations:
BDL: Beck, Demirgüc-Kunt, and Levine (2000).
IFS: IMF, International Financial Statistics.
LLSV: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998)
Mody: Personal communication from Ashok Mody, data based on AREAER
PWT: Penn World Table 6.1.
WDI: World Bank, World Development Indicators.
ICRG: International Country Risk Guide


Macroeconomic Indicators                                         mideast – dummy for Middle East countries

current – Current account balance as a ratio to GDP,             Financial Development Indicators
WDI
opn – openness to trade, (nominal exports plus                   lly – Liquid Liability to GDP (LLY), currency demand
imports)/nominal GDP                                             and interest-bearing liabilities of banks and other
exports – national currency (from national account,              financial intermediaries divided by GDP, BDL
90c), IFS                                                        SMKC – stock market capitalization ratio to GDP, BDL
imports – national currency (from national account,              SMTV – stock market total value traded to GDP, BDL
98c), IFS                                                        SMTO – stock market turn over ratio, BDL
impduty – import duty as a ratio to imports, WDI                 PCGDP – Private Credit by Deposit Money Banks to
expduty – export duty as a ratio to exports, WDI                 GDP, BDL
tradeopen – the weighted average of impduty and                  m2y – Ratio of M2 to nominal GDP, IFS
expduty calculated using the share of imports and
exports in total trade and then subtracted from 100. The
higher (or close to 100) tradeopen is, the less duties           Capital Controls Indicators
imposed on trade flows in both directions.
totalreserve – international reserves in months of               k1 – multiple exchange rates, Mody
imports, WDI                                                     k2 – restrictions on CA trans, Mody
reserve_m2 – international reserves as a ratio to M2, IFS        k3 – restrictions on KA trans, Mody
rypc = per capital real income in constant international         k4 – surrender of exports proceeds, Mody
dollars, PWT                                                     SHAREk3 – Share of a five-year period, the observed
cpi – Consumer price index (64), IFS                             year and the last four years, when the capital account
infl – Inflation rate calculated using log differences of        was open. Authors’ calculations
CPIs (64), IFS                                                   KAOPEN – index for openness to capital account
gsur – government budget surplus (+) or deficit (-) as a         transactions. The first standardized principal
ratio to GDP, WDI                                                components of k1, k2, SHAREk3, and k4. Authors’
                                                                 calculations.
                                                                 quinn – Quinn financial liberalization indicator, Quinn.
Regional Dummies                                                 miniane – Miniane (2004) index on capital controls

idc – equals one if industrialized country, and zero,            Legal Institutional Variables
otherwise (See the list of countries)
                                                                 LEGAL1 – legal index, the first principal component of
emg – equals one if emerging market country, and zero,
                                                                 Corrupt, LAO, and BQ.
otherwise (See the list of countries)
                                                                 Corrupt – average of corruption in 1984 – 1997.
asia – dummy for Asian countries
                                                                 LAO – average of Laworder in 1984 – 1997.
africa – dummy for African countries
                                                                 BQ – average of BQ in 1984 – 1997.
westhem – dummy for the countries in the west
                                                                 corruption – corruption index, ICRG.
hemisphere
                                                                 lawoder – index for Law and order, ICRG.
europe – dummy for European countries

                                                            27
bureauc – index for bureaucratic quality, ICRG.
LEGAL2 – legal index, the first principal component of
credit, enforce, shrights, and account, cross-sectional for
37 countries, LLSV
credit – index of creditor protection, composed of the
variables which incorporate the automatic stay
proposition on the assets of a failing firm (“noauto”);
the continuation of the old managers in a reorganization
process (“manages”); restrictions for going into
reorganization (“restorg”); and the seniority system of
secured creditors (“secured1”), cross-sectional for
44countries, LLSV
enforce – index of the degree of law enforcement.
Specifically, it is the average of “judsys” (efficiency of
the judicial system), “rulelaw” (rule of law), “riskEx”
(risk of expropriation), and “contrepu” (risk of contract
repudiation), average over period 1982 – 1995,
cross-sectional for 46 countries, LLSV
shrights – the sum of “oneshvt” (one share-one vote),
“bymail” (proxy by mail allowed), “noblock” (shares
not blocked before meeting), “comulvt” (cumulative
voting/proportional representation), “oppdmnty”
(oppressed minority), “premprt” (preemptive right to
new issues), and “esm” (% of share capital to call an
emergency shareholder meeting < 10%), cross-sectional
for 46 countries, LLSV
account – index of transparency and
comprehensiveness of companies’ (accounting) reports,
based on data in 1990, cross-sectional for 38 countries,
LLSV

cn – IMF country code, see the country list




                                                              28
Country list (108 countries)
   1      612     DZA     Algeria                      57      443      KWT     Kuwait
   2      213     ARG     Argentina e                  58      666      LSO     Lesotho
   3      193     AUS     Australia i                  59      674      MDG     Madagascar
   4      122     AUT     Austria i                    60      676      MWI     Malawi
   5      313     BHS     Bahamas, The                 61      548      MYS     Malaysia e
   6      419     BHR     Bahrain, Kingdom of e        62      678      MLI     Mali
   7      513     BGD     Bangladesh e                 63      181      MLT     Malta
   8      316     BRB     Barbados                     64      682      MRT     Mauritania
   9      124     BEL     Belgium i                    65      684      MUS     Mauritius e
   10     339     BLZ     Belize                       66      273      MEX     Mexico e
   11     638     BEN     Benin                        67      686      MAR     Morocco e
   12     218     BOL     Bolivia                      68      558      NPL     Nepal
   13     616     BWA     Botswana e                   69      138      NLD     Netherlands i
   14     223     BRA     Brazil e                     70      196      NZL     New Zealand i
   15     748     BFA     Burkina Faso                 71      278      NIC     Nicaragua
   16     618     BDI     Burundi                      72      692      NER     Niger
   17     622     CMR     Cameroon                     73      694      NGA     Nigeria e
   18     156     CAN     Canada i                     74      142      NOR     Norway i
   19     626     CAF     Central African Rep.         75      449      OMN     Oman e
   20     628     TCD     Chad                         76      564      PAK     Pakistan e
   21     228     CHL     Chile e                      77      283      PAN     Panama
   22     924     CHN     China e                      78      853      PNG     Papua New Guinea
   23     233     COL     Colombia e                   79      288      PRY     Paraguay
   24     634     COG     Congo, Republic of           80      293      PER     Peru e
   25     238     CRI     Costa Rica                   81      566      PHL     Philippines e
   26     662     CIV     Cote d'  Ivoire e            82      182      PRT     Portugal i, e
   27     423     CYP     Cyprus                       83      714      RWA     Rwanda
   28     128     DNK     Denmark i                    84      456      SAU     Saudi Arabia e
   29     243     DOM     Dominican Republic           85      722      SEN     Senegal
   30     248     ECU     Ecuador e                    86      718      SYC     Seychelles
   31     469     EGY     Egypt e                      87      724      SLE     Sierra Leone
   32     253     SLV     El Salvador                  88      576      SGP     Singapore e
   33     819     FJI     Fiji                         89      199      ZAF     South Africa e
   34     172     FIN     Finland i                    90      184      ESP     Spain i
   35     132     FRA     France i                     91      524      LKA     Sri Lanka e
   36     646     GAB     Gabon                        92      734      SWZ     Swaziland
   37     648     GMB     Gambia, The                  93      144      SWE     Sweden i
   38     134     DEU     Germany i                    94      146      CHE     Switzerland i
   39     652     GHA     Ghana e                      95      463      SYR     Syrian Arab Republic
   40     174     GRC     Greece i, e                  96      738      TZA     Tanzania
   41     258     GTM     Guatemala                    97      578      THA     Thailand e
   42     263     HTI     Haiti                        98      742      TGO     Togo
   43     268     HND     Honduras                     99      369      TTO     Trinidad and Tobago e
   44     532     HKG     Hong Kong e                  100     744      TUN     Tunisia e
   45     176     ISL     Iceland i                    101     186      TUR     Turkey e
   46     534     IND     India e                      102     746      UGA     Uganda
   47     536     IDN     Indonesia e                  103     112      GBR     United Kingdom i
   48     429     IRN     Iran, Islamic Rep. of        104     111      USA     United States i
   49     178     IRL     Ireland i                    105     298      URY     Uruguay
   50     436     ISR     Israel e                     106     299      VEN     Venezuela, Rep. Bol. e
   51     136     ITA     Italy i                      107     754      ZMB     Zambia
   52     343     JAM     Jamaica e                    108     698      ZWE     Zimbabwe e
   53     158     JPN     Japan i
                                                       i – industrialized countries (IDC), 22 countries
   54     439     JOR     Jordan e
                                                       e – emerging market countries (EMG), 31 countries
   55     664     KEN     Kenya e
                                                       (Standard & Poor, 2000)
   56     542     KOR     Korea e

                                                  29
Appendix 2: The “Chinn-Ito” Index
KAOPEN is an index to measure a country’s degree of capital account openness. The dataset
encompasses the time period of 1970-2000 for 108 countries. For a complete list of the countries,
see the attached country list.

Construction of KAOPEN
KAOPEN is based on the four binary dummy variables reported in the IMF’s Annual Report on
Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). These variables are to provide
information on the extent and nature of the restrictions on external accounts for a wide cross-section
of countries. These variables are:

   •    k1: variable indicating the presence of multiple exchange rates;
   •    k2: variable indicating restrictions on current account transactions;
   •    k3: variable indicating restrictions on capital account transactions; and
   •    k4: variable indicating the requirement of the surrender of export proceeds.

In order to focus on the effect of financial openness – rather than controls – we reverse the values of
these binary variables, such that the variables are equal to one when the capital account restrictions
are non-existent. Moreover, for controls on capital transitions (k3), we use the share of a five-year
window (encompassing year t and the preceding four years) that capital controls were not in effect
(SHAREk3).

                       k3,t + k3,t −1 + k3,t −2 + k3,t −3 + k3,t −4
       SHAREk 3,t =
                                            5

Then we construct an index for capital “openness” (KAOPENt), which is the first standardized
principal component of k1t, k2t SHAREk3, k4t. This index takes on higher values the more open the
country is to cross-border capital transactions. By construction, the series has a mean of zero. The
first eigenvector for KAOPEN was found to be (SHAREk3, k1, k2, k4)’ = (0.573, 0.273, 0.521,
0.571)’, indicating that the variability of KAOPEN is not merely driven by the SHAREk3 series.

We incorporate the k1,t, k2,t, and k4,t variables in our KAOPEN variable instead of focusing on k3
which refers to restrictions on capital account transactions. We believe the incorporation of k1,t, k2,t,
and k4,t in this index allows us to more accurately capture the intensity of the capital controls. This
point can be made more concrete by considering a country with an open capital account. It may still
restrict the flow of capital by limiting transactions on the current account restrictions or other
systems such as multiple exchange rates and requirements to surrender export proceeds.
Alternatively, countries that already have closed capital accounts might try to increase the
stringency of those controls by imposing k1, k2, and k4 types of restrictions so that the private sector
cannot circumvent the capital account restrictions.

Clearly, the measurement of the extent of capital account controls is a difficult enterprise. Many
researchers have tried to capture the complexity of real-world capital controls, with varying
degrees of success, and varying degrees of coverage. For reviews and comparisons of various
measures on capital controls, refer to Edwards (2001), Edison et al. (2002) and Eichengreen
(2002).

                                                            30
   Table 1: Growth rates of PCGDP, SMKC, SMTV, and SMTO
                    1970 – 2000 and decades

                                    Growth rates of
                Private Credit Stock Market Stock Market Stock Market
                  Creation Capitalization Total Value      Turnover
                 (PCGDP)         (SMKC)       (SMTV)       (SMTO)

                                  1970 – 2000
      Full          0.87%           1.93%          1.87%           2.47%
      IDC           1.74%           2.96%          3.67%           3.45%
      LDC           0.61%           1.32%          0.84%           1.87%
      EMG           0.91%           1.49%          1.09%           2.49%
                                  1970 – 1979
       Full         0.62%           0.47%          0.18%           0.35%
       IDC          0.77%          -0.22%          0.25%          -0.35%
      LDC           0.57%           1.70%          0.11%           1.85%
      EMG           0.70%           1.29%          0.09%           1.55%
                                  1980 – 1989
      Full          0.68%           1.52%          1.33%           1.98%
      IDC           1.99%           2.89%          2.25%           3.61%
      LDC           0.30%           0.53%          0.70%           0.78%
      EMG           0.49%           0.70%          0.82%           1.16%
                                  1990 – 2000
      Full          1.08%           3.33%          3.72%           3.81%
      IDC           1.95%           5.59%          7.51%           4.40%
      LDC           0.85%           2.27%          1.99%           3.53%
      EMG           1.35%           2.66%          3.00%           5.14%
                                  1995 – 2000
      Full          1.58%          3.03%           4.81%           5.08%
      IDC           3.10%          9.50%          12.06%           6.52%
      LDC           1.19%          0.25%           1.66%           4.45%
      EMG           1.78%          –0.39%         2.83%            7.30%

Notes: For the data description, refer to section 2.2.1 as well as Appendix 1. The
original data are extracted from the updated version of the Beck, Demirgüc-Kunt,
and Levine (2000) dataset.



                                       31
              Tale 2: Averages of KAOPEN, k1, k2 k3, and k4
                         1970 – 2000 and decades

                                            Averages of
                   KAOPEN            k1           k2            k3           k4
                                     1970 – 2000
       Full          0.000         0.796      0.501           0.311        0.258
       IDC           1.125         0.903      0.830           0.499        0.571
       LDC           -0.288        0.769      0.416           0.264        0.177
       EMG           -0.255        0.743      0.396           0.276        0.194
                                     1970 – 1979
       Full          -0.278        0.747      0.520           0.194        0.204
       IDC           0.257         0.795      0.763           0.216        0.390
       LDC           -0.424        0.735      0.457           0.188        0.156
       EMG           -0.547        0.709      0.405           0.202        0.084
                                     1980 – 1989
       Full          -0.296        0.758      0.458           0.212        0.196
       IDC           0.804         0.929      0.852           0.400        0.490
       LDC           -0.570        0.716      0.362           0.166        0.123
       EMG           -0.571        0.690      0.290           0.187        0.142
                                     1990 – 2000
       Full          0.485         0.862      0.564           0.524        0.376
       IDC           2.152         1.000      0.963           0.929        0.883
       LDC           0.069         0.827      0.463           0.422        0.247
       EMG           0.274         0.833      0.490           0.437        0.379
                                     1995 – 2000
       Full          0.679         0.895      0.546           0.474        0.452
       IDC           2.407         1.000      0.962           0.902        0.992
       LDC           0.241         0.868      0.440           0.364        0.314
       EMG           0.555         0.882      0.516           0.419        0.473
Notes: KAOPEN is an index for the openness in capital account transactions and is the
first standardized principal component of SHAREk3, k1, k2, and k4. k1 indicates the
presence of multiple exchange rates; k2 indicates restrictions on current account
transactions; k3 indicates restrictions on capital account transactions; and k4indicates the
requirement of the surrender of export proceeds. In order to focus on the effect of
financial openness – rather than controls – we reverse the values of these binary
variables, such that the variables are equal to one when the capital account restrictions
are non-existent. The first eigenvector for KAOPEN was found to be (SHAREk3, k1, k2,
k4)’ = (0.573, 0.273, 0.521, 0.571)’, indicating that the variability of KAOPEN is not
merely driven by the SHAREk3 series. The average of KAOPEN across countries over the
full time period is zero by construction. See Appendix 2 for more details.




                                           32
    Table 3: Summary Statistics on Legal1 variables                                 Table 4: Summary Statistics on Legal2 variables

                         Mean      Std. Dev.      Min          Max                                          Mean     Std. Dev.    Min         Max
              Total       0.00        1.63        -2.93        3.06                            Total         0.00      1.31       -2.71       1.89
              IDC         2.41        0.75         0.68        3.06              Legal2        IDC           0.70      0.86       -1.59       1.89
 Legal1
              LDC        -0.74       0.98         -2.93        1.76                          LDC/EMG        -0.77      1.31       -2.71       1.77
              EMG        -0.28        0.98        -1.98        1.76                            Total         2.30      1.38        0.00       4.00
                                                                                 Creditor
              Total      58.40       21.93        15.18       100.00            protection     IDC           1.81      0.98        0.00       4.00
              IDC        88.27       10.94        62.80       100.00                         LDC/EMG         2.72      1.54        0.00       4.00
Corrupt
              LDC        49.27       15.28        15.18        87.20                           Total         7.52      1.85        4.38       9.99
                                                                                Contract
              EMG        54.73       15.02        26.79        87.20                           IDC           9.24      0.83        6.73       9.99
                                                                               Enforcement
              Total      60.87       22.82        22.62       100.00                         LDC/EMG         6.18      1.19        4.38       9.18
              IDC        93.63        8.83        68.75       100.00                           Total         2.45      1.28        0.00       5.00
  LAO                                                                          Shareholder
              LDC        50.85       15.00        22.62        87.80                           IDC           2.19      1.29        0.00       4.00
                                                                                Protection
              EMG        55.76       18.01        22.62       87.80                          LDC/EMG         2.65      1.26        1.00       5.00
              Total      58.86       24.73        16.67       100.00                           Total         6.08      1.36        2.40       8.30
                                                                               Accounting
              IDC        92.26       13.77        57.89       100.00                           IDC           6.62      1.04        3.60       8.30
   BQ                                                                          Standards
              LDC        48.66       17.14        16.67        93.45                         LDC/EMG         5.55      1.44        2.40       7.80
              EMG        56.44       14.26        29.32        93.45
                                                                               Notes: LEGAL2 is the first standardized principal component of
Notes: LEGAL1 is the first principal component of Corrupt, LAO,                CREDITOR, ENFORCE, SHRIGHTS, and ACCOUNT, and depicts
BQ, indicating the general level of legal/institutional development.           the overall development of the legal system governing financial
Corrupt, LAO, and BQ measure the level of corruption, law and                  transactions. CREDITOR refers to the level of creditor protection,
order, and the quality of the bureaucratic system, respectively. All of        while ENFORCE is an index of the effectiveness of the legal system in
these data series included in LEGAL1 are obtained from the ICRG                enforcing contracts. SHRIGHTS is a measure of shareholder
database. In these indexes, higher values indicate better conditions.          protection, and ACCOUNT is an index of the comprehensiveness of
The data series are available for the period of 1984 through 1997, but         company reports. This group of legal variables pertain specifically to
are included as the period-average in order to maintain                        financial transactions, and are obtained from LLSV (1998). The first
comparability with the LEGAL2 variables. The first eigenvector for             eigenvector for Legal2 was found to be (Creditor, Enforce, Shrights,
Legal1 was found to be (Corrupt, LAO,BQ)’ = (0.574, 0.580,                     Account)’ = (0.206, 0.670, 0.095, 0.707)’.
0.578)’, indicating that the variability of LEGAL1 is not merely
driven by any particular series.

                                                                          33
                             Table 5-1: Financial Development, Financial Openness, and Legal/Institutional Development
                                                 (LEGAL1: General Legal/Institutional Development)
                                                  FULL, LDC, and EMG: Five year panels, 1980-2000

                                                         FULL                                                  LDC                                                 EMG

                                    Private     Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt          Private     Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt             Private     Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt
                            Pred    Credit      Capital'n Total Value Turnover         Credit      Capital'n Total Value Turnover            Credit      Capital'n Total Value Turnover
                            sign      [1]          [2]          [3]         [4]          [5]          [6]              [7]         [8]         [9]          [10]         [11]      [12]

Legal/Inst. Variable: LEGAL1
Financial Openness [t-5]    (+)      0.0027      -0.0009     -0.0036       -0.0041      0.0004       0.0050       0.0070         0.0096       0.0028       0.0097     0.0081      0.0013
                                   [0.0011]**    [0.0041]    [0.0031]     [0.0097]     [0.0013]     [0.0078]     [0.0042]*      [0.0123]     [0.0024]     [0.0070]   [0.0044]*   [0.0179]
LEVEL: LEGAL1               (+)      0.0014      -0.0025      -0.004       -0.0047      0.0011       0.0126       0.0091         0.0048       0.0077      0.0177       0.0117     0.0098
                                    [0.0010]     [0.0057]    [0.0051]     [0.0127]     [0.0014]     [0.0081]     [0.0053]*      [0.0186]    [0.0032]**   [0.0098]*    [0.0082]   [0.0277]
INTERACTION: LEGAL1 (+)              0.0005      0.0035       0.0037       0.0045      -0.0009       0.0037        0.0103    0.0213           0.0024      0.0072      0.0118     0.019
    x Fin. Open. [t-5]              [0.0005]    [0.0019]*   [0.0015]**    [0.0039]     [0.0010]     [0.0043]    [0.0035]*** [0.0109]*        [0.0025]    [0.0042]* [0.0033]*** [0.0102]*

Financial Deepening [t-5]   (–)      -0.017      -0.0335      0.1445       -0.0358      0.0001      -0.0493           0.0795    -0.0033       -0.0117     -0.0349      0.0926     0.0014
                                   [0.0085]**    [0.0307]    [0.0936]     [0.0344]     [0.0119]     [0.0380]         [0.1187]   [0.0536]     [0.0139]     [0.0382]    [0.1208]   [0.0683]

Per Capita                  (+)    0.0037    0.0164           0.016        0.0053        0.0031      0.0187           0.0128    -0.0023       -0.0031      0.0018      0.0049     -0.0134
        Income [t-5]            [0.0015]** [0.0106]          [0.0104]     [0.0227]    [0.0015]**    [0.0126]         [0.0123]   [0.0273]     [0.0030]     [0.0125]    [0.0159]   [0.0448]
Inflation [t-5]             (–)   -0.0112   -0.0548          -0.0318       -0.0561      -0.0047     -0.0497          -0.0221    -0.0815       -0.0248     -0.0334     -0.0164     -0.1095
                                 [0.0074] [0.0208]***        [0.0266]     [0.0919]     [0.0074]     [0.0303]         [0.0317]   [0.1166]    [0.0104]**    [0.0293]    [0.0414]   [0.1863]
Trade                       (+)     0.0000     0.0002        -0.0001       -0.0003      0.0000       0.0001       -0.0003        -0.0006      0.0000       0.0000      -0.0003    -0.0006
        Openness [t-5]             [0.0000]* [0.0001]**      [0.0001]    [0.0001]**    [0.0000]     [0.0001]     [0.0002]*      [0.0003]*    [0.0001]     [0.0001]   [0.0002]** [0.0003]**

N                                     408          175          206         172          289          101              115         98          138          87           97         85
Adj. R-sq.                           0.15         0.11          0.28       0.03         0.09          0.2             0.16        -0.01       0.16         0.19          0.18      0.01


    Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a five year
    period. Financial openness is measured by the Chinn-Ito index (KAOPEN). Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported). Observations of
    inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. (*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the (10%)[5%]{1%} level.


                                                                                            34
                                    Table 5-2: Financial Development, Financial Openness, and Legal/Institutional Development
                                        (Components of LEGAL1: Corruption, Law and Order, and Bureaucracy Quality)
                                                         FULL, LDC, and EMG: Five year panels, 1980-2000

                                                             FULL                                                 LDC                                                   EMG
                                     Private     Stock Mkt Stock Mkt        Stock Mkt   Private       Stock Mkt     Stock Mkt     Stock Mkt     Private     Stock Mkt     Stock Mkt       Stock Mkt
                             Pred    Credit      Capital'n Total Val.       Turnover    Credit        Capital'n     Total Val.    Turnover      Credit      Capital'n     Total Val.      Turnover
                             sign      [1]           [2]       [3]              [4]       [5]             [6]           [7]           [8]         [9]          [10]          [11]            [12]
Legal/Inst. Variable: Corrupt (Corruption)
Financial Openness [t-5]     (+)      -0.0009      -0.0129      -0.0195       -0.0309    0.0009         -0.0112       -0.0313       -0.0610      -0.006       -0.0193      -0.0362          -0.0634
                                     [0.0027]     [0.0099]    [0.0071]***    [0.0261]   [0.0038]       [0.0134]     [0.0110]***    [0.0409]     [0.0091]     [0.0146]    [0.0124]***       [0.0460]
LEVEL: CORRUPT               (+)      0.0001       0.0003       -0.0002       -0.0012    0.0000         0.0014     0.0004           -0.0012      0.0004       0.0016      0.0005            -0.0012
                                     [0.0001]     [0.0005]     [0.0003]      [0.0008]   [0.0001]      [0.0007]**  [0.0004]         [0.0011]    [0.0002]*    [0.0007]**   [0.0006]          [0.0016]
INTERACTION:                 (+)      0.0001       0.0002       0.0003        0.0004     0.0000         0.0003     0.0006            0.001       0.0001       0.0005      0.0007            0.0009
 Corrupt x Fin. Opn. [t-5]           [0.0000]     [0.0001]    [0.0001]**     [0.0003]   [0.0001]       [0.0003] [0.0002]***       [0.0006]*     [0.0002]     [0.0003]* [0.0002]***         [0.0006]
N                                      408         175              206       172         289           101             115          98          138            87             97            85
Adj. R-sq.                             0.15        0.12             0.28      0.03        0.09          0.23            0.16        -0.01        0.14          0.24           0.18          0.00
Legal/Inst. Variable: LAO (Law and order)
Financial Openness [t-5]     (+)      -0.0003     -0.0172       -0.0172       -0.0204     0.004        -0.0217        -0.0218       -0.0627      -0.0078      -0.0278       -0.0239         -0.0536
                                     [0.0025]    [0.0097]*    [0.0083]**     [0.0229]   [0.0029]      [0.0125]*      [0.0119]*     [0.0443]     [0.0076]    [0.0107]**    [0.0105]**       [0.0385]
LEVEL: LAO                   (+)      0.0001       -0.0003       -0.0001      0.0001     0.0001         0.0004         0.0003       0.0005       0.0004       0.0005        0.0003          0.0008
                                     [0.0001]     [0.0004]      [0.0003]     [0.0007]   [0.0001]       [0.0004]       [0.0003]     [0.0009]    [0.0002]**    [0.0004]      [0.0004]        [0.0011]
INTERACTION:                 (+)      0.0000       0.0003        0.0002       0.0003     -0.0001        0.0004         0.0004       0.0011       0.0001       0.0006        0.0004          0.0008
  LAO x Fin. Opn. [t-5]              [0.0000]    [0.0001]**    [0.0001]*     [0.0003]   [0.0001]       [0.0003]      [0.0002]*     [0.0007]     [0.0001]    [0.0002]**    [0.0002]**       [0.0005]
N                                      408         175              206       172         289            101            115          98          138            87             97            85
Adj. R-sq.                             0.15        0.12             0.28      0.03        0.09           0.2            0.12        -0.02        0.14          0.19           0.12          -0.01
 Legal/Inst. Variable: BQ (Bureaucracy Quality)
Financial Openness [t-5]     (+)       0.002       -0.0070      -0.0119       -0.0101    0.0048         0.0057        -0.0268      -0.0562       -0.0035       0.009        -0.0334         -0.0749
                                     [0.0024]     [0.0102]     [0.0070]*     [0.0205]   [0.0032]       [0.0107]     [0.0129]**    [0.0333]*     [0.0079]     [0.0136]     [0.0165]**       [0.0471]
LEVEL: BQ                    (+)       0.0001      0.0000       -0.0001       0.0004     0.0001         0.0003        0.0007        0.0014       0.0002       0.0004        0.0009          0.0019
                                     [0.0001]*    [0.0004]     [0.0002]      [0.0007]   [0.0001]       [0.0005]      [0.0004]*     [0.0010]     [0.0002]     [0.0006]      [0.0005]*       [0.0014]
INTERACTION:                 (+)       0.0000      0.0001       0.0002        0.0001     -0.0001        -0.0001       0.0006        0.0011       0.0001       -0.0001       0.0007          0.0014
  BQ x Fin. Opn. [t-5]                [0.0000]    [0.0001]     [0.0001]      [0.0002]   [0.0001]       [0.0002]     [0.0003]**    [0.0006]**    [0.0001]     [0.0003]     [0.0003]**      [0.0007]*
N                                      408         175              206       172         289           101             115          98          138            87             97            85
Adj. R-sq.                             0.15        0.10             0.27      0.02        0.10          0.18            0.17        0.00         0.11          0.15           0.17          0.02

             Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a five year period.
             Financial openness is measured by the Chinn-Ito index (KAOPEN). Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported). Observations of inflation rates in excess
             of 100% are dropped from the sample. (*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the (10%)[5%]{1%} level.



                                                                                                 35
            Table 5-3: Financial Development, Financial Openness, and Legal/Institutional Development
                        (LEGAL2: Legal Development pertaining to Financial Transactions)
                                 FULL, LDC, and EMG: Five year panels, 1980-2000

                                                                FULL                                                   LDC/EMG

                                          Private     Stock Mkt     Stock Mkt     Stock Mkt       Private     Stock Mkt     Stock Mkt     Stock Mkt
                                 Pred     Credit      Capital'n     Total Val.    Turnover        Credit      Capital'n     Total Val.    Turnover
                                 sign       [1]           [2]           [3]           [4]           [5]           [6]           [7]           [8]
   Legal/Inst. Variable: LEGAL2

    Financial Openness [t-5]      (+)     0.0036        0.0020        0.0018        0.0053        0.0000        0.0072       0.0111         0.0195
                                        [0.0016]**     [0.0053]      [0.0037]      [0.0092]      [0.0020]      [0.0136]     [0.0062]*      [0.0187]
    LEVEL: LEGAL2                 (+)     -0.0001        0.0086       0.0027        0.0126         0.001        0.0175       0.0141         0.0288
                                         [0.0022]       [0.0066]     [0.0057]      [0.0177]      [0.0033]      [0.0115]     [0.0087]*      [0.0261]
    INTERACTION:                  (+)     0.0000         0.0055       0.0036        -0.0028       -0.0013       0.0029       0.0077         0.0113
     LEGAL2 x Fin. Open. [t-5]           [0.0013]      [0.0030]*     [0.0031]      [0.0049]      [0.0017]      [0.0070]     [0.0041]*      [0.0110]

    Financial Deepening [t-5]     (–)     -0.0275       -0.0465       0.0997        -0.0637       -0.0106       -0.0532       0.0212       -0.0467
                                        [0.0109]**     [0.0367]      [0.1083]      [0.0434]      [0.0173]      [0.0454]      [0.1442]      [0.0684]

    Per Capita Income [t-5]       (+)     0.0025        0.0004        0.0047        -0.0125       0.0034        0.0161         0.012       -0.0039
                                         [0.0026]      [0.0097]      [0.0084]      [0.0244]      [0.0033]      [0.0112]      [0.0112]      [0.0314]
    Inflation [t-5]               (–)     -0.0237       -0.0423       -0.0203        0.005        -0.0206       -0.0404       -0.0016       0.0108
                                         [0.0140]*     [0.0262]      [0.0345]      [0.1032]      [0.0149]      [0.0305]      [0.0381]      [0.1350]
    Trade Openness [t-5]          (+)     0.0000        0.0002        -0.0001      -0.0002        0.0000        0.0001        -0.0003      -0.0007
                                         [0.0000]      [0.0001]      [0.0001]     [0.0001]*      [0.0000]      [0.0003]      [0.0002]      [0.0005]

    N                                       188           124           148          123            93            60            68            59
    Adj. R-sq.                             0.11          0.10          0.29          0.05          0.17          0.14          0.12          -0.05


Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a five
year period. Financial openness is measured by the Chinn-Ito index (KAOPEN). Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported). Observations
of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. (*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the (10%)[5%]{1%} level. Due to the data
availability of the LLSV variables, there is only one subsample for non-industrialized countries, which we call LDC/EMG.


                                                                           36
      Table 5-4: Financial Development, Financial Openness, and Legal/Institutional Development
    (Creditor Protection, Contract Enforcement, Shareholder Protection, and Accounting Standards)
                           FULL, LDC, and EMG: Five year panels, 1980-2000
                                                              FULL                                             LDC/EMG

                                       Private    Stock Mkt     Stock Mkt    Stock Mkt       Private    Stock Mkt     Stock Mkt    Stock Mkt
                               Pred    Credit     Capital'n     Total Val.   Turnover        Credit     Capital'n     Total Val.   Turnover
                               sign      [1]          [2]           [3]          [4]           [5]          [6]           [7]          [8]
Legal/Inst. Variable: CREDITOR (Creditor Protection)

Financial                       (+)    0.0003       0.0031        0.0036       0.0032        0.0011       -0.0013       -0.0021       -0.0058
Openness [t-5]                        [0.0022]     [0.0060]      [0.0055]     [0.0105]      [0.0038]     [0.0050]      [0.0049]      [0.0205]
LEVEL: CREDITOR                 (+)     0.0029      -0.0020       0.0012        0.0169        0.0030      0.0027        0.009         0.0202
                                      [0.0016]*    [0.0038]      [0.0035]     [0.0089]*     [0.0018]*    [0.0035]     [0.0045]*     [0.0118]*
INTERACTION:                (+)         0.0012      -0.0003       -0.0014       -0.0018       -0.0001     0.0014        0.0017        0.0006
 CREDITOR x Fin. Opn. [t-5]            [0.0010]    [0.0023]      [0.0021]      [0.0034]      [0.0014]    [0.0023]      [0.0017]      [0.0048]
N                                        230         145             169        143           129            80           88           78
Adj. R-sq.                               0.14        0.07            0.27       0.05          0.15          0.19         0.12         -0.01
Legal/Inst. Variable: ENFORCE (Contract Enforcement)

Financial                       (+)   -0.0044       -0.0342      -0.0211       -0.0246       -0.0080      -0.0531    -0.0587          -0.1509
Openness [t-5]                        [0.0057]    [0.0160]**    [0.0125]*     [0.0427]      [0.0131]    [0.0231]** [0.0203]***       [0.0974]
LEVEL: ENFORCE                  (+)    0.0020       -0.0068       -0.0030      0.0002        0.0059     0.0037      0.0097            0.0077
                                      [0.0014]     [0.0070]      [0.0058]     [0.0219]     [0.0028]** [0.0080]     [0.0079]          [0.0342]
INTERACTION:                    (+)    0.0009       0.0051         0.003       0.0034        0.0015     0.0093      0.0100            0.0243
 ENFORCE x Fin. Opn. [t-5]            [0.0007]    [0.0021]**    [0.0017]*     [0.0054]      [0.0021]  [0.0042]** [0.0033]***        [0.0144]*
N                                        240          151            178         149           139          86            97            84
Adj. R-sq.                               0.12        0.11            0.28       0.04          0.16          0.23         0.18          0.03
Legal/Inst. Variable: SHRIGHTS (Shareholder Protection)

Financial                       (+)    0.0031       0.0039        0.0021       0.0237        -0.0032      0.0002        0.0026       0.0353
Openness [t-5]                        [0.0022]     [0.0047]      [0.0042]     [0.0148]      [0.0043]     [0.0065]      [0.0060]     [0.0205]*
LEVEL: SHRIGHTS                 (+)    0.0007       0.0105        0.0015       0.0186        0.0011       0.0124        0.0033        0.0174
                                      [0.0010]    [0.0043]**     [0.0029]     [0.0173]      [0.0017]    [0.0055]**     [0.0050]      [0.0220]
INTERACTION:                    (+)    0.0000       -0.0003       -0.0004      -0.0091       0.0019       0.0017        0.0001        -0.0155
 SHRIGHTS x Fin. Opn. [t-5]           [0.0007]     [0.0022]      [0.0017]     [0.0073]      [0.0013]     [0.0042]      [0.0030]      [0.0099]
N                                        234          147            174         145           133          82            93            80
Adj. R-sq.                               0.11        0.11            0.27       0.07          0.13          0.21         0.11          0.03
Legal/Inst. Variable: ACCOUNT (Accounting Standards)

Financial                       (+)    0.0105       -0.0298       -0.0234      -0.0046       0.0137       0.0112        -0.0087       -0.0391
Openness [t-5]                        [0.0076]     [0.0184]      [0.0150]     [0.0227]      [0.0111]     [0.0208]      [0.0147]      [0.0388]
LEVEL: ACCOUNT                  (+)   -0.0012       0.0106        0.0030       0.0048        -0.0017      0.0084        0.0045        0.0113
                                      [0.0016]    [0.0052]**     [0.0033]     [0.0061]      [0.0026]     [0.0079]      [0.0047]      [0.0098]
INTERACTION:                    (+)   -0.0011       0.0050         0.004       0.0016        -0.0023      -0.0015       0.0021         0.008
 ACCOUNT x Fin. Opn. [t-5]            [0.0012]     [0.0031]      [0.0025]     [0.0032]      [0.0018]     [0.0047]      [0.0027]      [0.0062]
N                                        200          130            157         129           105          66            77            65
Adj. R-sq.                               0.11        0.12            0.29       0.05          0.20          0.16         0.09         -0.06

    Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a five year
    period. Financial openness is measured by the Chinn-Ito index (KAOPEN). Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported).
    Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. (*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the
    (10%)[5%]{1%} level.


                                                                       37
    Table 6: Difference between LDCs and EMGs in terms of
       the Total effect of a one-unit increase in KAOPEN
             when the dependent variable is SMTV

                                                  LDC             EMG

   [A]      Total effect of KA Openness         –0.0006           0.0041

   [B]               L (Legal1)                  –0.74            –0.28

   [C]       Threshold level of Legal1                    –0.68

   [A]      Total effect of KA Openness         –0.0017           0.0015

   [B]              L (Corrupt)                  49.27            54.73

   [C]       Threshold level of Corrupt                   52.2

   [A]      Total effect of KA Openness         –0.0015           0.0005

   [B]                L (LAO)                    50.85            55.76

   [C]        Threshold level of LAO                      54.5

   [A]      Total effect of KA Openness          0.0024           0.0071

   [B]                 L (BQ)                    48.66            56.44

   [C]         Threshold level of BQ                      44.7

   [A]      Total effect of KA Openness          0.0052             –
   [B]               L (Legal2)                  –0.77              –

   [C]       Threshold level of Legal2           –1.44

Notes: “Total Effect” [A] indicates the total effect of a one-unit increase in
KAOPEN when the legal/institutional variable takes the value of the average
in the subsample group ( L , shown in [B]). The estimation model is based on
equation (1) using the data of the LDC subgroup for the regressions with
LEGAL1 legal variables and of the LDC/EMG subgroup for the regressions
with LEGAL2. Rows [C] show the threshold level of the legal variable above
which the capital account openness has a positive impact on financial
development. For the analysis with LEGAL2, there is no distinction between
LDC and EMG due to data availability, but there is a subgroup LDC/EMG.




                                     38
                          Table 7: Determinants of Capital Account and Trade Openness
                                FULL, LDC, and EMG: Five year panels, 1980-2000


     Dependent Variable:                              Financial Openness (t)                       Trade Openness (t)
                                   Pred.       (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                   Sign        Full           LDC           EMG             Full          LDC            EMG
Financial Openness (t-5)             +        0.5939      0.5313      0.3499              -0.0001        0.0019         -0.0005
                                           [0.0580]*** [0.0794]*** [0.1176]***           [0.0015]       [0.0022]       [0.0028]

Trade Openness (t-5)                 +       2.1763          2.0317         1.9427        0.5938      0.5633      0.5746
                                           [1.0279]**      [1.0586]**      [2.0338]    [0.0794]*** [0.0857]*** [0.0940]***

Avg. Budget Surplus (t-1|t-5)        +        0.0402      0.0537           0.0618         0.0002         0.0002         0.0002
                                           [0.0151]*** [0.0177]***       [0.0305]**      [0.0005]       [0.0007]       [0.0006]
Avg. Total reserves (t-1|t-5)        +       -0.0049          0.0043        0.0124
                                            [0.0245]         [0.0304]      [0.0413]
Avg. GDP per capita (t-1|t-5)        +        0.3034         0.1945        0.5135         0.0174      0.0196      0.0339
                                           [0.0971]***      [0.1157]*     [0.2821]*    [0.0035]*** [0.0047]*** [0.0086]***

Number of Observations                         263             181             100          223           151             82
            2
Adjusted R                                     0.59           0.42           0.35           0.75           0.63           0.70
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Budget surplus, total
reserves, and GDP per capita are included at the average over t-1 through t-5. Constant and regional dummies for Asia, Europe,
Middle East, and Africa are also included in the regression, but their estimated coefficients are not reported. The regression
estimations are conducted in non-overlapping manners with the observations excepted for 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, and 2000
excluded.




                                                                39
                                                        Table 8: Two-Stage Least Squares Analysis
                                           Instrumented by per capita output, budget balance, and trade openness¶
                                                    LEGAL1 (General Legal/Institutional Development)
                                                     FULL, LDC, and EMG: Five year panels, 1980-2000

                                                     FULL                                               LDC                                                 EMG

                                Private     Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt      Private      Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt           Private     Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt
                        Pred    Credit      Capital'n Total Value Turnover     Credit       Capital'n Total Value Turnover          Credit      Capital'n Total Value Turnover
                        sign      [1]          [2]          [3]       [4]        [5]            [6]             [7]        [8]         [9]         [10]           [11]       [12]

Legal/Inst. Variable: LEGAL1
 Financial               (+)     0.0024       0.0057     0.0019      -0.0033    0.0000        0.0186        0.0210        0.0079     0.0011       0.0108        0.0172     -0.0029
     Openness [t-5]             [0.0031]     [0.0061]   [0.0051]    [0.0106]   [0.0033]      [0.0094]*   [0.0075]***     [0.0125]   [0.0037]     [0.0074]     [0.0065]**   [0.0253]
 LEVEL:                  (+)     0.0022       0.0041     0.0032      -0.0053    0.0006         0.0265     0.0116          -0.0184    0.0052       0.0198       0.0088      -0.0213
      LEGAL1                    [0.0015]     [0.0047]   [0.0025]    [0.0123]   [0.0025]     [0.0092]*** [0.0057]**       [0.0252]   [0.0042]    [0.0089]**    [0.0053]*    [0.0285]
 INTERACT.: LEGAL1x (+)          0.0007       0.0030     0.0041      0.0061    -0.0003        0.0043        0.0112        0.0231     0.0036       0.0053        0.0096      0.0223
    Fin. Open. [t-5]            [0.0010]     [0.0024]   [0.0022]*   [0.0052]   [0.0015]      [0.0051]    [0.0037]***     [0.0142]   [0.0024]     [0.0039]    [0.0032]***   [0.0149]

 Financial               (–)    -0.0109      -0.0426     0.0785      -0.0447    0.0257        -0.0805         -0.1180     -0.0196    -0.0133      -0.0617      -0.0931     -0.0227
     Deepening [t-5]            [0.0134]     [0.0291]   [0.0901]    [0.0408]   [0.0162]     [0.0326]**        [0.0777]   [0.0582]   [0.0246]    [0.0298]**     [0.0665]    [0.0688]

 Inflation [t-5]         (–)     -0.0218    -0.0522     -0.0053      -0.0070    -0.005        -0.0508          0.0196     -0.0028    -0.0312     -0.0557        0.0236     -0.0437
                               [0.0098]** [0.0223]**    [0.0291]    [0.1005]   [0.0102]      [0.0293]*        [0.0319]   [0.1243]   [0.0160]*   [0.0279]*      [0.0391]    [0.2139]

 N                                189          140          152       138        117            77              83         75          70          66             70         65
 R-sq.                           0.17         0.14          0.27     0.09       0.17           0.29            0.04       0.10        0.28        0.36            0.10      0.15


         Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over
         a five year period. Financial openness is measured by the Chinn-Ito index (KAOPEN). Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported).
         Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. (*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the (10%)[5%]{1%}
         level.
         ¶- The variable for financial openness lagged five years (KAOPENt-5) is instrumented by per capita output and budget balance, both of which are
         included as the average over the five years prior to five years before each window (i.e., t-10 through t-6 since the IV is already lagged five years),
         regional dummies, and the level of financial openness and trade openness, both of which are lagged ten years.




                                                                                       40
                                                     Table 9: Order of Financial Liberalization
                                            (LEGAL1,Corruption, Law and Order, and Bureaucracy Quality)
                                                 FULL, LDC, and EMG: Five year panels, 1980-2000

                                                        FULL                                        LDC                                           EMG
                               Private Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt            Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt      Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt
                          Pred Credit Capital'n Total Val. Turnover             Credit     Capital'n Total Val. Turnover      Credit     Capital'n Total Val. Turnover
                          sign   [1]       [2]       [3]       [4]                [5]          [6]       [7]       [8]          [9]         [10]      [11]      [12]

Legal/Inst. Variable: LEGAL1 (General Level of Legal/Institutional Development)

Other type of Financial    +/–    0.0033      0.0282      -0.0028     0.0133    -0.0034      0.1306     0.1040      0.0624     0.0033      0.0701     0.0861      0.0454
   Development (t–5)             [0.0064]    [0.0286]     [0.0336]   [0.0307]   [0.0070]   [0.0646]** [0.0499]**   [0.0554]   [0.0089]    [0.0710]   [0.0578]    [0.0660]
N                                 169         169          199        166         97          97          111        94         85          86           96        84
Adj. R-sq.                        0.12        0.11         0.27       0.02       0.07        0.27         0.22      -0.02      0.15        0.21         0.21      -0.01

Legal/Inst. Variable: CORRUPT (Corruption)

Other type of Financial    +/–    0.0025      0.0285      -0.0031     0.0189    -0.0046      0.1262     0.1008      0.0747     0.0014      0.0641     0.0872      0.0746
   Development (t–5)             [0.0067]    [0.0281]     [0.0333]   [0.0310]   [0.0078]   [0.0610]** [0.0470]**   [0.0545]   [0.0099]    [0.0620]   [0.0514]*   [0.0622]
N                                 169         169          199        166         97          97          111        94         85          86           96        84
Adj. R-sq.                        0.12        0.11         0.27       0.02       0.07        0.30         0.21      -0.02      0.12        0.26         0.21      -0.01

Legal/Inst. Variable: LAO (Law and Order)

Other type of Financial    +/–    0.0039      0.0329      -0.0023     0.0136    -0.0008       0.142     0.1023      0.0484     0.0076      0.0988     0.0925      0.0332
   Development (t–5)             [0.0064]    [0.0291]     [0.0339]   [0.0309]   [0.0064]   [0.0640]** [0.0499]**   [0.0548]   [0.0085]    [0.0708]   [0.0562]    [0.0720]
N                                 169         169          199        166         97          97          111        94         85          86           96        84
Adj. R-sq.                        0.11        0.12         0.27       0.01       0.08        0.29         0.17      -0.04      0.12        0.23         0.16      -0.02

Legal/Inst. Variable: BQ (Bureaucracy Quality)

Other type of Financial   +/–     0.0026      0.0269      -0.0050     0.0102    -0.0025      0.1292    0.0982       0.0397     0.0032      0.0776     0.0684      0.0238
   Development (t–5)             [0.0066]    [0.0288]     [0.0337]   [0.0317]   [0.0070]   [0.0615]** [0.0532]*    [0.0582]   [0.0103]    [0.0607]   [0.0572]    [0.0702]
N                                 169         169          199        166         97          97          111        94         85          86           96        84
Adj. R-sq.                        0.12        0.10         0.26       0.01       0.06        0.25         0.21      -0.02      0.08        0.17         0.19      0.01

     Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a five
     year period. Financial openness is measured by the Chinn-Ito index (KAOPEN). Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported).
     Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. (*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the (10%)[5%]{1%} level.




                                                                                     41
                                    Table 10: Relationship between Different Types of Financial Development
                                 (Controlled for LEGAL1,Corruption, Law and Order, and Bureaucracy Quality)
                                                 FULL, LDC, and EMG: Five year panels, 1980-2000

                                                    FULL                                          LDC                                          EMG
                               Private Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt          Private   Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt      Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt
                          Pred Credit Capital'n Total Val. Turnover           Credit    Capital'n Total Val. Turnover      Credit     Capital'n Total Val. Turnover
                          sign   [1]       [2]       [3]       [4]              [5]         [6]       [7]       [8]          [9]         [10]      [11]      [12]

Legal/Inst. Variable: LEGAL1 (General Level of Legal/Institutional Development)

Other type of Financial    +/–    0.0410     0.1769     0.0443    -0.1059      0.0910      0.7073    0.5069      -0.1026    0.0609     0.4044       0.3362     -0.2559
   Development (t|t–5)           [0.0504]   [0.2149]   [0.1745]   [0.2432]   [0.0402]** [0.2446]*** [0.3314]    [0.6457]   [0.0440]   [0.2111]*    [0.3061]   [0.7226]
N                                  165       165        195        162          93          93          107       90         84          84           94        82
Adj. R-sq.                         0.12      0.10       0.27       0.02        0.13        0.24         0.18     -0.03      0.17         0.2         0.18      -0.01

Legal/Inst. Variable: Corrupt (Corruption)

Other type of Financial    +/–    0.0385     0.1614     0.0403    -0.0887      0.0893     0.6745      0.4858     -0.1425    0.0559      0.3538      0.3605     -0.0175
   Development (t|t–5)           [0.0502]   [0.2186]   [0.1758]   [0.2468]   [0.0405]** [0.2572]**   [0.3346]   [0.6512]   [0.0453]    [0.2225]    [0.3242]   [0.6922]
N                                  165       165        195        162          93          93          107       90         84          84           94        82
Adj. R-sq.                         0.13      0.10       0.27       0.02        0.12        0.26         0.17     -0.03      0.14        0.24         0.18      –0.02

Legal/Inst. Variable: LAO (Law and Order)

Other type of Financial    +/–    0.0403     0.1701     0.0394    -0.1102      0.0934      0.7617    0.5088      -0.0498    0.0630      0.4332      0.4339     -0.1560
   Development (t|t–5)           [0.0499]   [0.2135]   [0.1743]   [0.2397]   [0.0411]** [0.2352]*** [0.3244]    [0.5951]   [0.0443]   [0.2055]**   [0.3160]   [0.7124]
N                                  165       165        195        162          93          93          107       90         84          84           94        82
Adj. R-sq.                         0.12      0.11       0.27       0.01        0.14        0.25         0.13     -0.04      0.15        0.20         0.14      –0.03

Legal/Inst. Variable: BQ (Bureaucracy Quality)

Other type of Financial   +/–     0.0427     0.1862     0.0525    -0.1068      0.0872      0.7163    0.4693      -0.1257    0.0856     0.5783    0.4021        -0.1157
   Development (t|t–5)           [0.0501]   [0.2133]   [0.1724]   [0.2384]   [0.0414]** [0.2353]*** [0.3267]    [0.6790]   [0.0515] [0.1907]*** [0.2379]*     [0.5846]
N                                  165       165        195        162          93          93          107       90         84          84           94        82
Adj. R-sq.                         0.12      0.09       0.26       0.01        0.12        0.22         0.18     -0.03      0.12        0.18         0.18      0.01

     Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a five
     year period. Financial openness is measured by the Chinn-Ito index (KAOPEN). Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported).
     Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. (*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the (10%)[5%]{1%} level.




                                                                                   42
Figure 1: Correlation between the Change in KAOPEN and the change in SMTV
                             (with a five-year lag)

                                         (a) When LEGAL1 is greater than the threshold hold level
                    2             1.5
      Change in SMTV b/w t-5 and t
       -1  -.5   0    .5
                    -1.5
                    -2      1




                                            -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2        2.5   3   3.5   4
                                                           Change in KAOPEN b/w t-10 and t-5




                                            (b) When LEGAL1 is below the threshold hold level
                    2              1.5
      Change in SMTV b/w t-5 and t
       -1  -.5    0 -1.5
                    -2  .5    1




                                            -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2        2.5   3 3.5 4
                                                           Change in KAOPEN b/w t-10 and t-5




                                                                      43
