                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         AN INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECTS
                  OF ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND ALCOHOL POLICIES
                        ON YOUTH RISKY SEXUAL BEHAVIORS

                                             Sara Markowitz
                                             Robert Kaestner
                                            Michael Grossman

                                          Working Paper 11378
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11378


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Sara Markowitz, Robert Kaestner, and Michael Grossman. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
An Investigation of the Effects of Alcohol Consumption and Alcohol Policies on Youth Risky
Sexual Behaviors
Sara Markowitz, Robert Kaestner, and Michael Grossman
NBER Working Paper No. 11378
May 2005
JEL No. I0

                                           ABSTRACT

The problems of teen pregnancy, HIV/AIDS and the high rates of other sexually transmitted diseases
among youth have lead to widespread concern with the sexual behaviors of teenagers. Alcohol use
is one of the most commonly cited correlates of risky sexual behavior. The purpose of this research
is to investigate the causal role of alcohol in determining sexual activity and risky sexual behavior
among teenagers and young adults. This research also addresses the question of whether there are
public policies that can reduce the risky sexual behavior that results in harmful consequences.
Individual and aggregate level data are used to investigate these questions. Results show that alcohol
use appears to have no causal influence in determining whether or not a teenage has sex. However,
alcohol use may lower contraception use among sexually active teens.

Sara Markowitz
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016
and Rutgers University
smarkow@rutgers.edu

Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois at Chicago
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner@uic.edu

Michael Grossman
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and CUNY
mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu
       In recent years there has been widespread public concern with the sexual behavior

of teenagers. Interest in this issue has been brought about mainly by the problems of teen

pregnancy, AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). Teen rates of

pregnancy and out-of-wedlock birth in the U.S. are high by historical standards and high

relative to other developed countries. Between 1940 and 1994, the rate of out-of-wedlock

birth among women aged 15–19 increased from 7 per 1000 to 46 per 1000, and even the

much heralded decline since 1994 leaves the rate of out-of-wedlock birth at about where

it was in 1990 (Stephanie J. Ventura and Christine A. Bachrach, 2000).

       When compared to older adults, teenagers and young adults are particularly at risk

for contracting a STD. The incidence of chlamydia and gonorrhea--the two most

common reportable STDs--are highest among American teenagers and young adults.

In 2002, chlamydia incidence was 297 per 100,000 population for persons of all

ages, 1,483 for teenagers, and 1,610 for young adults (CDC 2003). Similar age

disparities are found for gonorrhea, with incidence rates per 100,000 population of

125, 476, and 593, respectively. Moreover, approximately half of all new human

immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections in the United States occur among people

under age 25 (CDC 2002). These statistics make clear that teenagers’ sexual

behaviors are adversely affecting their health and development.

       An important question is whether there are public policies that can reduce the

risky sexual behavior that results in these harmful consequences. One potential way is to

take steps to reduce alcohol use among teens, for example, by more stringent regulation

of teen alcohol use or by increasing the price of alcohol. Alcohol use is one of the most




                                            2
commonly cited correlates of risky sexual behavior. Numerous studies have shown a

positive association between alcohol use and risky sexual practices (see Catherine

Donovan and Robert McEwan 1995 for a review of this literature). Importantly,

however, previous research has not established whether or not the association

between alcohol use and sexual behavior is causal. The absence of such information

undermines the formulation of effective public policies. In this paper, we investigate

whether or not alcohol is a causal factor affecting sexual activity and risky sexual

behavior.



       I. Research Design and Data

       Our objective is to obtain estimates of the association between alcohol use

and risky sexual behavior that can plausibly be given a causal interpretation.

Achieving our objective is complicated by two factors. First, an individual’s sexual

behavior and alcohol use may depend on a common set of personal and social

factors, some of which are unmeasured. Second, the two behaviors may influence

each other directly. To address these problems, we obtain estimates of the

relationship between alcohol use and sexual behaviors using a variety of statistical

methods that under certain assumptions can be given a causal interpretation. We

examine three outcomes: 1) the probability that a teenager engaged in sexual

intercourse; 2) whether birth control was used during intercourse; and 3) state-level

STD rates. Analysis of the first two outcomes is accomplished using individual-

level data and a structural equation that relates risky sex to alcohol use and personal

characteristics. This model directly estimates the relationship of interest. The




                                            3
analysis of state-level STD rates uses a reduced form model that relates

determinants of alcohol use (i.e. taxes and other alcohol regulatory policies) to the

incidence of STDs. This model reveals the direct effect of policy instruments on an

outcome of risky sex, while also providing indirect evidence for or against causality.

       Individual-level data come from the first three waves of the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1997 cohort (NLSY97) and the biennial Youth Risk

Behavior Surveys (YRBS). The characteristics of each data set allow us to use different

estimation techniques in each. The NLSY97 is a panel data set with a sample size of

approximately 7,900 teenagers. The YRBS is a pooled cross section with a sample size

of close to 58,000.



       II. Estimation and Results of Individual-Level Data

       Using the NLSY97, we use bivariate probit and individual fixed effects to assess

the strength of the association between alcohol use and the probabilities of having any

sex and having risky sex. Risky sex is an indicator that is equal to one if the person was

sexually active in the last year and used birth control less than 90% of the time, and is

zero for both abstainers and sexually active respondent who use birth control at least 90%

of the time. Alcohol use is measured by any use in the past 30 days and by episodes of

binge drinking (five or more drinks at one time) in the past 30 days.

       The bivariate probit is identified by assuming that the amount of selection on

unobserved variables is equal to the amount of selection on observed variables (see

Joseph G. Altonji, Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber 2000). We also estimate

regressions for which values of the correlation coefficient (ρ) are fixed in order to gauge




                                              4
how much selection on unobserved characteristics is necessary to eliminate the positive

association between substance use and sexual behavior (see Michael Grossman, Robert

Kaestner and Sara Markowitz 2004 for further details.) Results indicate that a relatively

small amount of selection on unobserved characteristics will do so. Thus, unless there is

very little selection on unobserved characteristics, there is little likelihood that the

positive association between alcohol use or binge drinking and the probability of having

sex is causal. The results of second estimation technique used, the time-invariant,

person-specific effects, also casts doubt on the causal relationship from alcohol use and

the probability of sexual activity. As compared to OLS models, the positive effects of the

two measures of alcohol use are substantially reduced, but are not entirely eliminated.

        Using the YRBS data, we examine the effects of alcohol and marijuana use on the

probability of having sex, and as additional outcomes, the number of partners and birth

control use conditional on being sexually active. Alcohol use is measured as the number

of days in the past 30 that the respondent had at least one drink of alcohol and the number

of days on which 5 drinks or more were consumed in one sitting. Our estimation strategy

here is to compare results from OLS, instrumental variables (IV), and a reduced form

model. The state-level instruments used in the IV and reduced form models are the tax

on beer, the per capita number of licensed alcohol outlets, the monetary price of

marijuana, and statutory penalties for marijuana use. (For further details, see Michael

Grossman and Sara Markowitz, forthcoming.)

        Our conclusion for the probability of having sex is the same as above—there

appears to be no evidence suggesting a causal role of alcohol use in determining the

probability of having sex. A similar conclusion is reached if the number of sexual




                                               5
partners among sexually active teens is considered. However, the IV and reduced form

results both show that among sexually active teenage males and females, alcohol

consumption lowers the probabilities of using birth control and condoms specifically.

       The results from the two individual-level data sets consistently show little

evidence to support the conclusion that alcohol use has a causal influence on the

incidence of teenage sex. It appears that divergent conclusions are reached if the

outcome under consideration is the probability of unprotected sex. However, these

results are not directly comparable, as the dependent variable is defined differently in the

two data sets. The indicator of risky sex in the NLYS97 sample includes sexually active

and inactive respondents, while the similar indicator in the YBRS data includes only

sexually active respondents. These definitions reflect different assumptions about

decision making. When the sample is limited to sexually active respondents, we assume

that alcohol has a differential impact on the decision to have sex versus the decision to

use birth control. Analyzing the use of birth control on the full sample assumes instead

that both decisions are made simultaneously. The resulting coefficients on alcohol use

reflect both the decision to engage in sex and the decision of whether or not to use

protection. The divergent effects of alcohol consumption on the probability of using birth

control indicate that further research is necessary on the decisions making process

regarding teenage sexual behaviors.



       III. Estimation and Results of Aggregate-Level Data

       Information on sexual habits gathered from individual-level survey data may

suffer from the problems of underreporting or measurement error. Therefore, it is




                                             6
worthwhile to examine the role of alcohol consumption in contributing directly to an

outcome of risky sex-- STD rates. We analyze rates of gonorrhea and AIDS as reported

by the Centers for Disease Control for young males and females. The gonorrhea data are

reported for each state from 1981 to 2001 for youth ages 15-19 and 20-24. The AIDS

data are at the MSA level from 1982 to 2001. Rates by gender for ages 20-29 and 30-34

are analyzed. Since there is on average an 8 year lag between initial viral transmission

and the development of symptomatic AIDS, these individuals most likely contracted the

disease between the ages of 12-21 and 22-26 thus providing a sample of teenagers and

young adults. In the AIDS equations, all independent variables are lagged 8 years so that

the timing of the right-hand side variables is consistent with the transmission of the virus.

(See Michael Grossman, Robert Kaestner and Sara Markowitz, 2005 for more

information.)

       The reduced form is the basic model for empirical estimation of STD rates. That

is, the logged STD rate is regressed on the real state and federal tax on beer, the

percentage of each state’s population living in counties dry for beer, indicators for the

presence of blood alcohol concentration (BAC) laws, an indicator for zero tolerance laws

for underage drinking and driving, other characteristics of the population of the area, area

effects and year effects. The state level variables are appended to the AIDS data based

on the state or states represented by the MSA.

       Two problems may arise in estimating the reduced form equation. First, the

residual may be serially correlated if there exists unobserved state-specific time-varying

factors. Persistent discrepancies in state reporting practices or screening programs might

cause the error terms to be correlated across time within a state. We solve this problem




                                              7
by adopting the Marianne Bertrand, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004)

correction for serial correlation by computing robust standard errors that allow for

clustering by area. The second problem arises if the incidence rate of communicable

diseases depends on the past incidence or prevalence of the disease. This suggests that the

lagged STD rate should be included in the equations. However, Badi H. Baltagi (2001)

shows that the coefficient of the lagged dependent variable is biased in a fixed-effects

model applied to a panel even if the disturbance term is serially uncorrelated. This bias

will translate to bias in estimates of the effect of other regressors that are correlated with

the lagged dependent variable.

       To address this problem, we adopt alternative methods to account for the lagged

dependent variable. The first is a reduced form equation which replaces the lagged STD

rate with some of its determinants, and the second directly includes the lagged STD rate.

The reduced form OLS equations include lagged beer taxes and percent dry as additional

regressors. Models that include a lagged dependent variable apply a first-difference two-

stage least squares (FD2SLS) estimator (Baltagi 2001). The FD2SLS estimator is

constructed by taking first differences of all variables and thereby eliminating area fixed

effects. The lagged first-differenced STD rate is correlated with the first-differenced

residual, hence, the second lag of the STD is employed as an instrument for the lagged

first difference. When considering STDs, it is questionable as to what is the appropriate

lagged rate to use. We test models that include alternatively the lagged dependent

variable, which is gender specific, and models including the lagged total rate for both

genders. Since the lagged total rate includes the lagged dependent variable, the model is

still estimated by FD2SLS.




                                               8
        The results are striking in that all models estimated reveal a negative and

statistically significant relationship between the beer tax and male gonorrhea rates for

both age groups. The result holds when the reduced form is estimated by OLS (with and

without the lagged tax) and with a lagged STD rate included and estimated by FD2SLS.

The OLS models give a tax elasticity of -0.47 for males ages 15-19 and -0.41 for males

ages 20-24. The magnitude of these effects fall slightly in the FD2SLS estimates to -0.44

for males 15-19 and -0.37 for males 20-24. A long-run effect can be calculated based on

the coefficients on the tax and the lagged gonorrhea rate. For males in both age groups,

the long run tax elasticity is -1.1.

        Higher beer taxes may also be effective in reducing AIDS rates for young males

and females. The OLS models with and without the lagged tax rates show negative and

statistically significant effects of the beer tax on AIDS rates, although the coefficients

from the FD2SLS are statistically insignificant. However, the one-year lag in the AIDS

rate does not contribute much to the models, suggesting that OLS is the preferred

specification.

        Larger percentages of the population living in dry counties do not appear to be

important in lowering either STD rate. The same can be said for the BAC laws although

zero tolerance laws, which are aimed at drivers under the legal drinking age, are

associated with a decrease in the gonorrhea rate of males ages 15-19.



        IV. Conclusions

        This research sheds some light on the nature of the causal relationship between

risky sexual behaviors and alcohol consumption. Using individual level data on sexual




                                              9
behaviors and aggregate data on STDs, which are measurable outcomes of risky sexual

practices, we can draw two firm conclusions. The first is that alcohol use appears to have

no causal influence in determining whether or not a teenage has sex. However, the

second conclusion is that alcohol use lowers contraception use among sexually active

teens. The individual level data analyzing birth control use among sexually active

respondents in conjunction with the results from the STD data support this causal

explanation. The evidence that gonorrhea and AIDS rates may be reduced with policies

such as higher beer taxes suggests that the pathway is through consumption, which in

turn affects risky sexual practices and leads to a STD.




                                            10
                                   REFERENCES

Altonji, Joseph G.; Elder, Todd E. and Taber, Christopher R. “Selection on

      Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic

      Schools.” National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA)

      Working Paper No. 7831, August 2000.

Baltagi, Badi H. Econometric Analysis of Panel Data. England: John Wiley and

      Sons, 2001.

Bertrand, Marianne; Duflo, Esther and Mullainathan, Sendhil. “How Much Should

   We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics,

   February 2004, 119(1), pp. 249-75.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Young People at Risk: HIV/AIDS

   among America’s Youth. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human

   Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2002.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually Transmitted Disease

   Surveillance, 2002. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,

   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2003.

Donovan, Catherine and McEwan, Robert. “A Review of the Literature Examining the

   Relationship Between Alcohol Use and HIV-Related Sexual Risk-Taking in Young

   People.” Addiction, March 1995, 90(3), pp. 319-328.

Grossman, Michael; Kaestner, Robert and Markowitz, Sara. “Get High and Get

      Stupid: The Effect of Alcohol and Marijuana Use on Teen Sexual Behavior.”

      Review of the Economics of the Household, December 2004, 2, pp. 413-441.




                                          11
Grossman, Michael; Kaestner, Robert and Markowitz, Sara. “An Investigation of the

      Effects of Alcohol Policies on Youth STDs,” in Advances in Health Economics

      and Health Services Research, Vol. 16-Substance Use: Individual Behavior,

      Social Interactions, Markets and Politics, edited by Bjorn Lindgren and Michael

      Grossman, Elsevier, Oxford, England, 2005.

Grossman, Michael and Markowitz, Sara. “I Did What Last Night?! Adolescent Risky

      Sexual Behaviors and Substance Use.” Eastern Economic Journal, Forthcoming.

Ventura, Stephanie J. and Bachrach, Christine A. “Nonmarital Childbearing in

      the United States, 1940-99.” National Vital Statistics Reports, October 18,

      2000, 48(16), pp 1-39.




                                         12
                                   FOOTNOTES

*
 Funding for this research was provided by grant number DA12692-03 from the National
Institute on Drug Abuse to the National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                         13
