NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL STRUCTURE CHANGE AND DECREASES
IN STOCKHOLDERS' WEALTH: A CROSS—SECTIONAL
STUDY OF CONVERTIBLE SECURITY CALLS

Wayne H. Mikkelson

Working Paper No. 113T

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

June 1983

This paper was prepared as part of the National Bureau of Economic
Research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and
project in the Changing Roles of Debt and Equity in Financing U.S.
Capital Formation, which was financed by a grant from the American
Council of Life Insurance. It was presented at the NBER Conference
on Corporate Capital Structures in the U.S., Palm Beach, Florida,
January 6 andT, 1983. I would like to thank Jerry Bowman, Larry
Dann, Ben Friedman, Mike Hopewell, Michael Jensen, Ron Masulis,
Megan Partch and the participants of the UCLA and University of
Oregon finance workshops for their helpful comments. I would also
like to thank Mike Ahearn and Francois Chaballier for valuable
research assistance. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the NBER.

NBER Working Paper #1137
June 1983

Capital Structure Change and Decreases in Stockholders' Wealth:
A Cross—Sectional Study of Convertible Security Calls

ABSTRACT

This paper is a cross—sectional analysis of the relationship between common stock price reactions to announcements of convertible
security calls and variables that represent possible determinants of

changes in common stockholders' wealth. The variables are measures of
the following effects of convertible security calls: (1) the change in
interest expense tax shields, (2) the potential redistribution of wealth
from common stockholders to preferred stockholders and debtholders,
(3) the decrease in the value of conversion privileges held by convertible securityholders, (4) the relative increase in shares outstand-

ing and (5) the change in earnings per share. A significant relationship
is found only between the measure of the reduction in interest
expense tax shields and the stock price response to call announcements.

The apparent corporate tax effect is consistent with some combination
of effects due to (1) a reduction in interest expense tax shields

and (2) unfavorable information about the calling firm's value or
earnings prospects that is conveyed by a call of convertible securities.

The evidence is consistent with theories of capital structure that

imply optimal financial leverage depends on earnings prospects and
with theories that imply reductions in leverage convey unfavorable
information about firm

value.
Wayne H. Mikkelson
Assistant Professor
The Amos Tuck School of Business Administration
Dartmouth College
Hanover, New Hampshire 03755
(603) 646—2369

I.

Introduction

Several studies document a statistically significant decrease in
the price of firms' common stock at the earliest public announcement of
certain types of capital structure changes. For example, Masulis (1978)
reports statistically significant negative average common stock returns

at the announcement of intrafirm exchange offers that involve the issuance
of common stock for debt, common stock for preferred stock, or preferred

stock for debt. Mikkelson (1981) reports a significant negative average
common stock return at the announcement of convertible debt calls that

force conversion of debt to common stock. Dann and Mikkelson (1982)
and Korwar (1982) also report a negative average return at the announce-

ment of the issuance of convertible debt and common stock, respectively.
None of these studies of capital structure changes, however, resolves
the issue of what factors determine the negative average stock price

response. Nor do they completely explain the motivation for these
capital structure changes.

This study attempts to shed light on these unresolved issues
by investigating potential determinants of negative stock price reactions
to the announcements of convertible debt and. convertible preferred

stock calls that force conversion. The empirical analysis extends
Mikkelson's (.1981) study of convertible security calls by estimating

the cross—sectional relationship between abnormal common stock price
responses to call announcements and variables that represent possible

determinants of stock price reactions. The variables are measures of
the following effects of calls: (1) the change in interest expense tax
shields, (2) the potential redistribution of wealth from common

2

stockholders to preferred stockholders •and debtholders, (3) the de-

crease in the value of conversion privileges held by convertible security—
holders, (4) the relative increase in shares outstanding and (5) the
change in earnings per share.

The empirical results indicate that wealth redistribution from
common stockholders to debtholders has no measurable effect on stockholders'

wealth. Some evidence, however, suggests that the conversion of debt to
cmmon stock alters the relative priority, of outstanding preferred stock

claims sufficiently to affect share price. There is no evidence of an association between common stock returns and decreases in the value of called

convertible securities at the announcements of calls. The potential wealth
transfers from convertible securityholders are typically quite small

relative to the market value of common stock. In addition, there is no
support for the notion particularly popular among practi1ioners that the
negative stock price response to call announcements is attributable to
a decrease in earnings per share or an increase in the supply of oustand—
ing shares.

The results reveal a positive association between the reduction
in interest expense tax shields and the announcement period common stock

returns. One

interpretation

is that the association between •stock returns

and the corporate taxvariable solely reflects the we,alth impact of a

decrease in interest expense tax shields. This interpretation implies
that on average the market does not anticipate complete replacement
of the tax shields with a subsequent issuance of new debt, even though

refinancing the called debt may be in stockholders' interests.
A second interpretation of this evidence recognizes that the

negative stock price response may reflect information about the

3

calling firm's value. This interpetaton presumes that the decision
to call and to reduce financial leverage is in the interests of

but is based on information not reflected

stockholders,

inthe calling firm's security

prices. For example, a call decision may convey management's lowered
assessment of the firm's optimal level of interest payments or preferred
dividends, and thereby convey management's reduced expectations about

future earnings. A convertible security call and the associated
decrease in financial leverage, therefore, can be viewed as a value—
maximizing response to a decrease in the firm's earnings prospects,
even though the share price reaction to a call announcement is negative.
Under the second intrepretation, the evidence of a relationship
between stock returns at the time of call announcements and changes in
interest expense tax shields may in part, or even entirely, reflect

information about the firm's value or earnings prospects. The results
presented in this study, however, do not resolve the extent to which

the stock price responses to call announcements reflect a tax effect
versus an information effect..

1
-

The paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses possible
determinants of stock returns at the announcements of convertible

security calls. A specification.of a cross—sectional relationship
between common stock returns and the possible determinants is also

developed in this section. Section III describes the sample of convertible security calls and the empirical proxies for the possible

determinants of stock returns. Estimates of the cross—sectional
relationship are presented in section IV. Section V interprets
the findings. The final section presents a summary and the conclusions
of the study4

.

0

4

II. Potential Determinants of Changes, in Stockholders' Wealth at
Announcement of Convertible Security Calls
This section discusses potential determinants of changes in
stockholders' wealth in response to call announcements and develops

a simple model of the determination of the stock price response to
call announcements. A specification of the potential impact on common
stockholders' wealth, expressed as a return, is presented for the

following effects of convertible security calls: (1) a reduction in
interest expense tax shields, (2) an increase in the relative priority
of a subset of claims senior to common stock, (3) a reduction in the
conversion premium of called securities., (4) an increase in shares out—•

standing and (5) a change in earnings per share.
Several assumptions are made in developing a simple model of

the share price effects of a convertible security call. First, the
calling firm has three classes of securities outstanding: (1) callable
convertible debt (CD), (2) nonconvertible debt (D), and (3) common

stock (CS). Second, the value of the convertible debt (VCD) exceeds
its call price and the optimal response of the convertible bondholders

Is conversion. Third, the call is unanticipated by the market.
In expression (1), the market value of common stock (VCS) immedi-

ately prior to the call announcement equals the total value.of the
firm (VF) less the market values of the callable convertible debt (VCD)
and the remaining outstanding debt securities (VD).
=

VF

—

—
VCD

VD

(1)

Temporarily, it is assumed that the market value of convertible debt equals
its conversion value, which equals the product of the fraction of outtand—
ing shares issued upon conversion (ci) and the market value of outstanding

5

common stock. In (2), the market value of common stock is expressed in
terms of the number of shares outstanding (n) and share price (P).
nP =

VF

—

ct(nP) — VD

(2)

The pre—announcement share price, as given by (3), equals thee

difference between the value of firm and the value of senior securities
divided by the total number shares outstanding after conversion of outstanding convertible securities.
P =

(VF

VD)/[(l+)n]

(3)

The post—announcement share price (P') can be expressed as the difference
between the post—announcement value of the firm (Vi) and the value of
outstanding senior securities (Vi) divided by [
Pt

(Vi. —

V)/[(l+a)n]

(l+c)n].
(4)

Thus, the announcement period per share return Cexpression (5)) implied
by the pre—announcement and post—announcement share prices equals the
change in the difference between firm value and the value of senior
securities [L(VF —

vD)] divided by the market value of shares, including

shares issued upon conversion, prior to the caliannouricement [(l+c)nP}.

(P—P)/P =

(VF

—

vD)![(l+ct)nPI

(5)

The remainder of this section discusses several possible effects of a
convertible security call on stockholders' wealth, and presents specifications
of the potential effects on share price based on expression (5).

II.A. Reduction in Interest Expense Tax Deductions
If the calling firm has sufficient earnings to fully utilize the
interest expense tax deductions provided by convertible debt, ceteris

paribus a call reduces cash flows available to securityholders. How—

6

ever, the net tax effect of a reduction in debt outstanding on stock-

holders' wealth is ambiguous. The net effect depends on whether the
decrease in leverage is expected to be temporary and on the extent to which

the loss of corporate tax benefits is offset by other types
of tax shields or by the elimination of costs, such as default related costs
and personal tax disadvantages associated with the called debt.
Various models of optimal capital structure that include corporate
taxes imply different valuation effects of a reduction in the amount of

debt outstanding. For example, Miller's (1977) analysis implies that for
any level of financial leverage of a firm, the loss in interest expense tax
deductions due to the conversion of debt is offset exactly by the gain
of eliminating interest payments that have been "grossed up" to provide
taxable debtholders with their required return net of personal taxes.
As a result, the conversIon of debt to common stock and, the reduction

in interest expense tax deductions have no effect on the wealth of common
stockholders.

DeAngelo and Masulis (1980) present an analysis of optimal capital
structure that Incorporates uncertainty about a firm's ability to fully

utilize interest expense tax deductions. In their model, firms issue
debt up to the point where the marginal benefits of uncertain interest
expense deductions equal the marginal costs of debt. Consequently, a

reduction in financial leverage generally affects stockholders' wealth.
Assuming a call is completely unanticipated, a corporate tax
effect of a call announcement decreases firm value by an amount equal
to the present value of the change in interest expense tax shields (AT).
Substituting 1T into the numerator of the right—hand side of equation (5)

7

gives equation (6), the corporate tax effect expressed as a relative
change in share price.
(P' -

P)/P

=

AT/[(l+)nP]

(6)

Miller's model implies that T is exactly offset by the elimination of personal tax disadvantages of debt, while DeAngelo and Masulis'
model imples that iT may be only partially offset by the reduction in

debt related costs. In equation (7), which incorporates the different
predictions of these models, the value of y is between 0 and 1, depending on the marginal effect of a reduction in interest expense tax deductions on firm value.
(P' -

P)/P

=

y(T)/[(l+c)nP]

(7)

Thus, the tax effect as measured by a retur'n per share

of

common stock

equals the net marginal effect of a reduction in interest expense tax
deductions on ffrm value [y(LT)} divided by th.e sum of the pre—announcement

value of common stock and the conversion value of the called securities
[(l+cu)nP].

1
L.L.D.
r1

CULUL
.___euLt'_J.
£Lib

..L1dLLge .LLL LL1 vL.Lue UI.

An unanticipated announcement of a convertible debt call that

forces conversion may cause a wealth transfer from common stockholders

to preferred stockholders and debtholders. Any

claims

on the firm's

assets with a priority higher than common stock, but not higher than

the called debt, increase in priority relative'to the debt claims con-

verted to common stock. Even if the firm's expected cash flows and
asset structure are unchanged by the call announcement, the value of a
subset of claims senior to common stock may increase due to the elimina-

tion of competing debt claims. A corresponding decrease in the value of
common stock reflects a wealth transfer from common stockholders.

3

8

Holding the value of the firm constant in expression (5), the
impact of a c.hange in the value of senior securities. (iVD) on the value

of common stock is expressed as a return per share in (8).

(p'...p)/P =

_L.VD/[(1+c)flP]

(8)

The relative price change equals the change in the value of senior
securities divided by the product of the total number of shares
outstanding following conversion and the pre—announcement share price.
II.C.

Transfer of Conversion Premium from Convertible Securityholders
If prior to a call announcement the market does not fully

anticipate the timing of. a call, the market value of convertible debt

(V) in general exceeds its conversion value (ctV5).4 An effect of a
call announcement is to eliminate any conversion premium (VCD_czVCS)
so that following the call announcement the market value f convertible

debt e4uals its conversion value. The decrease in the market value
of the called securities is a wealth transfer from the called security—
holders to the remaining securityholders of the firm.
Holding aside all other effects of a call announcement on
the value of the firm or on the value of senior securities and assuming that the transfer of the conversion premium is captured entirely
by common stockholders, the impact of a decrease in conversion
premium on the price of a share of common stock is given by (9).

(P'-p)/p (VCD_aVCS)/[(l+a)nP}

(9)

The total wealth of the convertible securityholders decreases by the

amount of the pre—announcement conversion premium (Vp_c1V5) less
the portion of conversion premium regained upon conversion

9

The quantity (+a) in the denominator of expression (9) reflects the
fact that only the fraction [l/(l+a)] of the conversion premium is
captured by the holders of common stock claims outstanding prior to
the call.

II.D. Increase in Shares Outstanding
Some corporate officers and investment bankers attribute the
negative stock price reactions to call announcements to the eventual

increase in the number shares outstanding. One price impact often cited
is in effect a movement along a downward sloping demand curve for the

calling firm's shares. Also mentioned is a price effect due to a decrease
in earnings per share caused by conversion of the called securities. Both
effects lack rigorous support in theory. On the other hand, neither notion

has been tested thoroughly. For this reason, both potential effects are
examined in this study.

Supply Effect. If the demand for a firm's common stock is not
perfectly elastic, the increase in the number of shares outstanding due

.

f

to conversion of debt may explain some part of the decrease in share
a . .flJ1. aLSLt%JtLL!...CLLLLt

firm

'rii-

4c
.#

nr,r,
trr'k r1imc -f th t11in
-.

do not have close substitutes, ceteris paribus an unanticipated

increase in the number of shares outstanding is associated with a

detectable price decrease. On the other hand, if shares of common
stock have perfect or very close substitutes in the form of another
security or a portfolio of securities, no significant price change is
caused solely by an increase in the: number' of shares outstanding.

Existing evidence does not support the notion of a supply
effect on share prices. 'Neither Scholes' (1972) examination of secondary

p

10

distributions of common stock nor Marsh's (1979) study of U.K. rights
offerings of common stock uncovers evidence of price changes that depend

on the size of the offering. A study of convertible security calls differs
from Scholes' study In that calls result in an increase in the
number of shares outstanding, and also differs from Marsh's study in that

a call does not produce a direct change in the firm's asset structure.
Estimation of the relationship between abnormal common stocc returns
at the call announcements and the ensuing Increase in the number of shares
outstanding provides new evidence on the importance of a supply effect.
This study tests the hypothesis'that the size of the relative
increase in the number of shares outstanding due to conversion (cx)
is unrelated

to the relative stock price change (P' —P.)/P]

in response

to call announcements, adjusting for the possible price effects of

corporate taxes and wealth redistribution. However, no theory of price
pressure or supply effects exists that implies a particular specification of
the relationship between stock price and the quantity of shares outstanding.
For this study, therefore, only a general form relationship Is specified.
That is, (P'.-P)/P

f(cx) and f' (a) <

0.

Failure to reject the null hypothesis is consistent with a perfectly
elastic demand for shares, I.e., no supply effects.

But since the.test is

based on estimation of a cross—sectional relationship, there is an assumption
of a homogeneous relationship between common stock returns and the relative
changes in shares outstanding for the sample of calling firms. If the assumption of a homogeneous relationship is incorrect,

the finding of no relationship

between the stock price respçnses and the relative

increases in shares

outstanding may simply reflect an incorrect specification of the test.

Earnings Dilution Effect. Financial economists generally argue

11

-

that there are no valuation effects attributable solely to' changes In

earnings per share. Prevailing theory of capital structure in a setting
of no taxes, as first presented by Modigliani and Miller (1958),

implies that to the extent a reduction in earnings per share of common
stock reflects a decrease in expected cash flows per share due to a
change in capital structure, there is compensating decrease in the

required return for common stock. That is, changes in capital structure

p se, even If they bring about a decrease in earnings per share, do
not necessarily affect shareholders' wealth.
The issuance of new shares due to conversion of convertible debt
or preferred stock reduces earnings per share, while the reduction in

interest expenses or preferred dividends increases earnings per share. Typically,
the net effect of a call and conversion is to reduce earnings per share. After
adjusting for the possible effects of corporate taxes and wealth redistribution,
the Modigliani and Miller theory predicts no price impact of a change In

earnings per share. Therefore, estimation of the cross—sectional relationship
between the stock price responses to call announcements ad the associated

relative changes in earnings per share EPs/EPs1, taking account of the effects
of corporate taxes and wealth redistribution, provides an opportunity to test
directly for a price effect due to dilution of earnings per share.5

II.E. Specification of the Cross—Sectional Relationship
On the assumption that the possible determinants examined in this
section are additive, expression (10) is the cross—sectional relationship
to be estimated.

(P'-P)/p =

o

+ i y(T)/(l4-ct)nPJ + 2I_VD/(l+a)nPJ

+ 3C(VCD_cVCS)/(l-I-ct)nPJ + i4[f(ctfl

A positive value of

+ 5[LEPS/EPSJ (10)

is consistent with a corporate tax effect on

12

share price. An increase in the value of senior securities implies
a positive value for F. .

Loss of a conversion premium by convertible

securityholders implies a positive value for 8 .
consistent with a negative value for

,

while

A supply effect is

a positive value for

is implied by an earnings dilution effect. The sample of calls and the
empirical proxies for the variables in (10) are described in the next
section.

13

III. Data

III.A. Sample of Calls

The sample consists of 107 convertible debt calls and 57
convertible preferred stock calls from the period 1962 through 1978.6 Each
call announcement is reported in the Wall 'Street Journal, and no other
firm—specific, news, related or unrelated to the call announcement, is

revealed by the Wall Street Journal Index or the cited call announcement

article. In every case, the conversion value exceeded the call price
at the time of the call announcement. In addition, all of the firms
were listed on the New York or American Stock Exchange at the time of
the announcement. Summary statistics of the convertible' security
•

calls are discussed in the following section.
III.B. Empirical Proxies for the Possible Determinants of Changes in
Stockholders' Wealth

The Relative Price Change at Announcement. An estimate of a two—day
announcement period risk—adjusted common stock return is the empirical

measure of the stock price impact of a call announcement. Risk—

adjusted returns (AR.)fQr

firm

j equal the difference between the

unadjusted stock returns (R.) and expected returns derived from firm

j's market model. That is, on day t

AR.= R_(bo+ blRMt),

(11)

where b0 and b1 are coefficient estimates of the linear relationship
between firm j's daily stock returns taken from the CRSP Daily Returns
Pile, and the daidy returns of the CRSP Value—Weighted Index (R,1).7'8 The
period used to estimate the parameters b0 and b1' begins 61 trading
days following the date of the call ajrnouncement and ends 200 trading

14

days following the annornicemen date.9
Table 1 presents average adjusted common stock returns for 21
trading days centered on the date of the initial published report of the

call announcement (day 0). Column 1 presents the trading day relative
to day 0. For the sample of convertible debt calls, the average adjusted
daily returns are presented in column 2 and the percentage of positive

adjusted returns is presented in column 3. For the sample of convertible
preferred stock calls, the average adjusted returns and the percentage
of positive adjusted returns are presented in columns 4 and 5, respectively.
The stock price response to the announcements of convertible debt

calls appears to be confined primarily to trading days —l and 0. For
the sample of c®nvertible debt calls, the average adjusted returns on days
—l and 0 are large in absolute value relative to any of the surrounding

trading days. In addition, the relatively low percentage of positive adjusted returns on days —l and 0 also implies an impact confined to these

days. Furthermore, over trading days +11 through +60 no statistically.
significant average adjusted returns are observed.

For the convertible preferred stock calls, no dramatic stock

price impact is observed on any day around day 0. However, on day —1
only 18 of 57 adjusted returns are positive, which suggests a possible

stock price impact on day —1. The percentages of positive returns in
column 5 provide no evidence of a price impact on any other day nearby
trading day 0.

Based primarily on the returns data for convertible

debt calls, the announcement period adjusted return for preferred stock
calls is also measured over trading days —l and 0.10
The first row of panels A and B of Table 2 presents summary
statistics of the two—day announcement period adjusted returns (AR2a)

15

TABLE 1
Adjusted Daily Common Stock Returnsa for 21 Trading
Days Around the Date of the Earliest Published
Report (Trading Day 0) of Convertible Debt Calls (107 Events)
and Convertible Preferred Stock Calls (57 Events)

Convertible Debt Calls
(2)

(1)

Trading

Day

(3)

Proportion
Average
Adjusted of Positive
Returns
Return (%)

Convertible Preferred
Stock Calls
(4)

(5)

Proportion
of Positive
Returns
Return ()

Average
Adjusted

.59%

.63

—10

.15%

.47

— 9

.10

.44

—.27

.42

— 8

.13

.48

.23

.65

— 7

—

.19

.43

—.43

.44

— 6

—

.15

.46

—.15

.47

—5

.08

.48

—.08

.44

— 4

.29

.56

.01

.51

— 3

.02

.46

.20

.51

— 2

.03

.51

.30

.56

—l

— .92

.35

—.22

.32

—1.23.

.30

—.21

.44

.47

.00

.60

2

.05
— .20

.43

—.04

.53

3

— .04

.47

—.02

.51

4

— .27

.43

.60

.47

5

—

.15

.48

—.08

.44

6

.10

.50

.45

.61

7

.16

.46

—.23

.40

8

.36

.52

—.08

.51

.13

.40

-.04

.47

— .29

.41

—.12

.44

1

9

10

—

—

aAdjustment is the difference between raw daily stock returns and re—
turns predicted by the firm's market model. The estimate of the
market model is based on the firm's raw daily returns and the CRSP
Value—Weighted Index returns from trading days +61 through +200.
bDate of the earliest published report of the call announcement in
The Wall Street Journal.

16

for the samples of convertible calls. - The mean two—day adjusted return is

—2.21% for the convertible debt calls (row 1, panel A) and is —.44% for

the convertible preferred stock calls (row 1, panel B). The standard de—

viation and range of 2a are not markedly djfferent between the two samples
of calls, but the hypothesis that the mean two—day announcement period returns of

the samples are equal is rejected at the .01 level. For the convertible debt
calls, the hypothesis that the mean two—day announcement period return
equals zero is rejected at the .01 level, but this hypothesis is not rejected

at .10 level for the convertible preferred stock calls. These data imply
a differential average impact of convertible debt and convertible preferred

stock calls on common stockholders' wealth. In the course of data collection, however, no potentially relevant differences were observed between
the timing or content of convertible debt and convertible preferred stock
call announcements that might explain the different average announcement
period returns.

in Interest Expense Tax Deductions. Three estimates of
the reduction in interest expense tax shields are computed. The estimates
are based on different assumptions about the market's view of the permanence

or duration of the reduction in interest expense tax shields. The assumptions
range from the expectation of a one year decrease to a permanent decrease

in interest expense tax shields. No attempt has been made to estimate the
calling firms' effective marginal tax rates at the time of the call announce-

ments. For all three measuresof the reduction in interest expense tax
shields, the calling firm's effective marginal tax rate is assumed to equal .48.
The first estimate of the reduction in tax shields (TD) is the product

of the tax rate and the total face value of the called debt. This measure
presumes that removal of the debt portion of the called debt claims

is a permanent reduction in the amount of debt outstanding. Thus, TD estimates

17
TABLE 2

Summary Statistics of Empirical Proxies for the
Abnormal Common Stock Price Change and the Possible
Determinants of the Change in Stockholders' Wealth
Associated with Convertible Debt and
Convertible Preferred Stock Call Announcements

A. Convertible Debt Calls
(1)

(2)

.

( 1)
C 2)
•

Measurea

.022 —.022

AR2
b

TD/V.

4) TPvI/vCsb

( 5)
( 6)
(7)

( 8)

(4)

(5)

(6)

FVCD/VCS

(7)

Number
of Calls

.037

.133

— .107

107

-

( 3) TI/VS
(

(3)

Standard Maximum Minimum
Mean Median Deviation
Value
Value

Empirical

— .035

— .029

.028

— .000

— .100

107

— .002

—.001

.002

— .000

— .011

107

— .016

—.012

.017

—

.000

.139

107

— .073

—•crj

.058

— .001

— .289

107

D/Vcs

.400

.209

.726

6.514

.000

107

PS/v

.067

.000

.182

1.163

.000

107

VCD/ctVCS

1.018 1.005

.044

1.217

.953

77

( 9) Vc/FVc

1.628 1.439

.546

3.883

1.094

77

.002

.001

.005

.017

— .011

77

.138

.092

.136

.747

.001

107

— .082 —.064

.144

.191

..-j..243

107

(10)
(11)

(VCD-.ctvCS)/VCS

a

(12) tEPS/EPS
B.
(1)

Empirical
Measure
(1)
(2)

AR2a

LVPS/VC5b

Convertible Preferred Stock Calls
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Standard Maximum Minimum
Mean Median Deviation
Value
Value

— .004

-.006

— .081
.049

(7)

Number
of Calls

.042

.189

— .091

57

—.062

.085

— .000

— .425

57

.000

.103

.531

.000

57

(3)

Ps/v

(4)

V1/ctV

1.007 1.008

.028

1.082

.959

46

(5)

v/c5

1.597

.910

6.300

1.042

46

(6)

(7)
(8)

(Vp5.-ctv5)/V5

a

EPS/EPS

.000

.000

.004

.014

— .013

46

.136

.010

.134

.669

.014

57

— .053 — .060

.082

.369

— .230

57

a(variable definitions presented on the next page)

bThese variables have negative values since they measure a decrease in tax
shields or a reduction in claims outstanding.

18

TABLE 2 (cont.)

=

two—day announcement period adjusted common stock return

=

market value of common

TD

=

TI

=

tax
tax

aAl

stock

prior to the call announcement

rate (.48) multiplied by the face value of the called debt

rate (.48) multiplied by annual interest payments of the
called debt

TPVI =

tax rate (.48) multiplied by estimate of thepresent value
of remaining interest payments of the called debt

FVCD =

face value of called debt
face value oflong—term debt outstanding after the call

D

=

PS

=

liquidation

value of preferred stock outstanding after the

call

=

market value of called debt plus accrued interest prior to the
call announcement

=

conversion value of called securities prior to the call
announcement

=

relative increase

in shares outstanding due to conversion of

the called debt
relative change in earnings per share due solely to the call and
conversion of convertible securities

iEPS/EPS

LVps =
=

liquidation

value of called preferred stock

market value of called preferred stock prior to the call
announcement
aggregate call value of called preferred stock

19

the present value of a perpetual stream of interest expense tax shields.
The second measure is the amount of annual interest expense

tax deductions (TI) provided by the called debt. This estimate equals
the product of the tax rate and the amount of annual interest payments

of the called debt issue. The assumption underlying this measure is
that the call of deb.tis viewed as only temporarily reducing the amount

of available interest expense tax deductions. That is, the expected
reduction in the firm's cash flows equals the value of one year's
interest expense deductions.

The third measure is the product of the corporate tax

rate

and

an estimate of the present value of the remaining interest expenses of

the called debt (TPVI). The remaining interest payments are discounted
•by the yield to maturity for corporate debt with a comparable Moody's

quality rating at the time of the call.announcement. An implicit assumption
of this measure is that the expected duration of the reduction in interest
expense tax shields equals the time remaining to maturity at the time of

call announcement. Thus, the expected duration of the decrease in interest
expense deductions implied by this measure is less than for the estimate
TD, but greater than for the estimate TPVI.
Summary statistics for the three measures of the change in interest
expense tax deductions are presented in rows 2, 3 and 4 of panel A of Table 2.
Each of the tax variables shown in Table 2 is measured relative to the market

value of common stock (Vc5) prior to the call announcement. Data on
the terms of thecalled debt issue and the number of shares outstanding
are obtained from .Moody's manuals and the Wall Street Journal. The

common stock prices are taken from the Commercial and Financial Chronicle

or the Wall Street Journal. The mean value of the estimate of the
reduction in interest expense tax shields divided by the market value
of common stock is —.035 for TD/Vcs, —.016 for TPVI/VCS and —.002

for TI/V5.

Change in the Value f Senior Securities. In general, a substantial portion of a firm's senior securities, i.e., debt and preferred
stock, are either privately held or publicly held and traded infrequent—
ly." Unlike common stock, therefore, it is not possible to obtain a
direct measure of the impact of a call announcement on the total value

of senior securities. Instead, a proxy for the impact of wealth redistribution among classes of securityholders is used.
For a call of convertible debt, the change in the value of debt

securities that remain outstanding following the call (VD )
assumed to depend on the amount of debt called (

tD)

is

and the amount of

debt relative to common stock outstanding after the call (

D/Vcs).

A general form specification is

tVD= h(D,D/VCs),
where h1>0 and h2>0 .

(12)

That is, the change in the value of outstanding

debt is greater, the larger the amount of debt called and the greater

the ratio of debt to common stock outstanding after the call. Similarly,

the impact on the value of outstanding preferred stock (AV8 )

is

assumed

to be a function of the amount of debt called ( LD) and the amount of

21

preferred stock relative to common stock (PS/Vcs) outstanding following

the call. That is,

k(t2D,PS/Vcs),

(13)

where k1 >0 and k2 >0.
The intuition for the hypothesized signs of h1 and k1 is that for
a given amount of°outstanding debt or preferred stock, the greater the
amount of debt claims retired, the greater is the increase in the relative

priority of the remaining debt and preferred stock claims. Thus, the
greater is the impact on the values of outstanding debt and preferred

stock. The positive signs predicted for h2 and k2 reflect that for a
gIven amount of debt claims retired, the total dollar wealth redistribution
from common stockholders is expected to be larger, the greater is the
relative amount of debt or preferred stock claims that remain outstanding after the call.

For a call of convertible preferred stock, it is assumed that
only the relative priority of outstanding preferred stock claims is

affected. The general form expression for the impact on the value of preferred stock

V= 2.(PS, PS/vcs)

(14)

where LiPS is the amount of preferred stock called and PS/V is the
relative amounts of preferred stock and common stock outstanding

following the call. Based on the same intuition presented for expressions

(12) and (13), 9 and 2 are hypothesized to be positive.
Various specifications of h(),k (.) and (.)

are employed in

the estimation of the cross—sectional relationship given by (10).

22

For all of the specifications, the amount of debt called (AD) equals the
total face value of the called debt and the amount of preferred stock called
(LiPS) equals the total liquidation value of the called preferred stock.
The amounts of preferred stock (PS) and long—term debt (D) that remain
outstanding after the call are also measured by the total liquidation

value and total face value, respectively. All of these data are obtained
from Moody's manuals.

For the sample of convertible debt calls, row 5 of panel A in
Table 2 presents summary statistics for the change in the amount of
debt outstanding as measured by the ratio of the total face value of the

called debt to th market value of common stock (FVCD/vcS). The mean
ratio is —

.073.

Rows 6 and 7 present summary statistics for the total

face value and total liquidation value of remaining long—term debt and
preferred stock, respectively, divided by the market value of common

stock. The mean value of DIV

CS

is

is .400 and the mean value of PS/V
Cs

.067. Row 2 of panel B. gives summary data on the change in the amount

of preferred stock outstanding as measured by the ratio of the liquidation
value of called preferred stock relative to the market value of common

stock. The mean value of LVps/Vcg is —.081. Data on the liquidation
value of preferred stock outstanding following the call relative to the

market value of common

stock

is presented in row 3 of panel B. The

mean ratio of PS/V for preferred stock calfs is .049.
Reduction in Conversion Premium. For only 77 of 107 convertible
debt calls and 46 of 57 convertible preferred stock calls, a market
value of the called securities can be measured within the two weeks

immediately preceding the call announcement. Rows 8, 9 and 10 of panel A

23

of Table 2 present the following summary statistics for these 77 convertible debt calls:

(1) the ratio of the total value of the called debt

(adjusted for accrued interest)'2 to the total conversion value of the
called debt (VCD/cVCS), where both value estimates come from the same trading
day, (2) the ratio of the total market value of the called debt to its
aggregate face value (VCD/FVCD) and (3) the total dollar conversion premium,
derived from VCD and ctV5, divided, by the market value of common stock

[(VCD_cVCS) /V.
Corresponding measures for the calls of convertible preferred stock

are presented in rows 4, 5 and 6 of panel B of Table 2. Summary data on
the total market value of the called preferred stock divided by the aggregate

conversion value of the preferred stock (VIaV5), measured from the same
•

trading day, is reported in row 4. The ratio of the value of the called

securities to the aggregate call value (V5IC5) is summarized in row 5.
Data on the total dollar conversion premium divided by the market value of
common stock [(vps_cvcs)/vcs1 is reported in row 6.

For each firm, the values of the common stock and the callable con-

•

vertible security are based on price quotations reported in the Commercial
and Financial Chronicle or the Wall Street Journal for the same day of trad-

ing. The terms of the conversion privileges and the call provisions are
identified in Moody's manuals and the Wall Street Journal.

The mean ratio of market value to conversion value of the called
securities equals 1.018 for the convertible debt calls and equals 1.007 for

the convertible preferred stock calls.13 These mean ratios are each signifi—
•

cantly different from 1.0 at the .05 level. Measured within the two weeks just
prior to call announcement, the average ratio of conversion value to

face value of the called debt securities equals 1.628. The mean

24

ratio of conversion value to call payment value equals 1.597 for the

convertible preferred stock sample. As a proportion of the market
value of common stock, the average conversion premium is .0019 for

convertible debt calls and is .0001 for convertible preferred stock
calls.

Based on these sample means, convertible debt and preferred
stock call policies appear to occur at similar times, as measured by
the ratio of market value to face value or call payment value of

the called securities. In addition, just prior co c:ll announcements,
both tvies of securities are priced at similar preiiums relative to
conversion value.

14

Increase in Shares Outstanding. The measure of the relative
increase in the number of common shares outstanding (c*) equals the

number of shares issued upon conversion divided by the number of shares

outstanding prior to the call announcement. Data on shares outstanding
and the conversion terms of the called securities were collected from

MOOdYtS manuals and the Wall Street Journal)5
The mean relative increase in shares outstanding is .138 for
the convertible debt sample (row 11, panel A)and .136 for the convertible

preferred stock sample (row 7, panel B). The summary statistics
indicate that the distributions of

for the two samples are quite similar.

Change in Earnings Per Share. The variable LEPS/EPS measures'the
relative change in earnings per share due to conversion of the called

securities. That.is, holding total earnings before interest and taxes
constant, IEPS/EPS measures only the effects of (1) an increase in the
number of shares outstanding and (2) a reduction in after—tax interest ex-

penses or preferred dividends.16 Thus, EPS does not measure any •change in

25

earnings observed over time. The mean values of tEPS/EPS are - .082

and

—.053 for the convertible debt (row 12, panel A) and convertible
pref.erred stock (row 8, panel B) samples, respectively. The earnings,
interest payment and preferred dividend data used to calculate 1EPS/EPS
are obtained from Moody's manuals.

Based on the summary statistics presented in Table 2, the samples
of convertible debt and convertible preferred stock calls are quite

similar. The most apparent differences are associated with the average

two—day stock return 2a and the corporate tax variables. Since no
other potentially important differences have been uncovered, a preliminary conclusion is that the decrease in interest expense tax deductions,
or an associated factor, explains the larger negative average stock return
-

at the announcements of convertible debt calls.

III.C.

Specification of the Estimated Cross—Sectional Relationship
Various specifications of the following linear regression model

are estimated for the sample of convertible security calls:

2a =

b0 + b1 [TD/(l+)Vcs]+b2 [h(DD/Vcs)/(1) V]

+ b3.[k(AD,Ps/vcs)/(l+)ycs] + b4 [(LPS,PS/V5)/(1+a)v5I

+ b5 [VCD_aVCS)/(l+)VCS}

b6[f()] + b_[EPS/EPSJ +

In (15), the empirical proxies discussed in this section are substituted
for the variables in the cross—sectional relationship specified by (10),

and u represents a random error term thathas a zero mean. The measures
TI and TPVI are substitute measures for TD, the change in interest

(15)

26

expense tax shields. For four

terms in (15), a general form is given

for the relationship between AR2 and the proxy for a potential deter—
minant of the announcement period stock return. As reported in the next
section, several specifications of these terms are examined in estimating
the cross—sectiOnal relationship.

For each of the potential effects, the null hypothesis tested is
that the coefficient of the corresponding independent variable in (15)

equals zero. A positive va1ie of b1 is consistent with a valuation effect

associated with the corporate tax variable. Defining h(.), k(.), and

'9(.) to have nonnegative values, negative values of b2, b3 and b4
are consistent with wealth redistribution from common stockholders to

more senior securityholders. Negative values for b2 and b3 are consistent
with wealth transfers to debtholders and preferred stockholders,

respectively, for calls of convertible debt. A negative valie of b4 is
consistent with a wealth transfer to preferred stockholders for calls

of convertible preferred stock. A positive value of b5 is consistent with
a wealth transfer from the called convertible securityholders to common

stockholders. A negative value of b6 is consistent with a suppy effect,
and a positive value of b7 is consistent with an earnings per share

dilution effect. Coefficient estimates are presented in the next section.

27

IV. Estimates

of the Cross—Sectional Relationship

Estimates of the relationship given by (15) are• presented in this

section. The cross—sectional relationship is estimated using different
measures of the change in interest expense tax deductions and using
different specifications of the variables expressed in a general form
in (15). The cross—sectional relationship is also estimated •for several
subsets of the calls.

IV.A. Total
Sample of Convertible Debt and Convertible Preferred
Stock Calls
Initially, ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of the cross—
sectional relationship given by (16) are analyzed.

2a =

b

+

b1{TD/(1+a)V05} + b2{[D(DIvcs)/(1)VCs}

b3{ [D(PS/V )]/(1+c)VC} + b4{[P(PS/VCS)i/(l+c)VCS}
+ b5{c} + b6{AEPS/EPS} + ii

(16)

The joint hypothesis that the coefficients of (16) equal zro is

rejected at the .05 level. However, only the t—value for the coefficient
of the interest expense tax deductions variable (b1) is significant at
the .05 level.

Given that the variance of common stock returns is not constant
across firms, there is reason to suspect that the error term of the

regression model is not homoscedastic. Tests on the residuals of the
OLS estimates of (16) indicate that the variance of the error term is
positively related to the standard deviation of the two—day adjusted

stock returns.17 Thus, statistical inferences based on the OLS results
are possibly incorrect and the OLS estimates are not presented in detail.

2g

No evidence is found that suggests a relationship between the.

values of any independent variable in (16) and the variance of the

error term. Therefore, in order to correct for heteroscedasticity,
each two—day adjusted announcement period stock return (AR2)
divided by an estimate of the standard deviation (ci) of the calling

firm's two—day adjusted stock returns.

That is, standardized risk'-

adjusted announcement period returns (AR2a/a) are regressed on the

independent variables of (l6.18 Tests of the residuals of the OLS
estimates of the model with standardized adjusted returns uncover no

evidence of heteroscedasticity in the error term. Therefore, all of
the regression estimates presented in this section are based on a
dependent variable that is a standardized two—day return.
Table 3 presents OLS estimates of the cross—sectional relationship where the dependent variable is a standardized common stock

return. The first three rows contain coefficient estimates of
specifications that differ only in terms of the measure of the change

in interest expense tax shields. In all three cases, however, the
joint hypothesis that the coefficients equal zero cannot be rejected at
the .10 level,

The remaining results presented in Table 3 are estimates for
the relatbnship between the standardized returns and the variable(s)

that represents a particular potential determinant of the stock price

response. Rows 4, 5, and 6 present the estimates for the simple
regression of the standardized return on a measure of the change in

interest expense tax shields. In each case, the t—value of the estimated
coefficient is significant at the .01 level, and the sign of the
estimated coefficient is consistent with a corporate tax effect.

•448

.401

.414

.583

.488

.538

)

)

)

)

)

(-4.34 )

—

(-3.17

—

(-5.28

—

(309

—

(.2.96

—

)

)

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

.340 a

(-2.40

—

(-2.78

-

(—2.69

-

.380 b
(-2.30 )

-

(

(

2.90

)

)

•

.

14.544

2.25

a

b

Cs

14.756

(l+ct)V

(

(

.

.

2.55

199.037
)

1.62 )

a

cs

182.184

(l+ct)V

TI

.88

(

2.45

23.563

.

)

bsignifiCant at the .05 level (one—tailed test).

.312

(—1.20

—

(—

.70

(

)

)

)

.67 )

1.56

C—

-1.775

(-

-2.211

(l+a)VCs

—1.855

a

cs

1

CS)

21.021
)

(l+ct)V

TPVI. ADID/V

asignificant at the .01 level (one—tailed test).

(8)

(6)

(4)

(2)

(1

Constant

TD

Independent Variables

.

.710
.08 )

.616
.07 )

.290
.03 )

—9.501
(-1.16 )

(—

—

(—

—

(-

-

'I

CS)

(l+a)vcs

(

ADIPS/V

(

(—

—

-

(-

(

Cs

CS)

.02

.583
)

6.533
.42 )

7.034
.45 )

.64)

-10.040

(1+ct)V

t

psips/v

—

-.964

.927

.22

.237

)

)

( 1 .26

1.081

)

—.453
(—.29 )

-.637

)

(—.42 )

(-.64

.17 )

)

.010

.008

.019

.036

.039

.050

,

.041

.042

.057

R2

djusted
A1DVQ
/

.177

.28

.283

(-1.16

.

C

C

C

•

.

Ordinary Least Squares Estimates of the Linear Relationship between the Standardized Two—Day Adjusted Common
Stock Returns and Possible Determinants of Changes in Stockholders' Wealth at the Announcements
of Convertible Debt and Convertible Preferred Stock Calls
(.164 observations, t—statistics in parentheses)

29
TABLE 3

.

.

160

1.34

1.05

.

601a

648a

843a

1.12

1.16

1.57

rva±ue

.

30

Row 7 presents the estimates of the relationship between the standardized two—day common stock return and the variables that measure the possible
effects of wealth redistribution. The F—statistic for the regression is not

significant at .10 level. The last two rows present the estimates of
simple regressions where the independent variable is the measure of the
relative increase in shares outstanding (row 8) or the measure of the change

in earnings per share (row 9). The t—statistic of the estimated coefficient

is not significant at the .10 level for both regressions. The estimated
coefficient of tEPS/EPS also is not statistically significant for the subset
of 142 calls that were associated with a decrease in earnings per share, i.e.,
iEPS<0.

The rsu1ts presented in Table 3 only provide support for a price
effect associated with the measure of the change in interest expense tax

deductions. For all three measures of interest expense tax shields, the estimates of the simple regression suggest that larger decreases in interest
expense tax deductions are associated with larger negative announcemeht

period stock returns. The results do not reveal valuation effects on
common stock that are attributable to wealth redistribution from common

stockholders to preferred stockholders or debtholders. In addition, the.
evidence does not support a supply effect or an earnings per share dilution effect on share price.

Estimation of several alternative specifications of the cross—

sectional relationship confirms the results reported in Table 3. For

.

example, no significant nonlinear relationship is found between the
standardized common stock returns and the values of c or AEPS/EPS. Four
specifications of each of the variables that measure the impact of calls

on the value of debt and preferred stock are also examined.19 In

31

only one instance, for the variable that measures the impact of convertible debt calls on outstanding preferred stock, is the t—value of

an estimated coefficient significant at the .05 level. The results
presented in Table 3, therefore, are generally supported by the estimates
of alternative specifications of the model.
IV.B. Subsets of the Calls Sample
Calls Associated with a Negative Stock

Price

Reaction. Each

of the independent variables in the cross—sectional relationships
reported in Table 3 is a potential determinant of a negative share

price response to a call announcement. None of the coefficients implies
a positive price change. Therefore, a relevant determinant of the
stock price response may be missing from the model, especially for the

calls associated with a positive stock price response. In addition,
a positive stock price response may reflect a prior release of
news of the call or it may reflect an accurate prediction of the timing

of the call by the market. If either of these problems exist, the
tests on the full sample of calls are likely biased against rejecting

the hypothesis of no price impact foreach of the possible determinants.
Furthermore, a test of the residuals of the OLS estimates rejects the
hypothesis that the subsample of calls with positive stock price responses
and the subsample with negative stock price responses are described by

the same cross—sectional model.2° For these reasons, the cross—sectional
relationship is estimated for the sample of calls with a negative
announcement period adjusted stock return.
Estimated coefficients for the .subset of calls with a negative

announcement price response are reported in (17).

32

a 1°AR =

- 1.04

+ 8.76{TD/(l-R)V

(—8.03). (1.69)

Cs

}.

-l.265{[iD(D/VCS )J/(l+ct)VCS }
(—.67)

—l1.578{[D(PS/V
)]/(l+)VCs } + 3.602{[P(PS/V
Cs
CS )J/(l+)v
Cs}
(—1.78)

-.243{c} -.729LEPS/EPS} R2(adj) = .121, F = 2.45
(—.29)

(—.58)

For this subsample of 114 calls, the results are generally consistent with

the results for the full sample of calls. That is, the coefficient for
the variable that measures the change in interest expense tax deductions

is significant at the .05 level for a one—tailed test. In addition, no
significant t—values (presented in parentheses) are associated with with
the estimated coefficients of variables that measure the relative increase
in the number of shares outstanding or the change in earnings per share.

Thus, even when only calls with negative stock price responses are ex—
amined, which induces a bias against the null hypothesi.s cf no significant

relationship, no support is found for a supply effect or an earnings
dilution effect.21 However, the coefficient of the variable that represents

wealth redistribution from common stockholders to preferred stockholders

due to calls of convertible debt is significant at the .05 level. The
coefficients of the other two wealth redistribution variables are not
significant at the .10 level.

Calls with Conversion Premium Data. Within two weeks preceding
the call announcement, a published price quotation for the called

security is found for 123 of the 164 calls. These price data are useful
for two reasons. First, an estimate of the difference between the
market value and the conversion value of the called security, i.e., a
conversion premium, can be derived from the prices of the convertible

security and the common stock. The total conversion premium of the
called security, measured before •the call announcement, represents a

(17)

33

potential wealth transfer from convertible securityholders to common

stockholders. Second, to some extent the size of a conversion premium
reflects the market's expectations about the timing of a call announce-

ment. Estimates of conversion premiums, therefore, may be helpful in
identifying call announcements that were a greater surprise to the

market. Analysis of calls associated with larger pre—announcement
conversion premiums can provide a stronger test of the potential
determinants of stock price responses to call announcements.
For the sample of 123 calls with conversion premium data, the
regressions reported In rows 1, 2 and 3 of Table 3 are augumented
to include a variable that measures the total conversion premium of
However, the F—statistics

the called securities

of these regressions are not significant at the .10 level.
Expressions (18) and (19) present the estimates of simpler
versions of the cross—sectional relationship that include a variable

for the conversion premium. In (18), the independent variables are
measures of the effects due to a permanent change in interest expense
tax shields [TD!(l-fa)Vc] and the potential wealth transfer from convertible
securityholders [(VCD_aVCS)/(l+ct)VCS}. The t-statistics are in parentheses.

[AR2a/c]= —.431 + ll.O86[TD/(l+O)Ycs1 —
(—2.48)

(1.80)

R2(adj.) =

.041, F = 2.57

28.479[(vCD_ovCS)/(l+ct)vCS]
(—.78)
(18)

The negative estimated coefficient for the variable that represents
the conversion premium is not consistent with a wealth transfer from
the called securi-tyholders tci stockholders. For the simple regression

0

34

reported in (19), the coefficient of the conVersion premium variable is
again negative.

[AR2a/cAR I

= — .636 — 47.849[(V —cLV )/(1+ct)V
Cs
CD
CS]
(—4.78 ) (—1.36

R2(adj.) = .015,

F =

1.85

(19)

The failure to find evidence of a wealth transfer from convertible

securityholders is not surprising, however, given the small estimated mean
value of the conversion premiums and the apparent measurement error in
the estimates of the conversion premiums, as indicated by the fact that

51 of the 123 estimates of the conversionpremiums are negative.
The estimated coeffIcients of the cross—sectional relationship may
depend on the accuracy of the market's expectation of the timing of call

announcements. If calls with lower estimates of the preannouncement
conversion premiums represent calls that were more accurately anticipated,
ceterus paribus the two—day announcement period returns are closer to
zero for these calls. As a result, more accurate anticipation of the
timing of call announcements tends to induce a downward bias in the estimates

of the coefficients of the variables that measure tax effects, wealth
redistribution effects, supply effects or earnings per share dilution
effects.

22

The possible effect of varying degrees of anticipation of call

announcements is examined by estimating the cross—sectional relationship
on subsamples of calls grouped by the sign of the estimated conversion

premium. Table 4 presents estimates of cross—sectional regressions for
two subsamples of calls. Panel A presents three sets of coefficient

•

)

.350

(—1.40

—

)

.422 b

.239
.67 )

,

(—1.99

—

(—

—

.—

.567 b
(-2.33 )

)

.741 a

(-4.04

-

b

C

(

)

.35 )

3.910

.76

12.6.16

.

)

13.022 b

.

( 1.81

(

3.428
.34 )

\

(l+ct)V

TD

C

(

(-

C—

-

.02

.129

.61

)

(l÷a)V

t

IPS(PSIV
1

CS)

a

.

)

—l7374
C- 1.60 )

1.50

-16.761
(—

.

-

(—

-

(—

1.726
.08 )

6.340
.28 )

.

.93

-1.514
(—

)

)

)
C

)

bsignificant at the .05 level (one—tailed test).

(.52
)

23.536

.60

28.885

(—

—

(—

—

6.431
.28 )

7.695
.31 )

.

.669
•.29
C

.27

)

-.481
(—

)

'

)

—3.338

EPS

(—1.31

51 Calls with Negative Estimated Conversion Premiums

6.493

B.

1.14

1.972

1

cs)

•

with Positive Estimated Conversion Premiums

(l+ct)V

t

D1PS/V

72 Calls

5.484
1.49 )

A.

1

csj

D1D/V

asignificant at the .01 level (one—.tailed test).

(6)

(5)

(4)

.

(2)

(1)

.590
(—2.23 )

Constant

.

Independent Variables

R2

.003

.009

.060

.045

.078

.115

.

Adjusted

.

.12

.15

.22

328b

1.92

1.43

F—Value

Ordinary Least Squares Estimates of the Cross—Sectional Relationship between Standardized Two—Day Announcement
Period Adjusted Common Stock Returns and Possible Determinants of the Returns for Subsamples of
Convertible Security Calls Grouped by the S1g13 of the Estimated Pre—Announcement Conversion Premium
(t—statistics in parentheses)

TABLE 4

35

36

estimates for the 72 calls with positive conversion premiums and Panel B
presents estimates for the 51 calls with negative conversion premiums.
The results presented in Table 4 suggest that the e0stimates of

the coefficients depend on the sign of the conversion premium. For
example, the estimated coefficient of the tax variable [TD/(l-fc)VJ is
greater for the sample of calls with positive conversion premiums
(row 3) than for the sample of calls with negative conversion premiums

(row 6). In addition, the coefficients for the wealth redistribution
variables are all negative and one t—value is 'significant at .10 level

for the sample calls with positive conversion premiums. This is
consistent with a valuation effect of './ealth redistribution. No

significant t—values are found among .the estimated coefficients for the

sample of calls with negative estimated conversion premiums. It should
also be noted that the unexplained variance of common stock returns,
as indicated by R2, is noticeably higher for the subsample of calls

with negative conversion premiums.
But even though the regression results appear to depend on the
degree of anticipation of calls, as measured by conversion premiums,
the inferences drawn from the regressions presented in rows 1, 2 and 3
of Table 4 are not markedly different, from the inferences drawn from

the results for the full sample of calls. The t—values for the estimated
coefficients of variables that represent the possible effect of wealth

redistritution are not significant at the .05 level. In addition, there
is no evidence in Table 4 that supports either a supply effect or an

earnings dilution effect. And like the results for the full sample,

37

the results for the sample of calls with positive conversion premiums
imply an impact on share price that is associated with the decrease in
interest expense tax shields.

38

V.

Interpretation of the Results
The principal finding of the cross—sectional analysis is a

positive and statistically significant relationship between the
announcement period adjusted stock returns and measures of the change

in interest expense tax shields. One interpretation of this effect
is that the negative stock price response reflects the expected
reduction in the firm's after—tax cash flows due to a decrease in

interest expense tax deductions. This interpretation is consistent
with the finding of a significant negative average stock price re—
action to convertible debt call announcements, but not to convertible
preferred stock call announcements.. This interpretation is troublesome,
however, because it does not identify a benefit to securityholders of
calling convertible securities, and it raises questions about whether
managers' call decisions are in stockholders' interests.
A second interpretation attributes some part of the apparent
tax effect to information about the calling firm's value that is im-

plicitly conveyed by the call decision. This interpretation presumes
that the capital market correctly believes that managers' call decisions
are in the interests of stockholders, and are in part based on informa-

tion that is not reflected in security prices. Therefore, if the
managers' assessment is that the net benefits of a call and conversion
are positive and the decision to call is based on earnings prospects
that are less favorable than those held by the capital market, a call
decision may convey unfavorable information about the value of the

firm. That is,a call announcement is associated with a negative

-

39

stock price reaction, even though the call decision is a positive net
present value decision based on managers' more complete information.

According to the second interpretation, the variable that measures
the change in interest expense tax deductions may reflect both (1) a
reduction in tax shields and (2) a reduction in firm value due to information conveyed by the call. For example, if the decision, to call is
motivated by a lowered assessment of the amount of interest expenses
that can be supported by the firm's cash earnings and the capital market
infers that motivation from the decision to call, the decrease in share
price reflects both the reduction in interest expense tax shields and

the expected decrease in cash earnings. In that case a relationship between the price response to call announcements and' a measure of the re-

duction in interest expense tax deductions is consistent with theories
that imply the optimal level of financial leverage depends on earnings
coverage of interest payments and utilization of available interest expense tax deductions.

This study does not resolve to what extent the results reflect a
corporate tax effect or an effect due to information conveyed about firm
value. However, one piece of evidence supports an information effect..

For the sample of 57 calls of convertible preferred stock, further investigation uncovers a significant relationship (at the .10 level) between the
common stock returns at the announcements of preferred stock calls and
the amount of preferred stock called, as measured by liquidation value.23
That is, even for convertible securities that provide no corporate tax
deductions, there is evidence that the stock price response to a call

announcement depends on the size of the issue called. This finding also
suggests that the larger negative stock price response to calls of con—

40

vertible debt than to calls of convertible preferred stock may reflect

the effect of a reduction in expected earnings that is reinforced by

the effect of a reduction in interest expense tax deductions. But in
the final analysis, whether the announcement period stock price responses

reflect a downward revision in expected earnings is left as an open
issue.

24

The high frequency of estimates of negative conversion premiums
just prior to the call announcement suggests that many calls are

anticipated quite accurately. Therefore, the measured stock price responses in some cases appear to reflect only a small revision in the

expected timing of a call. Furthermore, examination of the subset of
calls with estimates of positive conversion premiums (Table 4) indicates
that the magnitude of the coefficient of the tax variable depends on

the anticipation of the call announcement. Consequently, the entire
valuation effect associated with the interest expense tax shields
variable, i.e., the price response that would be observed if the call
announcement was a complete surprise, is probably larger than is sug—
gested by the results presented in Section IV.
Estimates of the conversion premium prior to the call announcement
also indicate that on average the potential wealth transfer from convertible securityholders is small relative to the market value of cornon stock.

Within two weeks preceding the call announcement, the average total dollar
conversion premium equals $591,000, or .1% of the market value of common

stock. In addition, a wealth transfer from the called securityholders is
not found to be a significant explanatory variable for the stock price re-

sponses to convertible security calls. Thus, the potential wealth transfer from convertible securityholders does not appear to be an important
motivation for call decisions.

41

The results also do not provide strong support for a stock price

impact attributable to changes in the relative priority of debt and
preferred stock that remain outstanding following a call. Since con—
vertible debt is typically a subordinated debt claim, the shifts in the

relative priority of debt claims are probably minor. Therefore, it is
not surprising that wealth transfers todebtholders are not detected.
For outstanding preferred stock, conversion of debt to common stock re-

places a higher priority claim with a lower priority claim. Thus, the
impact on the relative priority of preferred stock is clearer. Some
evidence reported in section IV (see footnotes 20 and 22) is consistent

with a positive effect on the value of preferred stock. The results for
the sample of calls with negative stock price responses (expression (17))
and •for the sample of calls with positive conversion premiums (panel A,

Table 4) also provide some support a valuation effect on common stock

due to a wealth transfer to preferred stockholders. However, direct
measurement of preferred stock price responses for a subsample of announcements of convertible debt calls does not uncover any price.changes that

are consistent with a wealth transfer to preferred stockholders.25 Thus,
the results provide some support, but not strong support, for a valuation
effect attributable to wealth redistribution to preferred stockholders.

Finally, there is no evidence of price responses to convertible
security call announcements that are attributable to an increase in the

number of shares outstanding. The announcement period adjusted stock re—
turns are not related cross—sectionally to the relative increases in
number of shares outstanding that result from the call of convertible

securities. This does not support the notion of a supply effect on share
prices. In addition, the relationship between the common stock returns

42

and the effect of the convertible security calls on earnings per share is

not statistically significant. Contrary to arguments commonly presented
by practioners, the evidence does not support a price effect due to a
change in earnings per share.

43

VI. Summary and Conclusions
This study investigates possible determinants of stock price

reactions to announcements of capital structure changes. Specifically,
the study presents estimates of the cross—sectional relationship
between risk—adjusted common stock returns at the announcements of
convertible security calls that force conversion and variables that
represent potential determinants of the valuation effects of call

announcements. The variables include proxies for: (1) the change in
interest expense tax shields, (2) the change in the relative priority

of outstanding securities, (3) the wealth transfer from the holders of called convertible securities,

and (4) the increase in the number of

shares outstanding.

Estimation of a cross—sectional regression model provides
evidence that the stock price responses to convertible security call
announcements are related to measures' of the decrease in interest

expense tax deductions. The results, however, do not resolve to what
extent this finding reflects a valuation effect due to corporate taxes
se versus a valuation effect due to information conveyed by call

announcements. Weak evidence consistent witha price effect due to wealth
redistribution from common stockh6lders to preferred stockholders is also

found. The potential stock price effects of an increase in the number
of shares outstanding are not supported by the results.
Evidence of price effects related to a measure of the change in
interest expense tax deductions is consistent with the results of a

similar study. Nasulis' (1983) cross—sectional study of both leverage
increasing and leverage decreasing intrafirm exchange offers also reports a positive statistically significant'relationship 'between announce—

44

ment period common stock rurns and a measure of the change in interest
expense tax shields. And

also interprets his results as being con-

sistent with an information effect. In view of Nasulis' fThdings, the
results presented in this study of convertible security calls appear to
reflect a general pattern in stock price responses to capital structure

changes. However, a complete explanation of the motivation for capital
structure changes requires a better understanding of managers' incentives
to make capital structure decisions that convey unfavorable information
about the value of the firm.

45
FOOTNOTES

1.

This study does not address the interesting question of why the

calling firms issued convertible securities. The only rationale
for the issuance of convertible securities that is accepted generally among financial economists is that debt or preferred stock
with conversion privileges reduces costs associated with conflicts of interest between common stockholders and more senior

securityholders (e.g., see Smith and Warner (1977)]. At this time,
however, there exists no strong empirical support for this rationale.
The results of this study of convertible security calls, therefore,

must be interpreted subject to not fully understanding the motivation
for the issuance of convertible securities.
2.

Call announcements arenot likely completely unanticipated, since calls of

convertible securities are not uncommon events. Prior to a call
announcement, a firm's stock price reflects both the probability

of a call and the expected timing of a call. Thus, the stock price
response to a call announcement reflects only the revisions n the
probability and expected timing of a call. The importance of
anticipation of call annduncements is examined in section IV.B.
3.

Smith and Warner (1977> discuss the notion that the issuance of debt
with conversion privileges mitigates the asset substitution incen-

tive engendered by the issuance of debt claims. Consequently, the
call and conversion of convertible debt may be expected to exacerbate

this incentive and reduce the value of outstanding debt. However,
Nikkelson (1981) reports a positive, but statistically insignificant,

return for straight debt during the week of a call announcement. If

46

there is any price impact on the value of outstanding debt, a shift
in the relative priority of outstanding claims appears to be the
dominant effect on the value of senior securities.
4.

A nonzero probability of the conversion value being less than the
face value of the convertible debt prior to the expected expiration
date of the conversion privileges implies VCD >

5.

cV5.

The notion of an earnings per share dilution effect on share price
is not rigorously developed in. theory. Several corporate finance
testbooks, however, present an alternative to the Modigliani and

Miller (1958) theory that implies a valuation effect of changes in

capital structure per se. Weston and Brigham (1978), for example,
present the "net income approach" to valuation of a levered firm
that assumes the required return on common stock is independent of
financial leverage and implies reductions in leverage decrease shareholders' wealth. In the spirit of this valuation approach, an earn.—
ings dilution effect.is specified under the assumption that the
firm's PIE ratio is unaffected by a call of convertible securities nd

a reduction in leverage. That is, before the call and conversion
share price is P(e)(EPS) and after the conversion share price is
p'=(c)(EPS'),

where c is a constant. Earnings per share before and

after the conversion are represented by EPS and EPS', respectively.
Thus, the potential earnings per share dilution eff-ect is specified as

(P'—P)/P = (EPS'—EPS)/EPS = LEPS/EPS.
6.

The sample of calls is derived from the sample formed for the time—

series study of security returns reported in Mikkelson (1981). Six
calls are excluded from this study because of the unavailability of

-

47

financial data or stock return data following the call announcement.
7.

Center for Research in Security Prices, the University of Chicago.

8.

In order to mitigate the bias in the OLS estimates of the market
model due to nonsynchronous trading of securities (see Scholes
and Williams (1977)), the estimate of b1 is derived from OLS

estimates of the coefficiçnts of R. regressed on R
; R
and
mt—i
mt
jt

Rt+i
9.

There are two reasons for using returns following the call announce-

ment to estimate each firm's market model. First, calls are
typically announced following a period of generally positive risk—

adjusted returns. These returns impart an upward bias to the
estimation of the parameters of the market model. Second, to some
degree, if not completely, the decrease in systematic risk of common
stock due to conversion and a reduction in financial leverage occurs

on the call announcement date. Post-announcement returns should
provide estimates of the market model coefficients that more accurately reflect the reduction in systematic risk at the amnouncement date.
10.

Several recent investigations of security returns around announcements of capital structure changes have also found a price impact

that is concentrated on days —l and 0. For example, see Dann (1980),
Masulis (1980), Korwar (1982), and,Dann and'Mikkelson (1982).
11.

Among the 107 convertible debt calls, in only 19 cases did the calling
firm have publicly traded nonconvertible debt outstanding that traded

actively enough to compute an announcement week return. Publicly
traded nonconvertible preferred stock was outstanding in only 7 cases.
12.

The purchaser of a bond pays interest accrued since the preceding
coupon payment date but receives no interest payments from the firm

48

upon conversion of the debt, Therefore, a zero arbitrage profits
condition implies that the sum of the convertible bond price
plus accrued interest is not less than the conversion value of the bond.
The adjusted bond prices are calculated under the assumption that
the holder is entitled to three months of accrued interest.
13.

Several estimates of conversion premiums are negative. This need
not reflect an arbitrage profit opportunity. It may reflect either
(1) nonsynchronous price quotes for the firm's common stock. and

convertible debt or (2) the assumption of three months accrued

interest (see fn. 11). Investigation of a number of estimates of
negative premiums and precise measurement of accrued interest indicates
that nonsynchronous prices are likely the more important reason for
the negative estimates of conversion premiums.
14.

The hypothesis that the mean ratios of market value to conversion
value are equal for the two samples is not rejected at the.lO level.

15.

The actual number of called securities converted to common stock is

not easily determined. Instead, it is assumed for the sample of calls
that a large, constant proportion of called securities are converted

rather than redeemed at the call price. Table 3 indicates that for.
calls of convertible debt, on average the price per called bond is

more than $60 greater than its face value. This suggests that on
average the conversion value exceeds the call price by approximately

$50 per bond. Thus, the incentive of a bondholder to convert is
substantial.
16.

Earnings per share (EPS_1) at the fiscal year—end preceding the call

announcement equals net income (E1) less preferred dividends
(PD1) divided by the number of outstanding shares of common stock

49

(PD1), i.e., EPS

(E1-PD1)/S1. This measure of earnings per

share is the denominator of (EEPS/EPS). Following.a convertible
debt callannouncement, earnings available to common stockholders

equal net income for the preceding fiscal year (E1) less preferred
dividends (PD1) plus the annual after—tax interest payments on the
called debt ((l_t)Ic)• Earnings per share equals this quantity
divided by the total shares outstanding following the call and

conversion (S_1+tS). Thus, the change in earnings per share
(EPS) due to the call and conversion of debt equals

EPS =

[(E_i_PD_i+(l_t)Ic)/(S_1 +AS)]

-

[(E1-PD1)/s1}.

For a call of convertible preferred stock, earnings available to
common stockholders increases by the annual preferred dividends

(PD) of the called issue. The change in earnings per share due
to a call of convertible preferred stock equals

EPS =
17.

[(E_1_PD_i±PDc)/(S_i±S)]

—

[(E1—PD1)/s1].

The estimate of the standard deviation of the two—day announcement
period, adjusted return (ciAR) equals the standard deviation of the

25 two—day risk—adjusted returns from trading days

through

Using this estimate, two tests of homoscedasticity are computed.
The first, proposed by Goldfield and Quandt (1965), involves
ranking the observations by the estimate of.the standard deviation
of two—day adjusted returns and estimating the cross—sectional
relationship separately on the 60 observations with the smallest
values of

and the 60 observations with the largest values of

The ratio of the sum of squared residuals of the two regressions

has the F—distritution. For two sets of estimates of the specification
given by (16), the F—value of the ratio of the sum of squared residuals

•

50

equals 3.47. The hypothesis of a homoscedastic error term is re—
jected at the .01 level.

The second test, presented by Glejser (1969), regresses the

absolute value of the regression residuals (eI) on the estimate
of the standard deviation of the two—day adjusted common stock return

(cY). The estimated relationship is
le! =

.006 + .703(ci)

and the t—value o.f the slope coefficient is 4.16. Again, the hypothesis of homoscedasticity is rejected at the .01 level.
18.

An alternative procedure to correct for heteroscedasticity is to

divide each of the terms of the regression by a. For reasons that
are not clear, this weighted least squares procedure induces another

source of heteroscedasticity in the error term. The residuals of
a weighted least squares regression are related significantly to the
independent variable that measures the change in interest expense

tax deductions. Thi problem is not found when only the dependent

variable is divided by AR•

19.

For the measure of the impact of a convertible debt call on outstand-

ing preferred stock, the following specifications of k() are ex-

amined: (1) [D2(PS/Vcs)], (2) [LJY5(PSIVcs)], (3) [DcPS/Vcs)2 and

(4) [LD(PS/Vcs) ].

Corresponding specifications were also examined

for the other two variables that represent the potential wealth
redistribution from common stockholders to debtholders or preferred
stockholders.
20.

For the 114 observations where AR2a<O the sum of the squared
residuals of the regression model given by (16) equals 78.7. The
sum of squared residuals equals 293.6 for the full sample of calls.

51

An F—statistic is computed to test the hypothesis that the two
samples of calls grouped by the sign of AR2a are explained by the

same cross—sectional relationship. The F—statistic equals 5.84,
which is significant at the .01 level.
21.

Regressions that correspond to the specifications presented in rows
4 through 9 in Table 3 are estimated for the subset of 114 calls

with AR

2a <0. The results show a significant coefficient for each

of the, three corporate tax variables and insignificant coefficients

for the variables that measure the relative increase in shares

outstanding and the change in earnings per share. The only departure
from the results for the full sample is the finding of a significant
negative coefficient for the variable that measures the impact of
a convertible debt call on the value of outstanding preferred stock.

This result is consistent with a wealth redistribution effect.
22.

No patterns were uncovered in the magnitudes of the estimated

conversions premiums. For example, the correlation between the
estimates of the conversion premium and the ratios of conversion
value to face value, or call value, (a.measure of how much the
conversion privileges are in the money) is found to be insignificant.
Also, no relationship is found between the conversion premiums and
the corporate tax variables.
23.

For the sample of 57 calls of convertible preferred stock, the standardized two—day announcement period stock returns were regressed on the
liquidation value of the preferred stock divided by the market value

of common shares [LV/(l+cL)V}. The following estimates were obtained
[AR2a'cAR}= -.038 + 4.133 [LV/(l+ct)V
(-.16)

C

(1.60)

R2(adj.) = .044, F =

2.55

52

24.

If managers act to maximize stockholders' wealth, a conjecture is
that calls motivated by unfavorable inside information about the

firm's value are more likely to occur when the convesion value is
closer to the call price. That is, the value of the downside protection offered by the debt component of a convertible bond is greater,

the lower is the conversion value. Thus, the expected valuation
impact of a call that conveys unfavorable information is possibly
greater at lower •conversion values. However, investigation of the
calls indicates that the stock price response to call announcements
does not depend on the level of conversion value relative to call
price.
25.

For 19 calls of convertible debt, the calling firm had a publicly
traded preferred stock issue outstanding at the time of the call

announcement. A total sample of.30 preferred stock issues was
formed that consists of 8 nonconvertible issues and 22 convertible

issues. Average daily preferred stock returns for these two samples
of preferred stock issues are examined over 21 trading days centered

on the call announcement date. For neither sample is a significant
average preferred stock return found on or nearby the date of the call
announcement.

53

REFERENCES

1.

Dann, L.Y. 1981. Common Stock Repurchases: An Analysis of Returns
to Bondholders and Stockholders. Journal of Financial Economics
9: 113—138.

2.

Dann, L. Y. and Mikkelson, W.H. 1982. Convertible Debt Issuance,
Capital Structure Change and Leverage—Related Information: Some

New Evidence, unpublished manuscript, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH.
3.

DeAngelo, H. and Masulis, R. W. 1980. Optimal Capital Structure

Under Corporate and Personal Taxation. Journal of Financial Economics
8: 3—30.
4.

Goldfield, S.M. and Quandt, R. 1965. Some Tests for Hornoscedasticity.

Journal of the American Statistical Associatiqn 60: 539—547.
5.

Glejser, H. 1969. A New Test For Heteroscedasticity. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 64: 316—323.

6.

Korwar, A. N. 1982. The Effect of New Issues of Equity: An Empirical
Investigation, unpublished manuscript, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA.

'7.

Marsh, P. 1979. Equity Rights Issues and. the Efficiency of the

UK Stock Market. Journal of Finance 34: 839—862.
8.

Masulis, R. W. 1978. The Effect, of Capital Structure Change on

Security Prices, unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL.
9.

Masulis, R. W. 1980. The Effects of Capital Structure Change on

Security Prices: A Study of Exchange Offers. Journalof Financial
Economics 8: 139—177.

10. Masulis, R. W. 1983.

The impact of Capital Structure Change on Firn

Value, Some Estimates, Journal of Finance forthcoming.

5.4

REFERENCES

11.

continued

Nikkelson, W. H. 1981. Convertible Calls and Security Returns.
Journal of Financial Economics 9: 237—264.

12. Miller, M. H. 1977. Debt and Taxes. Journal of Finance 32: 261—275.
13. Modigliani, F and Miller, N. H. 1958. The Cost of Capital,
Corporation Finance, and the Theory of Investment. American
Economic Review 48: 261—297.

14. Scholes, N. 1972. The Market of Securities: Substitution Versus
Price Pressure and the Effects of Information on Share Prices.
Journal of Business 45: 179—211.

15. Scholes, N. and Williams, J. 1977. Estimating Betas From Non—
syndronous Data. Journal of Financial Economics 5: 309—328.

16. Weston, J.F. and Brigham, E.F. 1978. Managerial Finance.
Hinsdale, IL: Dryden Press,

-

