                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               HOSPITAL INTEGRATION AND VERTICAL CONSOLIDATION:
                 AN ANALYSIS OF ACQUISITIONS IN NEW YORK STATE

                                           Robert S. Huckman

                                          Working Paper 11379
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11379


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




The views presented in this paper do not necessarily reflect the findings of the New York State Department
of Health or the New York State Cardiac Advisory Committee. I thank two anonymous referees, Malcolm
Baker, Jason Barro, Richard Bohmer, Richard Caves, David Cutler, Fritz Foley, Thomas McGuire, Joseph
Newhouse, Gary Pisano, Sarah Reber, David Scharfstein, Geoffrey Verter, and seminar participants the
NBER Summer Institute, Harvard University, Harvard Business School, University of Rochester,
Washington University-St. Louis, and Vanderbilt University for helpful comments. I also thank Rhonda
O’Brien, Casey Roark, and Gene Therriault of the New York State Department of Health for their help in
providing the data for this analysis. I acknowledge financial support from the Division of Research at
Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Robert S. Huckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hospital Integration and Vertical Consolidation: An Analysis of Acquisitions in New York State
Robert S. Huckman
NBER Working Paper No. 11379
May 2005
JEL No. I1, L2

                                            ABSTRACT

While prior studies tend to view hospital integration through the lens of horizontal consolidation,
I provide an analysis of its vertical aspects. I examine the effect of hospital acquisitions in New York
State on the distribution of market share for major cardiac procedures across providers in target
markets. I find evidence of benefits to acquirers via business stealing, with the resulting
redistribution of volume across providers having small effects, if any, on total welfare with respect
to cardiac care. The results of this analysis--along with similar assessments for other services--can
be incorporated into future studies of hospital consolidation.

Robert S. Huckman
T17 Morgan Hall
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rhuckman@hbs.edu
I.      INTRODUCTION


        Studies of industry consolidation typically assume that the specific form of

integration under consideration can be neatly categorized as either horizontal or vertical.

Nevertheless, in certain industries, it is difficult to classify integration in this manner.

The American hospital industry—which has experienced a dramatic increase in

consolidation activity over the past twenty years1—represents one such sector. For

example, consider a market in which all hospitals provide routine obstetrics, but only a

few provide complex cardiac surgery. The consolidation of any two hospitals in this

market would, by definition, reduce the number of firms providing obstetrics, but may

leave the number of firms providing cardiac surgery unchanged. Referral patterns for

cardiac surgery may change and could either increase or decrease measures of market

concentration. Whether a consolidation in this market should be viewed as horizontal or

vertical thus depends upon the service considered.

        Most previous studies of hospital integration have relied on the horizontal model,2

suggesting that consolidation may, in theory, affect social welfare via two countervailing

channels: increased market power and greater efficiency. An attractive feature of the

horizontal model is that it allows one readily to infer the effect of a merger on price and

cost. Horizontal consolidation, by definition, increases market concentration, so one can


        1
           See Gaynor and Haas-Wilson (1999) for an overview of recent consolidation activity in the
health care industry. Between 1980 and 1993, the annual number of hospital consolidations in the United
States remained relatively stable at between 10 and 30 transactions per year (American Hospital
Association, 1992; Modern Healthcare, 1994-2000). The number of transactions, however, jumped to 100
in 1994 and reached a peak of 198 in 1998 before declining to 142 in 1999 (Modern Healthcare, 1994-
2000).
         2
           Melnick et al. (1992), Dranove and Ludwick (1999), and Keeler, Melnick, and Zwanziger (1999)
provide support for the view that increased market concentration allows hospitals to increase their prices.
Noether (1988) finds that both price and quality competition are greater in less concentrated markets,



                                                    1
estimate the impact of consolidation simply by examining the effect of increases in

market concentration—typically measured by the Hirschman-Herfindahl Index (HHI)3—

on key welfare determinants such as price and cost. This approach is common in many

studies of hospital competition (e.g., Noether, 1988; Melnick et al., 1992; Dranove and

Ludwick, 1999; Keeler, Melnick, and Zwanziger, 1999; Kessler and McClellan, 2002).

        The pure horizontal model, however, is not well equipped to explain the impact of

hospital consolidation on markets for more complex services (e.g., cardiac surgery) that

are often provided by only one of the two parties to a given transaction. For these

services, hospital consolidation joins complements, rather than substitutes, in production,

with an ambiguous impact on market concentration. Further, to the extent that hospitals

providing these complex services have substantially differentiated levels of quality and

cost, the transfer of cases across a fixed number of firms could have implications for

welfare. For example, shifts in volume from low-quality to high-quality providers might

improve overall welfare regardless of whether those shifts increase or decrease market

concentration.

        In this paper, I supplement existing horizontal studies by considering what I will

refer to as the vertical aspects of hospital integration. I focus on the impact of

consolidation on the provision of two complex cardiac procedures—coronary artery

bypass graft (CABG) surgery and percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty

(PTCA). Cardiac procedures are the subject of this study for several reasons. First, they

represent a profitable and sizeable source of revenue for hospitals (Appleby, 2002;


though the impact of concentration on observed prices is not significant. Lynk (1995) suggests that
consolidations may enable hospitals to lower costs by reducing the impact of variability in demand.




                                                     2
Kowalczyk, 2003). Second, they require substantial fixed investments (New York State

Department of Health, 2004) in equipment and dedicated staff, creating the potential for

consolidation to improve efficiency by exploiting economies of scale in production.

Third, because a significant portion of patients receiving CABG and PTCA die in the

hospital, the variation in average mortality among hospitals is large enough to make it a

meaningful quality measure. I consider how acquisition events among hospitals in New

York State between 1992 and 19994 affected the distribution of cardiac patients across

firms and the average cost and quality of care.

         A small number of studies have considered the impact of consolidation on explicit

quality in health care settings (e.g., Baker and Brown, 1999; Ho and Hamilton, 2000;

Kessler and McClellan, 2000).5 Like prior studies that have examined the quality of

cardiac care, this paper uses risk-adjusted patient mortality as the relevant measure of

quality. Detailed clinical data about the pre-procedure health of every patient undergoing

CABG or PTCA in New York over several years allows for more complete risk-

adjustment than has been used in most previous studies.


         3
            The HHI for a given market is calculated as the sum of the squared market shares across all firms
serving a given market. Kessler and McClellan (2000) outline the reasons why the use of simple HHI
measures may lead to biased estimates of the effects of competition in hospital markets.
          4
            This number represents a lower bound for the total number of consolidations that occurred in
New York between 1992 and 1999. All transactions occurring after 1993 were verified using the annual
survey of hospital merger activity conducted by Modern Healthcare. For 1992 and 1993, consolidations
were identified on the basis of public news reports identified by searches of the LEXIS database.
          5
            Ho and Hamilton (2000) suggest that, given the fixed or quasi-fixed nature of hospital prices for
many services, hospitals could theoretically use lower quality as a means of lowering costs and increasing
profits following consolidation. Their empirical analysis finds that consolidations among California
hospitals in the early 1990s were associated with increased readmission rates for heart attack patients and
higher rates of early discharge for newborns. Nonetheless, they find no significant effects on mortality for
heart attack or stroke patients. Kessler and McClellan (2000) examine the impact of hospital competition
on the quality and cost of heart attack patients. They find that, before 1991, competition was associated
with higher costs and higher quality of care. In the early 1990s, however, competition was associated with
unambiguous welfare effects (i.e., lower costs and higher quality). Baker and Brown (1999) find that
increased HMO penetration leads to consolidation among mammography providers. They also find that
increased HMO activity is associated with lower costs and longer waiting times for mammography
appointments, but not with reductions in health outcomes.


                                                     3
        Acquisitions that shift procedure volume from non-acquirers to acquirers are a

form of “business stealing" (Mankiw and Whinston, 1986). I find evidence of such

activity with respect to cardiac care. In particular, defining the “acquirer” as the hospital

offering complex cardiac services, I find that consolidations are correlated with an

increase in the acquirer's share of cardiac procedures originating from the primary market

of the target. I consider the welfare implications of this business stealing by

decomposing its effect on average quality and cost into two components: simple

redistribution and volume-related changes in performance. Simple redistribution captures

the impact of moving volume between hospitals with different levels of hospital-specific

quality or cost. Volume-outcome effects may occur to the extent that consolidations

increase volumes at some hospitals and decrease them at others. Such volume changes

may affect the average quality and cost of care at both acquiring hospitals that gain

volume and competing facilities that lose it. Though results differ somewhat for CABG

and PTCA, hospital consolidation appears to have had little impact on average cost and

quality of major cardiac procedures in New York.



II.     THE POTENTIAL EFFECTS OF HOSPITAL CONSOLIDATION



Private Incentives for Business Stealing and Increased Volume

        One can imagine several reasons for the pursuit of acquisitions. These include

increased volume or market share, higher prices, 6 and synergies unrelated to quantity.7

The first of these is the focus of this analysis.


        6
           One possible effect of hospital consolidation is an increase in price or price-cost margins
resulting from greater market concentration (Melnick et al., 1992; Dranove and Shanley, 1995; Keeler,


                                                    4
         A 2003 news article on innovations in cardiac care noted, “For three decades,

open heart surgery has been the most profitable service at many hospitals” (Kowalczyk,

2003). It continues by noting that average margins for CABG procedures have

traditionally exceeded 40%. The lucrative nature of cardiac procedures has made it

attractive for hospitals to attempt to steal market share from competitors. Barro and

Cutler (2000) speculate that large “downtown” hospitals may buy small “suburban”

hospitals to increase the share of patients traveling from the suburbs to the downtown

facility.

         Market transactions are an alternative to vertical integration to increase sales. In

health care, however, such market transactions are labeled “kickbacks” and are subject to

legal and professional sanction. For example, it is fraudulent for hospitals to sign

contracts with independent physicians that are construed as involving the “purchase” of

patient referrals. Such contracts are viewed as creating potential conflicts of interest for

physicians who are expected to serve as agents for their patients. Nevertheless, hospitals

are typically allowed to employ physicians directly.


Melnick, and Zwanziger, 1999). Unfortunately, New York collects data at the patient level only on gross
charges, not on actual prices paid. As a result, this study is not able to consider the effects of market
concentration on price. Given the unique regulatory environment in New York during much of the sample
period, however, one could argue that these effects were likely small. Until January 1997, hospital rates for
inpatients with commercial (i.e., non-HMO and non-government) insurance were administered by a
statewide pricing formula. In addition, Medicare inpatient rates were set by the federal government under
the Prospective Payment System (PPS) adopted in 1983. As a result of the New York and federal
regulations, nearly 85% of the inpatient admissions involving CABG or PTCA in New York during 1996
were covered under some form of price regulation. This regulatory structure should reduce concerns about
price-related welfare effects resulting from hospital consolidation, especially in the first half of the sample.
         7
           For example, acquisitions may increase the degree of formal or informal communication between
physicians in the target market and those practicing at acquiring hospital. In addition, consolidation allows
each hospital to benefit from the administrative skills (e.g., managerial expertise) found at the other facility.
Finally, many target hospitals—which are noticeably smaller than acquirers along several dimensions
(Table 2)—may face financing constraints that reduce their ability to invest in new clinical services. By
linking small targets with larger acquirers—who likely have higher internal cash flows and fewer
borrowing constraints—acquisitions may serve to decrease the financing costs for targets. The synergies
described above, however, are not easily captured by the administrative and financial data available at the




                                                       5
         The corporate strategy literature (Wernerfelt, 1984; Dierickx and Cool, 1989;

Peteraf, 1993; Capron, 1999) notes that firms integrate to compensate for incomplete

markets for resources, such as brand names, management expertise, or referrals. In the

case of hospital integration, both acquirers and targets may hold critical resources for

which markets are incomplete. Through integration, the acquirer might gain access to the

target’s resource of a close attachment to local patients and physicians; the target might

gain access to specialized technology, the quality reputation of the acquirer, and

potentially valuable contracts with managed care payors.



Welfare Implications of Business Stealing

         Acquisitions can change the average quality and cost of care. With respect to

either quality or cost, these effects can be decomposed into two parts. First, business

stealing results in the movement of patients between hospitals with different levels of

underlying quality or cost. For example, patients may move from hospitals that have

highly-skilled cardiac surgeons to those that have less-skilled surgeons. I refer to this

impact of mergers as "simple redistribution".

         Changes in volume at individual hospitals also can affect average quality and

cost, creating a second channel through which acquisition-related business stealing can

impact welfare. Previous studies have identified a negative relationship between annual

procedure volume—at either the hospital or physician level—and mortality rates for




hospital level. As a result, I am unable to provide an empirical test of this theoretical motivation for
acquisition.


                                                       6
CABG and PTCA patients.8 Similar effects may also be present with respect to the

average cost of care. Moving volume from one hospital to another may thus improve

performance at the expanding hospital while decreasing it at the shrinking facility.



III.    CARDIAC PROCEDURES


A Brief Summary of Cardiac Procedures

        The path for a typical cardiac patient through the medical system begins at a

hospital or physician’s office with a condition that may be either emergent, such as an

acute myocardial infarction, or chronic, such as ischemic heart disease. The physician

decides whether to prescribe a diagnostic cardiac catheterization—which is performed at

a hospital on either an inpatient or outpatient basis—to look for arterial blockage. As an

alternative to catheterization, the physician may prescribe medical treatment of the

patient’s condition. For those patients undergoing catheterization, the physician

recommends one of three broad options—no further surgical treatment, CABG, or PTCA.

        The CABG and PTCA options—together referred to as revascularizations—

involve additional procedures for the patient. CABG is an invasive surgical procedure

that involves taking a section of artery, typically from the patient’s leg, and grafting it to

create a bypass of the blockage in the coronary artery. It requires the opening of the

patient’s chest and relies on a heart-lung bypass machine to perform the functions of the

heart during the grafting process. In comparison, PTCA involves the threading of a

balloon device to the point of blockage. The balloon is inflated to expand the artery and


        8
           Luft, Bunker, and Enthoven (1979), Showstack et al. (1987) and Hannan et al. (1991) consider
these relationships for CABG, while Hannan et al. (1997) and Ho (2000) examine them with respect to
PTCA.


                                                    7
restore blood flow. PTCA, therefore, is less traumatic than CABG, as PTCA patients

avoid the substantial chest incision and arterial reconstruction that are integral parts of the

CABG procedure. PTCA patients, however, run the risk of restenosis, or the return of

blockage to the artery.9



The Economics of Cardiac Procedures

         Cardiac procedures have high fixed costs in the form of specialized equipment

and dedicated staff. Catheterizations and PTCAs are performed in dedicated

catheterization laboratories. CABG procedures are performed in operating rooms that—

while sometimes available for other procedures—typically are dedicated to cardiac

surgery. Between 1996 and 2000, the State of New York received 51 applications from

hospitals that intended to build or renovate their catheterization laboratories.10 The

average cost for these projects was $2.68 million with a standard deviation of $1.65

million (New York State Department of Health, 2004). During the same period, the state

received seven applications from hospitals that aimed to initiate cardiac surgery

programs.11 The mean cost of these programs was $14.05 million with a standard

deviation of $20.7 million. These figures do not include the cost of nurses and

technologists who are typically dedicated to a catheterization lab or a cardiac surgery

program. When combined with limitations on hospital investment imposed by many

states, these high fixed and quasi-fixed costs enable only a portion of hospitals to offer

CABG and PTCA.

         9
           In recent years, the problem of restenosis for PTCA patients has decreased due to the
development of stents, which are small metal inserts that prop open the artery after angioplasty.
         10
            To keep projects comparable, this group excludes any applications that included services other
than cardiac catheterization.



                                                     8
         Cardiac procedures are profitable for hospitals in New York, both on average and

at the margin. The average Medicare reimbursement for an admission involving CABG

in New York was approximately $33,700 in 1997; the analogous figure for PTCA was

roughly $15,200 (Table 1).12 The average cost per Medicare admission in 1997 was

$31,700 for CABG and $13,100 for PTCA. These figures imply an average profit of

$2,000 (6%) for CABG and $2,100 (14%) for PTCA. Though exact revenue data are not

available for non-Medicare patients, I use the actual distribution of patients across the

various payor types (i.e., Medicare, commercial, and Medicaid or HMO) in 1997 and

estimates of the average reimbursement rates for non-Medicare providers to arrive at an

average profit per case across all payer types in 1997. These figures are $3,900 for

CABG (Column 2) and $2,700 for PTCA (Column 3).13 Multiplying these profit-per-

case figures by the number of patients per hospital receiving CABG and PTCA,

respectively, illustrates that the average hospital performing CABG and PTCA in New

York in 1997 generated net revenues of $33.3 million (9.6% of total hospital net revenue)

and operating profit of $4.7 million (16% of total hospital net income) solely from

patients receiving either CABG or PTCA.

         Due to the large fixed costs associated with CABG and PTCA, the marginal

profitability of these procedures substantially exceeds their average profitability. Later, I

         11
            This figure and that for catheterization represent the number of applications submitted, not the
number approved by the state.
         12
            The revenue-per-admission figures are based on the fact that New York hospitals received and
average of $6,164 per case-mix adjusted Medicare case in 1997. The average case-mix index across all
Medicare CABG patients in New York was 5.47 in 1997, resulting in the estimated revenue figure of
$33,700 (≈$6,164 x 5.47) per case. For PTCA, the average case-mix index was 2.47. To correct for the
small number of cases with unrealistically low reported charges, these average case mix figures exclude
CABG cases with reported charges of less than $5,000 (roughly 1.2% of CABG cases) and PTCA cases
with reported charges of less than $2,500 (roughly 3.4% of PTCA cases).
         13
            A national estimate, reported in 2002, for the average profit for a CABG procedure was $6,800
per case (Appleby, 2002). This figure differs from that in this study due to the fact that it is based on more
recent data from a wider geography than just New York State.


                                                      9
estimate the marginal cost for an admission involving CABG in 1997 to be

approximately $26,700, implying a marginal profit of $6,200. For PTCA, the estimated

marginal cost was $9,800 and marginal profit was $4,900.14 Most hospitals thus are in a

position of seeking to expand their volume of cardiac procedures.



IV.     ACQUISITIONS IN NEW YORK STATE, 1992-1999



Definitions

        For the purposes of this study, a “consolidation” is defined as any transaction that

involves delegating the key decision-making rights of two or more hospitals to a single

board. The universe of consolidations thus includes full asset mergers, holding

companies involving substantially all of the operations of multiple hospitals, and any

other “active parent” relationships. This definition of consolidation excludes less-formal

relationships such as joint marketing agreements for particular services (e.g., cardiac

care, oncology) and academic affiliations. Consolidations can be classified further as

either “acquisitions” or “mergers” depending on the characteristics of the hospitals

involved. An acquisition joins two or more parties that are asymmetric with respect to

size or services offered. Alternatively, mergers bring together parties that are roughly

similar with respect to size and services.

        This paper focuses on acquisitions and defines acquirers and targets by their

cardiac service offerings. Specifically, an acquirer is a hospital that offers CABG and


        14
          The marginal cost estimates are based on the estimated effect of ln[annual CABG (PTCA)
admissions] for hospital h on average cost per CABG (PTCA) admission at hospital h (see Equation (3)).
The marginal cost estimates are calculated by dividing the growth in total costs due to a 1% increase in
volume by the absolute magnitude of the 1% volume increment.


                                                    10
PTCA and was involved in an acquisition between 1992 and 1999.15 A target is a

hospital that was involved in an acquisition between 1992 and 1999 and did not offer

CABG or PTCA prior to consolidation. Acquisitions integrate hospitals that possess

fundamentally different capabilities with respect to cardiac procedures and, as a result, do

not necessarily result in a reduction in the number of firms providing these services in a

given market. In fact, during the time period studied, none of the CABG or PTCA

programs in New York State were closed.16

           Based on the definitions above, over 60% of the consolidations in New York

between 1992 and 1999—28 out of 4517—were acquisitions (Figure 1). In six of the 17

mergers, both hospitals offered CABG and PTCA, and, in the remaining 11, none of the

parties offered CABG or PTCA prior to merger. These two types of mergers are referred

to as “big-big” and “small-small”, respectively, in Figure 1.



Universe of Transactions

           The universe of transactions for this study includes the 28 acquisitions involving

New York hospitals between 1992 and 1999. These 28 transactions corresponded to the

acquisition of 35 target hospitals by 16 acquirers. The year of a given transaction is

defined as the one in which it legally closed. In cases where the date of closure is not




           15
                This range of dates reflects the fact that minimal acquisition activity occurred in New York prior
to 1992.
           16
             The CABG program at one facility in a multi-hospital system was moved to a different hospital
in that system in 1993. Nonetheless, the number of statewide CABG programs was not affected by this
transfer.
          17
             This number represents a lower bound for the total number of consolidations that occurred in
New York between 1992 and 1999. All transactions occurring after 1993 were verified using the annual
survey of hospital merger activity conducted by Modern Healthcare. For 1992 and 1993, consolidations
were identified on the basis of public news reports identified by searches of the LEXIS database.


                                                          11
available, the year in which both hospital boards approved the consolidation is used as

the year of the transaction.18

        Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for 1992—the first year of discharge data

used in this study—for the hospitals in the sample of acquisitions. On average, acquirers

were more than twice as large as targets in terms of inpatient beds and hospital days and

at least three times as large in terms of net revenue and operating expenses. With respect

to cardiac procedures, the average acquirer performed nearly 650 CABG and 470 PTCA

procedures in 1992.



Primary Hospital Markets

        Defining hospital markets is an issue that has received significant attention in the

literature (see Gresenz, Rogowski, and Escarce (2004) for a recent discussion). Some

studies use fixed radii around a hospital (e.g., Shen, 2003), while others have defined

markets based on variable radii around a hospital to capture a fixed percentage of its

admissions (e.g., Phibbs and Robinson, 1993). Defining markets based on observed

admissions may be subject to concerns of endogeneity with respect to variables of

interest, such as prices, quality, or market volume (Kessler and McClellan, 2000).

        I use a variant of the variable-radii approach to define the primary markets of each

target hospital in my sample. The primary market of a target includes any zip codes that

accounted for at least five percent of a hospital’s inpatient admissions in the base year of



        18
             The dates of transactions were determined using the following sources: searches of the
LEXIS/NEXIS database using the names of potential acquirers; the annual survey of hospital consolidation
activity in the United States conducted by Modern Healthcare for each year after and including 1994; the
Greater New York Hospital Association’s annual surveys of health care systems in New York for each year
after and including 1993; and author’s correspondence with hospital executives.


                                                  12
the study (i.e., 1992).19 I use this simple approach to market definition because I am

identifying the impact of mergers based on longitudinal analysis of an acquirer’s market

share within a given target market. The goal of my analysis is to identify an area that

represents the “historic” market for a target hospital and ask how the share of cardiac

cases traveling to the acquirer from that market changes after an acquisition.



V.       DATA



         A critical reason for using New York as the setting for this study is the high

quality of data—both administrative and clinical—available for cardiac patients. The

Statewide Planning and Research Cooperative System (SPARCS) database provides

discharge-level records on every inpatient hospital case in the state.20 This database

includes detailed information about the patient (e.g., age, race, sex, insurance status, zip

code of residence), providers (e.g., hospital and physician identifiers), diagnoses, and

procedures performed. In 2000, this database included over 2.3 million discharges, the

smallest total for any of the nine years—1992 through 2000—analyzed in this study.

         The information from SPARCS is supplemented by discharge-level data for

CABG patients from New York's Cardiac Surgery Reporting System (CSRS) and for

PTCA patients from the state's Coronary Angioplasty Reporting System (CARS). These

data provide additional clinical detail on each patient undergoing revascularization

         19
            To provide for a slightly larger market area, I repeat the base regressions using markets that
include any zip code that accounted for at least three percent of a hospital’s inpatient admissions in 1992.
The results on share redistribution reported later in the paper are robust to this change in market definition.
         20
            The SPARCS data were obtained following approval from the Data Protection Review Board of
the New York State Department of Health. For the multivariate analysis later in the paper, I exclude those
records that did not receive a Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) code. In 1992, 84,581 admissions (3.2% of




                                                      13
between 1991 and 1996 for CABG and 1993 and 1995 for PTCA. The annual number of

CABG procedures in the CSRS data ranges from a low of 14,944 in 1991 to a high of

20,078 in 1996;21 for PTCA, these figures vary from 16,804 in 1993 to 21,707 in 1995.

        The cost regressions and welfare calculations appearing later in this paper draw

upon data from Medicare Prospective Payment System (PPS) cost reports. These data

provide cost-to-charge ratios for each hospital performing CABG or PTCA in New York

for each year between 1992 and 1998.



VI.     RESULTS



Business Stealing

        To test for business stealing, I determine whether acquisitions are associated with

changes in the shares of acquirers serving the primary markets of target hospitals. The

identification of acquisition-related changes in market share comes from the staggered

timing of individual transactions. I estimate the following specification using data from

all zip codes that are within the primary market of at least one target hospital:



        ACQ_SHAREit = αi + γ3t + δkDit + βZit + εit                                                 (1)



ACQ_SHAREit represents the market share of the relevant acquirer for zip code i in year t.

If zip code i is in the primary market of multiple target hospitals, ACQ_SHAREit is the


total) did not have a DRG; in 1993, this figure was 117,135 (4.6%). After 1993, all records in the SPARCS
data received a DRG.




                                                   14
combined share of all acquirers for that zip code.22 The above specification is estimated

separately for CABG and PTCA.

         The key independent variables are included in Dit, the vector of indicators for

“year relative to acquisition.” Each of the individual indicators, referred to as d itk , takes

a value of one if zip code i is in the primary market of a target hospital that: 1) was

acquired between 1992 and 1999 and 2) is k years away from the date of acquisition in

year t.23 Because I am interested in identifying changes in primary markets after

consolidation, I test whether each d itk coefficient is significantly different from that for

the year of acquisition, d it0 , or the year immediately preceding acquisition, d it−1 .24 The

pre-transaction dummy variables serve to distinguish acquisition-related changes from

the simple continuation of existing trends that may be unrelated to consolidation.

         Zip-code fixed effects, αi, are included to control for time-invariant characteristics

of given areas that might affect the market share of specific providers. The vector Zit

includes additional demographic controls. These include Medicaid, HMO, and female

patients, respectively, as a percentage of patients receiving a particular cardiac procedure

in a given zip code. These variables control for the possibility that certain providers may

be more likely to target particular socioeconomic, payor, or gender categories. In

addition, Zit includes the percentage of patients from a given zip code in each of several

         21
             The CSRS data includes information only for “isolated” CABG procedures. A CABG is
“isolated” when it occurs on a patient who does not receive any other major heart surgery (e.g., valve or
other heart procedures) during the same admission (New York State Department of Health, 1998).
          22
             Seventy-nine percent of the zip codes that are in the primary market of at least one target are in
the primary market of only one target, 20% are in the primary market of two targets, and 1% are in the
primary market of three targets.
          23
             The index k is negative for years prior to merger and assumes the following values: <-4, -3,-2,-
1, 0, 1, 2, 3, and >4.




                                                      15
age categories25. These categories allow for the possibility of a non-linear relationship

between patient age and the market shares of particular types of hospitals.

         Fixed effects for calendar time, γ3t, are included to control for changes in the

average share of acquirers over time. For example, if, on average, acquirers increased

their quality more than other hospitals during the period studied, one would not be

surprised to see their shares growing in target areas over time even in the absence of

acquisitions. Including single-year fixed effects concurrently with fixed effects for zip

code and year-relative-to-acquisition, however, creates problems with respect to

identification. In fact, the identification in such a model would come only from those zip

codes that are in the primary market of more than one hospital and the “collection

points”—four or more years before or after acquisition—among the year-relative-to-

acquisition indicators. As an alternative to fixed effects for each year, I use indicators for

three-year periods—1992 to 1994, 1995 to 1997, and 1998 to 2000—to capture the

impact of calendar time on the share to acquirers.

         Table 3 shows that acquisitions increase the CABG and PTCA market shares of

acquiring hospitals in primary markets of their targets. Column 1 illustrates that the

CABG share to acquirers increases by a total of 5.0 percentage points from Year 0 to

Year 3. The magnitude of this increase—which is calculated by subtracting the value of

the Year 0 coefficient from the Year 3 coefficient [0.027-(-0.023)]—is 18% of the

weighted average share to acquirers prior to acquisition (27.6%) and is significant at the



         24
             Comparisons with both the year of acquisition and the year before acquisition are used because
the official merger date is measured by the year in which the transaction closes. Changes in market share,
however, may begin after the deal is announced but before it closes.
          25
             The age categories include: less than 50, 50-59, 60-64, 65-74, 75-84, and greater than or equal
to 85.


                                                     16
1% level.26 The share increase for four or more years after acquisition is similar in

magnitude at 4.8 percentage points and is significant at the 5% level. Though not

significant at conventional levels, the share gains for the first and second years following

acquisition do suggest an increasing trend. The results for PTCA (Column 2) are similar

to those for CABG and suggest an increase of 6.0 percentage points (24% relative to the

weighted average share in the sample) by Year 3 and 6.3 percentage points for Year 4

and beyond.27 Figure 2 presents these results graphically, normalizing acquirer share to

zero in Year 0.

         As mentioned above, for many acquisitions, I was only able to confirm the year in

which the transaction was completed rather than the year in which it was announced.

Nevertheless, it is possible that referral patterns may begin to change after a merger is

announced but before it closes. I thus test the significance of share changes relative to

Year -1 rather than Year 0. Measuring changes in this manner for CABG suggest slightly

larger and statistically significant changes for Year 3 and Year 4 and beyond. In

addition, it shows that the change by Year 2 is also significant at the 5% level. For

PTCA, the changes for Year 3 and beyond are slightly smaller in magnitude, though still

significant at conventional levels.

         A few features of these results merit particular attention. First, despite the

inclusion of zip-code-level fixed effects, the Durbin-Watson statistics for the regressions

in Table 3 suggest that some correction for correlation in the error terms may be required.

         26
            This weighted-average share is calculated using all zip-year observations prior to the year of the
acquisition affecting a given zip code. In cases where a zip code is in the primary market of two or more
hospitals, this figure is calculated based on the date of the first acquisition affecting that area.
         27
            The dependent variable in the basic specification is limited to values between zero and one. To
address the impact of this restriction, I re-estimate the regressions using the logistic transformation of the
acquirer’s market share in a given zip code. That is, the dependent variable in these regressions becomes




                                                      17
To address this issue, the standard errors in all models are clustered by target market to

address any possible lack of independence in the error terms (i.e., remaining after the zip-

code fixed effects) for zip codes within the same target market.28

        A second potential critique of these results is that the occurrence of acquisitions

may be endogenous. For example, acquirers may use these transactions to solidify their

presence in markets where they are already gaining share. In such a case, a post-

acquisition increase in share in a target market may simply represent the continuation of

pre-acquisition trend. Nevertheless, the coefficients on the pre-acquisition indicators

reveal that there is no significant pre-acquisition trend in market share and, therefore,

reduce concerns about the effects of such endogeneity.

        A third potential critique of these results is that they may be influenced by the

unbalanced panel of observations. This might be the case if certain acquisitions are

included in the sample for their post-acquisition years, but are not included in their pre-

acquisition years and vice-versa. For example, because the data range from 1992 to

2000, a transaction that occurred in 1993 will not have observations for two, three, and

four or more years prior to acquisition. Similarly, a transaction occurring in 1998 will

not have observations for three or four or more years after acquisition. While the data

include at least one year of post-acquisition observations for 28 transactions and two




LTSHAREit=ln(ACQ_SHAREit/(1-ACQ_SHAREit)). The estimates are qualitatively similar to those in the
basic specification.
         28
            I also estimate these models with the assumption of an AR(1) error structure within zip codes
and heteroskedasticity across zip codes. The results of this AR(1) estimation are qualitatively similar to
those in Table 4, though there is some evidence of a decline in market share to acquirers prior to
acquisition. The AR(1) model, however, does not account for potential correlation across zip codes within
a given target market, as is the case with the clustered standard errors reported in Table 3. The clustered
models, while not efficient, are robust to any type of within-group correlation. Given the support for the
use of clustering over parametric assumptions in similar situations (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan,
2004), I use the results with standard errors clustered by target area for this analysis.


                                                    18
years for 23, there are three (four-plus) years of observations for only 19 (16)

acquisitions.

       To address the impact of the unbalanced panel, I re-estimate (1) on a sample that

includes only those zip codes with data in each period from Year –2 to Year 2. The

results of these regressions appear in Columns 1 (CABG) and 3 (PTCA) of Table 4. To

ensure balance, these regressions include only those zip codes that were in the primary

market of a single acquisition between 1992 and 1999. The resulting panels include

observations from roughly 18% of the zip codes in the unbalanced CABG (PTCA)

regression in Table 3.

       The regressions provide strong support for the hypothesis of acquisition-related

increases in the average share of procedures going to acquirers. Relative to Year 0,

CABG share increases by roughly 7.4 percentage points (46% relative to the 16.1%

weighted average share for the balanced sample prior to acquisition) by Year 2 (Column

1). Similarly, PTCA share rises by 13.9 percentage points (Column 3). As in the

unbalanced panel, there is no significant pre-acquisition trend in share to acquirers. The

results in Columns 2 and 4 extend the balanced panel to three years following acquisition

and illustrate that the increase in market share continues beyond Year 2. The three-year

increase for CABG (PTCA) is greater than 8.7 (19.2) percentage points. The dashed

lines in Figure 2 show these results graphically.

       The balanced panels that extend to three years after acquisition show some

evidence of share increases prior to the year of acquisition, particularly for PTCA.

Nevertheless, the growth in share from Year 0 to Year 2 is over twice the magnitude of




                                             19
the growth from Year -2 to Year 0. As noted above all of the balanced-panel results must

be qualified by the restricted samples on which they are estimated.



VII.   IMPLICATIONS FOR QUALITY AND COST



       I next consider the effect of acquisitions on the quality and cost of care. A

common measure of the quality of CABG and PTCA procedures is the risk-adjusted

mortality rate (RAMR). Previous studies have used administrative covariates, such as

age, race, gender, and the number of comorbidities as the basis for the risk-adjustment of

outcomes (Ho and Hamilton, 2000). New York’s CSRS and CARS data provide

additional clinical covariates for each patient. This information, such as the patient’s

ejection fraction and whether he or she has a history of diabetes or myocardial infarction,

allows for better risk-adjustment. New York State uses this CABG and PTCA data to

create risk-adjusted mortality rankings for individual physicians and hospitals in the

entire state. These rankings have been released in annual public reports (e.g., New York

State Department of Health, 1998) each year since 1993 (for CABG) and 1995 (for

PTCA).

       To determine the effect of acquisitions on total mortality, I estimate the following

specification:



         MORTiht = δh + γt + βd ln( xh ,t −1 ) + φM iht + εiht               (2)




                                                   20
MORTiht is an indicator that assumes a value of one if patient i died during his or her stay

in hospital h following a procedure in year t. xh,t-1 is the volume of relevant procedures—

either CABG or PTCA—performed at hospital h in year t. I use the lagged value of

annual volume to reduce the impact of possible endogeneity associated with using

volume in the current year. The semi-logarithmic form chosen for (2) is common in the

volume-outcome literature (Luft, Hunt, and Maerki, 1987; Farley and Ozminkowski,

1992).29 δh is a vector of hospital fixed effects, γt is a vector of fixed effects for year, and

Miht is a vector of demographic and clinical controls for each patient. I estimate (2)

separately for CABG and PTCA. A list of the controls included in each equation appears

in the Appendix.30

         A specification analogous to (2) is used to estimate the risk-adjusted cost of

CABG and PTCA cases. The form of this equation is:



         COSTiht = µ h + γt + β c ln( x h ,t −1 ) + φRiht + ε iht                                     (3)



Similar to (2), the above equation includes fixed effects for hospital (µh) and year (γt) as

well as a vector, Riht, which contains both a linear and quadratic control for patient age.

COSTiht represents the estimated cost of patient i’s entire admission, regardless of

whether that patient received procedures other than CABG or PTCA. This variable is

         29
             To test the fit of the semi-logarithmic form for the mortality regression, I re-estiamted this
equation using: 1) only a linear volume term and 2) linear and quadratic volume terms. The adjusted R2
were identical to three digits in all three specifications. Similar results were obtained for various forms of
the PTCA mortality model. Given the use of the semi-logarithmic form in prior studies—as well as the
belief that volume-outcome effects taper at higher volumes—I rely on the semi-logarithmic sepcficiation
for this analysis.
          30
             Because length of stay may be an endogenous determinant of mortality, it is not included in the
regressions presented in this paper. Nevertheless, including length of stay does not have a material effect
on either the coefficient on lagged volume or the relative values of the hospital-specific intercepts.


                                                      21
estimated because New York provides data only for gross charges—not actual cost or

prices paid—at the level of the individual patient. To estimate the cost per patient

admission, I calculate the cost-to-charge ratio for each hospital-year using data from the

Medicare PPS Cost Reports. For a given hospital, the cost-to-charge ratio is total

operating expense divided by gross patient revenues. The average value of this ratio

across the nine acquirers in the sample—77.1%—is roughly similar to the average value

of 72.9% for targets (Table 2).

         This single ratio does not capture the heterogeneity in cost-to-charge ratios across

various clinical departments within a given hospital (e.g., the cost-to-charge ratios for

cardiac care may be quite different from those for general medical care). To the extent

that each hospital’s composition of low-margin and high-margin services differs, the use

of a single cost-to-charge ratio for each facility may hinder comparison of cardiac costs

across facilities. Limiting this analysis only to hospitals that provide CABG and PTCA

likely provides greater homogeneity in case mix across sample hospitals than that found

in the entire cross section of New York facilities. Nevertheless, the remaining

heterogeneity across sample hospitals cannot be easily measured or controlled for using

the data available for this study.

         For several reasons, the mortality and cost regressions are run on patient

populations that overlap significantly, but are not identical. First, the CSRS and CARS

data are not available for the same years as the SPARCS data.31 In addition, a small


         31
            The CABG mortality results are based on CSRS data for all cases from 1992 to 1996 (with 1991
used to generate lagged volumes) and the PTCA regressions include data for 1994 and 1995 (with 1993
data used to generate lagged volumes). These were the only years of data available as of the date this study
was initiated. The cost regressions—which rely on the patient-level charge information found in SPARCS
but not in the CSRS and CARS database—include CABG and PTCA patients for the six-year period from
1993 to 1998 (with 1992 used to generate lagged volumes). Given differences in encryption
methodologies, the CSRS, CARS, and SPARCS data could not be linked for this study, so clinical


                                                    22
percentage of cases in the SPARCS data have unrealistically low reported charges; I

exclude CABG cases with reported charges of less than $5,000 (roughly 1.2% of CABG

cases) and PTCA cases with reported charges of less than $2,500 (roughly 3.4% of PTCA

cases) from the cost regressions. These cases may or may not be included in the CSRS

and CARS data, and, hence, in the mortality regressions.

         Table 5 reports the volume-outcome effects with respect to both mortality and

cost. For CABG, a 10% increase in a hospital’s lagged CABG volume is correlated with

a 0.09 percentage point decrease in its risk-adjusted mortality rate. This 0.09 percentage-

point decrease represents a change of 3.3% relative to the statewide mortality rate for

CABG of 2.66%.32 In contrast, the PTCA regressions suggest a positive, but

insignificant, relationship between lagged hospital volume and mortality. The PTCA

results must be qualified, however, as they are based on only two years of data. Further,

mortality is less common for PTCA than for CABG, making outcomes noisier for the

former procedure. The welfare calculations later in this section assume no volume-

related quality effects for PTCA. This assumption is conservative in light of other studies

that have found a volume-outcome relationship for PTCA that is in the same direction as

that for CABG (Hannan et al., 1997; Ho, 2000).

         The cost regressions find that costs fall as volume increases. These effects are

small, but highly significant, for both CABG and PTCA. For CABG, a 10% increase in

volume leads to a $230 decrease in the average cost per case (0.8% relative to the average

of $28,000 per case across all years and zip codes in the sample). For PTCA, a similar



covariates could not be incorporated into the cost regressions. As a result, the risk-adjustment for cost is
more limited than that for mortality.
         32
            Represents the statewide, in-hospital mortality rate for CABG in New York for the period from
1991 to 1996.


                                                     23
increase in volume leads to a $220 decrease in cost (1.9% relative to the average of

$11,800 per case across all years and zip codes).

       The movement of market share between hospitals can affect total welfare via two

channels: simple redistribution and volume-outcome effects. Table 6 summarizes the

effects on cost and quality for CABG and PTCA across all of the acquisitions in this

study. Unless otherwise noted, these effects are based on changes that occur by Year 3.

To determine the values in the "Simple Redistribution" section of the table, I re-estimate

(1) using the volume-weighted, hospital-specific intercepts for mortality (δh) and cost

(µh) from (2) and (3), respectively, as the dependent variable. For the most part, share

redistribution has no significant effect on either CABG mortality or cost. The one

exception is the reduction in mortality of 3.5 deaths in the two-year balanced panel,

though this result is based on data from only 36 zip codes.

       To measure volume-outcome effects, I draw upon the market share results from

Table 3. For the average target market in the year 2000, this share increase translated

into approximately seven additional CABG cases per year per target acquired. Given the

semi-logarithmic form of the volume-outcome relationships, the net effect of this

movement depends on the total number of patients at each type of hospital prior to an

acquisition. In 2000, hospitals that were acquirers during the study period had an average

of 983 CABG cases. To simplify the calculations, I divide the universe of hospitals that

"lost" volume into two groups: hospitals that made acquisitions in other markets but not

in the market in question (i.e., non-local acquirers) and hospitals that did not make any

acquisitions (i.e., non-acquirers). The former hospitals performed an average of 825

CABG procedures in 2000, while the latter performed 614. Regardless of whether the



                                             24
full sample or balanced panels are used, the volume-outcome effects suggest small

declines in mortality and cost at acquirers that are almost entirely offset by increases at

non-local acquirers and non-acquirers. The aggregate impact of these volume-outcome

effects is, therefore, very small.

        These small overall volume-outcome effects are not unexpected given the

magnitude of cases moving between hospitals relative to the overall size of their cardiac

programs. For example, the average acquirer adds roughly seven CABG procedures per

year per acquisition from seven competing facilities, while each non-acquirer loses one

procedure per year per acquisition. Given the total volume of CABG procedures being

performed by the hospitals in this sample (i.e., 600 to 1000), it is quite likely that this

relatively small movement of volume occurs near the “flat” of the volume-outcome

curve. While these volume-outcome effects are not substantial with respect to mature

procedures, such as CABG, such effects could be more meaningful for procedures that

are early in their lifecycle or for procedures where acquirers and non-acquirers have

dramatically different initial volumes of activity. Repeating this methodology on

technologies that are earlier in their life cycle represents an area for future investigation.

        The bottom half of Table 6 presents analogous welfare calculations for PTCA.

These figures are more sensitive to the assumptions of the analysis than is the case for

CABG. For example, the unbalanced panel suggests an increase in mortality of roughly

four deaths per year in New York due to the redistribution of patients to hospitals with

relatively weaker PTCA programs. The balanced panel results, however, show wide-

ranging outcomes. The two-year balanced panel shows trivial welfare improvement (due




                                              25
to slightly reduced costs), while the three-year balanced panel reveals significant

increases in mortality offset by decreases in cost, both due primarily to redistribution.33

        The less-consistent welfare implications for PTCA relative to CABG may be due

to several factors. First, much of the effect is driven by simple redistribution and, as

suggested by the change from the unbalanced to balanced panels, such patterns may

depend substantially on the markets selected for analysis. In addition, these results may

be affected by the limited mortality data available for PTCA. With only two years of

observations, the hospital-specific coefficients used in the redistribution calculation are

quite noisy. Finally, given the low average mortality rate for PTCA relative to CABG,

one might question whether an outcome measure other than mortality might yield a more

precise comparison of quality across hospitals.

        A few caveats concerning these welfare calculations are worth noting. First,

while the calculations described above capture the impact of business stealing, they do

not include the effect of potential changes in the total market quantity of procedures. In a

Cournot model, reductions in market quantity are associated with deadweight loss.

Alternatively, one could imagine that volume-outcome effects, by changing the

profitability of cardiac procedures for particular hospitals, could create incentives to

increase or decrease volume. In the current setting, however, simply knowing whether

the total volume of procedures increases or decreases does not allow for a definitive

assessment of welfare effects. Specifically, the costs and benefits associated with the

marginal procedure depend on the clinical condition of the patient receiving (or not


        33
           One could use an analysis of quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) to determine whether the
value of the life years lost in some models due to redistribution of PTCA patients outweighs the associated
cost savings. Such calculations, however, require assumptions about the expected survival of those patients
whose mortality was "accelerated" due to the redistribution and are beyond the scope of this paper.


                                                    26
receiving) that treatment as well as the risk-adjusted outcome. These effects cannot be

measured using the CSRS and CARS data as they do not include information on patients

who were candidates for CABG or PTCA but did not receive either procedure. The

welfare effect calculated in this paper thus should be viewed as an incremental effect

beyond any impact that is due to the changes in the overall volume of cardiac procedures.

       Second, this study examines only cardiac procedures and does not consider the

effects of acquisitions on quality or cost in other clinical areas. Nevertheless, the

methodology of this study could be applied to other types of complex treatment where

volume-outcome effects may be present and a complementary relationship may exist

between acquirers and targets.

       Third, the welfare implications provided by this study rely on in-hospital

mortality as an outcome measure. Ideally one would also like to examine other measures

of quality, such as mortality or readmission within some fixed period after hospital

discharge (e.g., 30 days or six months) or other measures of patient health status

following a procedure. Such information, however, is not available in these data.

       Finally, events other than acquisitions were occurring in New York during this

period and may have affected the distribution of CABG and PTCA volume across

hospitals. Of particular note is the release of hospital report cards for these procedures.

Some studies have suggested that these report cards were associated with the shift of

CABG volume from low-performing to high-performing hospitals (Mukamel and

Mushlin, 1998; Cutler, Huckman, and Landrum, 2004). Others suggest that the

institution of CABG report cards encouraged providers to operate on less severe patients

(Dranove et al., 2003). To the extent that poor performing hospitals were more likely to




                                              27
engage in such risk selection, volume may have been redistributed between low and high

performers. While it is possible that the results of this study could be confounded with

the impact of report cards, I note the significant redistribution of CABG patients in the

full sample (Table 3, Column 1) is not associated with redistribution effects on mortality

(Table 6, Column 1).



VIII. CONCLUSION



       This paper views hospital acquisitions as transactions that bring together

complements—not simply substitutes—in production. When consolidation is viewed

from this vertical perspective, its welfare effects must be assessed not solely by using

standard relationships between measures of market concentration and market outcomes,

but rather based on empirical analysis of the redistribution of volume between firms.

Based on the sample of transactions from New York, I find that acquirers steal business

within target markets. Though the welfare implications are somewhat more precise for

CABG than for PTCA patients, hospital consolidation appears to have had relatively little

impact on average cost and quality of major cardiac procedures in New York.

       This study suggests that an overall assessment of the implications of hospital

consolidation should consider the fact that these transactions do not simply reduce the

number of firms providing substitute products. Rather, with respect to certain services,

they alter the allocation of customers across firms with differentiated levels of quality and

cost. Acknowledging the complementary nature of the hospitals involved in many




                                             28
acquisitions makes for a more complete assessment of consolidation’s impact on the

productivity of medical care.




                                          29
                                    REFERENCES


American Hospital Association (1992). Hospital Mergers and Consolidations: 1980-
1991, Chicago: American Hospital Association.

Appleby, Julie (2002). “Hospitals Fight for Turf in Medical Arms Race,” USA Today,
February 20, pp. 1-2.

Baker, Laurence and Martin Brown (1999). “Managed Care, Consolidation Among
Health Care Providers, and Health Care: Evidence From Mammography,” Rand Journal
of Economics, 30(2), pp. 351-374.

Barro, Jason and David Cutler (2000). “Consolidation in the Medical Marketplace: A
Case Study from Massachusetts,” in Steven Kaplan, ed., Mergers and Productivity,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bates, David et al. (1997). “Coronary Angiography and Angioplasty After Acute
Myocardial Infarction,” Annals of Internal Medicine, 126(7), pp. 539-550.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). “How Much Should
We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
119(1), pp. 249-275.

Blustein, Jan (1993). “High-Technology Cardiac Procedures: The Impact of Service
Availability on Service Use in New York State,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 270(3), pp. 344-349.

Capron, Laurence (1999). “The Long-Term Performance of Horizontal Acquisitions,”
Strategic Management Journal, 20, pp. 987-1018.

Center for the Evaluative Clinical Sciences (1998). The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care
in the United States, 1998, Chicago: American Hospital Association.

Cutler, David and Jill Horwitz (2000). “Converting Hospitals from Not-for-Profit to For-
Profit Status: Why and What Effects?” in David Cutler, ed., The Changing Hospital
Industry: Comparing Not-for-Profit and For-Profit Institutions, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Cutler, David and Robert Huckman (2003). “Technological Development in Medical
Care: The Diffusion of Angioplasty in New York State,” Journal of Health Economics,
22(2), pp. 187-217.

Cutler, David, Robert Huckman, and Mary Beth Landrum (2004). “The Role of
Information in Medical Markets: An Analysis of Publicly Reported Outcomes in Cardiac
Surgery,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 94(2), pp. 342-346.



                                           30
Cutler, David and Elizabeth Richardson (1999). “Your Money and Your Life: The Value
of Health and What Affects It,” NBER Working Paper 6895.

Cutler, David, Mark McClellan, and Joseph Newhouse (2000). “How Does Managed
Care Do It?” Rand Journal of Economics, 31(3), pp. 526-548.

Dierickx, Ingmar and Karel Cool (1989). “Asset Stock Accumulation and Accumulation
of Competitive Advantage,” Management Science, 35(12), pp. 1504-1511.

Dranove, David, Daniel Kessler, Mark McClellan, and Mark Satterthwaite (2003). "Is
More Information Better? The Effects of 'Report Cards' on Health Care Providers,"
Journal of Political Economy, 111(3), pp. 555-588.

Dranove, David and Richard Ludwick (1999). “Competition and Pricing by Nonprofit
Hospitals: A Reassessment of Lynk’s Analysis,” Journal of Health Economics, 18, pp.
87-98.

Dranove, David and Mark Shanley (1995). “Cost Reductions or Reputation Enhancement
as Motives for Mergers: The Logic of Multihospital Systems,” Strategic Management
Journal, 16, pp. 55-74.

Every, Nathan et al. (1993). “The Association Between On-Site Cardiac Catheterization
Facilities and the Use of Coronary Angiography After Acute Myocardial Infarction,”
New England Journal of Medicine, 329(8), pp. 546-551.

Farley, Dean and Ronald Ozminkowski (1992). “Volume-Outcome Relationships and
Inhospital Mortality: The Effect of Changes in Volume Over Time,” Medical Care,
30(1), pp. 77-94.

Gaynor, Martin and Deborah Haas-Wilson (1999). “Change, Consolidation, and
Competition in Health Care Markets,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(1), pp. 141-
164.

Greater New York Hospital Association (1993-1997). Annual surveys of health care
delivery systems in New York State.

Gresenz, Carol, Jeannette Rogowski, and José Escarce (2004). "Updated Variable-Radius
Measures of Hospital Competition," Health Services Research, 39(2), pp. 417-430.

Hannan, Edward et al. (1991). “Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery: The Relationship
Between Inhospital Mortality Rate and Surgical Volume After Controlling for Clinical
Risk Factors,” Medical Care, 29(11), pp. 1094-1107.




                                          31
Hannan, Edward et al. (1997). “Coronary Angioplasty Volume-Outcome Relationships
for Hospitals and Cardiologists,” Journal of American Medical Association, 277(11), pp.
892-898.

Ho, Vivian (2000). “Evolution of the Volume-Outcome Relation for Hospitals
Performing Coronary Angioplasty,” Circulation, 101(15), pp. 1806-1811.

Ho, Vivian and Barton Hamilton (2000). “Hospital Mergers and Acquisitions: Does
Market Consolidation Harm Patients?” Journal of Health Economics, 19, pp. 767-791.

Keeler, Emmett, Glenn Melnick, and Jack Zwanziger (1999). “The Changing Effects of
Competition on Non-Profit and For-Profit Hospital Pricing Behavior,” Journal of Health
Economics, 18, pp. 69-86.

Kessler, Daniel and Mark McClellan (2000). “Is Hospital Competition Socially
Wasteful?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 577-615.

Kowalczyk, Liz (2003). “Heart Stent's New Promise May Be Costly for Hospitals,”
Boston Globe, February 9, p. A1.

Luft, Harold, J.P. Bunker, and Alain Enthoven (1979). “Should Operations be
Regionalized? The Empirical Relation Between Surgical Volume and Mortality” New
England Journal of Medicine, 301(25), pp. 1364-1369.

Luft, Harold, Sandra Hunt, and Susan Maerki (1987). “The Volume-Outcome
Relationship: Practice-Makes-Perfect or Selective-Referral Patterns?” Health Services
Research, 22(2), pp. 157-182.

Lynk, William (1995). “The Creation of Economic Efficiencies in Hospital Mergers,”
Journal of Health Economics, 14(5), pp. 507-530.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Michael Whinston (1986). “Free Entry and Social
Inefficiency,” Rand Journal of Economics, 17(1), pp. 48-58.

McClellan, Mark (1993). “The Economics of Medical Treatment Intensity,” Ph.D.
Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

McClellan, Mark and Joseph Newhouse (1997). “The Marginal Cost-Effectiveness of
Medical Technology: A Panel Instrumental-Variables Approach,” Journal of
Econometrics, 77, pp. 39-64.

Melnick, Glenn et al. (1992). “The Effects of Market Structure and Bargaining Position
on Hospital Prices,” Journal of Health Economics, 11, pp. 217-233.

Modern Healthcare (1994-2000). Annual surveys of hospital merger activity.




                                           32
Mukamel, Dana and Alvin Mushlin (1998). “An Analysis of Market Share and Price
Changes After Publication of the New York State Cardiac Surgery Mortality Reports.”
Medical Care, 36(7), pp. 945-54.

New York State Department of Health (2004). Certificate of Need Application
Distributed (http://www.health.state.ny.us/nysdoh/cons/distributed_cons.htm, accessed
August 15, 2004).

_____ (1998). Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery in New York State: 1994-1996.

Noether, Monica (1988). “Competition Among Hospitals,” Journal of Health Economics,
7, pp. 259-284.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (1999). OECD Health Data
99 database.

Peteraf, Margaret (1993). “The Cornerstones of Competitive Advantage: A Resource-
Based View,” Strategic Management Journal, 14, pp. 179-191.

Phibbs, Ciaran and James Robinson (1993). "A Variable-Radius Measure of Local
Hospital Market Structure," Health Services Research, 28(3), pp. 313-324.

Shen, Yu-Chu (2003). “Changes in Hospital Performance After Ownership Conversions,”
Inquiry, 40(3), pp. 217-234.

Showstack, Jonathan et al. (1987). “Association of Volume with Outcome of Coronary
Artery Bypass Graft Surgery: Scheduled vs. Nonscheduled Operations,” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 257(6), pp. 785-789.

Tolley, George, Donald Kenkel and Robert Fabian, eds. (1994). Valuing Health for
Policy: An Economic Approach, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Tu, Jack et al. (1997). “Use of Cardiac Procedures and Outcomes in Elderly Patients with
Myocardial Infarction in the United States and Canada,” New England Journal of
Medicine, 336(21), pp. 1500-1505.

Wernerfelt, Birger (1984). “A Resource-Based View of the Firm,” Strategic Management
Journal, 5, pp. 171-180.




                                           33
                                              Figure 1: Hospital Consolidations in New York State, 1992-1999




                                     14

          Number of Consolidations   12

                                     10

                                      8

                                      6

                                      4

                                      2

                                      0
                                          1992     1993     1994    1995     1996    1997     1998     1999
                                                                        Year
                                     Acquisitions (Big-Small)        Mergers (Small-Small)         Mergers (Big-Big)




Note: A hospital is considered “big” if it offers CABG and PTCA procedures and “small” if it does not offer these procedures. Transactions
      involving the acquisition of multiple target facilities are counted as single consolidations.

Sources: LEXIS-NEXIS search of local newspapers; Modern Healthcare; author correspondence with hospital executives.




                                                                           34
                                                                             Figure 2: Share to Acquirer Surrounding Acquisition Events

                                                                                                   25.00%




                                                                                                   20.00%
               Share to Acquirer (Normalized to Year 0 Share)




                                                                                                   15.00%




                                                                                                   10.00%




                                                                                                    5.00%




                                                                                                    0.00%
                                                                -3      -2               -1                 0               1                   2             3              4



                                                                                                   -5.00%




                                                                                                  -10.00%
                                                                                                      Year Relative to Acquisition

                                                                     CABG (Unbalanced)        PTCA (Unbalanced)        CABG (3-Year Balanced)       PTCA (3-Year Balanced)

Note: Values for the unbalanced panels are obtained by subtracting the Year 0 coefficient from the relevant "year relative to merger" coefficient from Table 3,
Columns 1 and 2 .

Source: SPARCS Database, 1992-1998.



                                                                                                                  35
Table 1: Estimated Revenues and Profits from CABG and PTCA Procedures for New York Hospitals, 1997


                                                                                                              CABG and
                                                                                                                PTCA
                                                     CABG                            PTCA                     Combined

                                          Medicare         All Cases      Medicare         All Cases          All Cases
                                            (1)                (2)          (3)                (4)                (5)

                       Panel A: Per-Case Revenue and Profit from CABG and PTCA Procedures

Revenue/Case*                             $ 33,700     $         32,900   $ 15,200     $       14,700

Average Cost/Case                           31,700               29,000     13,100             12,000
Average Profit/Case                          2,000                3,900      2,100              2,700

Marginal Cost/Case**                                             26,700                         9,800
Marginal Profit/Case                                              6,200                         4,900

                         Panel B: Total Revenue and Profit from CABG and PTCA Procedures

Average Cases/Hospital                                              654                            806

Average Revenue Per Hospital                           $ 21,505,291                    $ 11,843,745       $ 33,349,036

Average Profit Per Hospital                            $    2,549,259                  $    2,175,382     $     4,724,641


   * Medicare revenue/case based on the assumption of $6,164 per case mix adjusted admission. "All Cases" revenue
     figures assume that revenue/case is 10% greater for Commercial patients and 20% less for HMO and Medicaid
     patients (relative to Medicare). Further, the "All Cases" revenue assumes a payor mix similar to that in New York
     during 1997. For CABG this mix is 50% Medicare, 25% commercial, and 25% Medicaid or HMO; for PTCA, this mix is
     40% Medicare, 30% commercial, and 30% Medicaid or HMO.
  ** The marginal cost figures are based on the estimated effect of ln[annual CABG (PTCA) admissions] for hospital h on
     average cost per CABG (PTCA) admission at hospital h (see Equation (3)). The marginal cost estimates are
     calculated by dividing the growth in total costs due to a 1% increase in volume by the absolute magnitude of the 1%
     volume increment.


                                                            36
                                  Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for Acquirers and Targets in Sample, 1992



                                                                                  ACQUIRERS                           TARGETS
                                                                                         Standard                            Standard
                                                                            N     Mean   Deviation            N       Mean   Deviation

Inpatient Beds                                                              16         856        318         31          421         158   ***
Inpatient Days                                                              16     269,759     96,635         31      125,084      55,111   ***

Financial Data ($000s Unless Otherwise Specified)
         Hospital Charges                                                   16   $ 521,000 $ 253,000          31   $ 173,000 $ 90,300       ***
         Net Revenue (Hospital Charges Less Discounts)                      16     363,000   175,000          31     121,000   64,800       ***
         Operating Expenses                                                 16     403,000   204,000          31     126,000   68,700       ***
         Net Income Margin                                                  16       -0.9%      3.6%          31        0.9%     3.6%       *
         Cost-to-Charge Ratio (Operating Expenses/Total Charges)            16       77.1%      9.9%          31       72.9%     8.9%

Patients Receiving
          CABG                                                              15        649         361
          PTCA                                                              16        469         302




   Note: ***,**, and * denote that acquirer and target means are significantly different at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, repsectively. Acquirer
         and target data are reported by facility (rather than by firm) in cases where a each facility reports data separately to Medicare. One
         acquirer provided PTCA but not CABG.


Source: Medicare PPS Cost Reports, 1992; New York State Department of Health, Statewide Planning and Research Cooperative System
        (SPARCS), 1992.




                                                                       37
                            Table 3: Acquirer Market Share in Target Markets
                                                                            Market Share to Acquirer
                                                                          CABG             PTCA
                                                                           (1)              (2)

                    Primary Market of Target x

                               4+ Years Pre-Acquisition                    -0.035                 -0.002
                                                                          (0.028)                (0.043)
                               3 Years Pre-Acquisition                     -0.032                 -0.025
                                                                          (0.020)                (0.029)
                                                                                    ¥¥
                               2 Years Pre-Acquisition                     -0.017                 -0.030
                                                                          (0.015)                (0.025)
                               1 Year Pre-Acquisition                      -0.038                 -0.043
                                                                          (0.016)                (0.021)
                               Year of Acquisition                         -0.023                 -0.057
                                                                          (0.013)                (0.017)
                               1 Year Post-Acquisition                     -0.015                 -0.050
                                                                          (0.016)                (0.017)
                                                                                    ¥¥
                               2 Years Post-Acquisition                    -0.003                 -0.029
                                                                          (0.014)                (0.018)
                                                                                    ###,¥¥¥                ###,¥
                               3 Years Post-Acquisition                     0.027                  0.003
                                                                          (0.013)                (0.012)
                                                                                    ##,¥¥¥                 ###,¥¥
                               4+ Years Post-Acquisition                    0.025                  0.006
                                                                          (0.015)                (0.017)

                    Female (As Percentage of CABG
                    Cases)                                                  0.042                  0.031
                                                                          (0.027)                (0.047)


                    HMO (As Percentage of CABG Cases)                      -0.046                 -0.018
                                                                          (0.059)                (0.070)

                    Medicaid (As Percentage of CABG
                    Cases)                                                  0.011                  0.045
                                                                          (0.084)                (0.099)
                    Average Value of Dependent Variable
                    Prior to First Acquisition                            0.276                  0.247
                    N                                                      111                    111
                    NT                                                     997                    997
                               2
                    Adjusted R                                            0.909                  0.894
                    Durbin-Watson Statistic                               1.64                    1.50

***,**,*   Coefficient is statistically significantly different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
###,##,#
           Coefficient is statistically significantly different from the "Year of Acquisition" coefficient at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
           respectively.
¥¥¥,¥¥,¥
           Coefficient is statistically significantly different from the "1 Year Pre-Acquisition" coefficient at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
           respectively.
Note:      Robust standard errors, clustered by target market, are in parentheses. Each regression includes the following variables which
           do not appear in this table: a constant term; 3-year fixed effects; zip-code fixed effects; and indicators for several age categories
           (i.e., less than 50, 50-59, 60-64, 65-74, 75-84, and greater than 84). The data for each zip-code observation is weighted by the
           number of cases from that zip code. For ease of presentation, the indicators of significant differences from zero (***,**,*) are not
           presented for any of the "year relative to acquisition" variables.



                                                                 38
                         Table 4: Acquirer Market Share in Target Markets (Balanced Panel)


                                                 CABG                   CABG                   PTCA                      PTCA
                                                Share to               Share to               Share to                  Share to
                                                Acquirer               Acquirer               Acquirer                  Acquirer
                                                  (1)                    (2)                    (3)                       (4)

Primary Market of Target x
                                                                                   ***
           2 Years Pre-Acquisition              0.00648                -0.05340                0.00622                  -0.06650
                                                (0.0326)                (0.0161)               (0.0306)                  (0.0448)
                                                                                                                                    ***
           1 Year Pre-Acquisition               0.01359                -0.04743                0.01347                  -0.05097
                                                (0.0252)                (0.0295)               (0.0118)                  (0.0170)
           Year of Acquisition

                                                                                                                                    ***,¥¥¥
           1 Year Post-Acquisition              0.00381                 0.01022                0.03140                  0.07234
                                                (0.0182)                (0.0272)               (0.0210)                 (0.0272)
                                                           ,¥                      **,¥¥¥                 ,¥¥¥                      ***,¥¥¥
           2 Years Post-Acquisition             0.07411 ***             0.06364                0.13852 ***              0.15983
                                                (0.0249)                (0.0259)               (0.0405)                 (0.0441)
                                                                                   **,¥¥                                            ***,¥¥¥
           3 Years Post-Acquisition                                     0.08734                                         0.19241
                                                                        (0.0420)                                        (0.0535)

Female (As Percentage of CABG
Cases)                                          0.03086                 0.06908                0.02116                  -0.06516
                                                (0.0639)                (0.1142)               (0.0888)                  (0.0751)

HMO (As Percentage of CABG
Cases)                                          -0.11301                0.00565               -0.22401                  -0.19988
                                                 (0.1513)               (0.1883)               (0.1803)                  (0.2508)
Medicaid (As Percentage of CABG
Cases)                                          -0.01071                0.05242               -0.05868                  -0.59240 *
                                                 (0.2231)               (0.1791)               (0.2007)                  (0.3119)

Average Value of Dependent
Variable Prior to First Acquisition               0.161                 0.184                   0.165                    0.236
N                                                   36                    18                      35                       17
NT                                                 180                   108                     175                      102
           2
Adjusted R                                        0.916                 0.930                   0.902                    0.922

***,**,*   Coefficient is statistically signficantly different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
¥¥¥,¥¥,¥   Coefficient is statistically signficantly different from the "1 Year Pre-Acquisition" coefficient at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
           levels, respectively.

   Note: Robust standard errors, clustered by target market, are in parentheses. Each regression includes the following
         variables which do not appear in this table: a constant term; 3-year fixed effects; zip-code fixed effects; and indicators
         for several age categories (i.e., less than 50, 50-59, 60-64, 65-74, 75-84, and greater than 84). The data for each zip-
         code observation is weighted by the number of cases from that zip code.




                                                                        39
      Table 5: Fixed-Effect Regressions of Procedure Mortality and Cost on Volume and
                                     Other Covariates


                                                   CABG               CABG               PTCA                PTCA
                                                  Mortality,          Cost,             Mortality,           Cost,
                                                  1992-96            1993-98            1994-95             1993-98
                                                    (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)

ln(Lagged Annual CABG Cases at Facility)             -0.0093 **          -2,297 ***
                                                    (0.0047)            (577.8)

ln(Lagged Annual PTCA Cases at Facility)                                                    0.0096             -2,200 ***
                                                                                          (0.0082)            (211.5)

Patient Age                                          -0.0044 ***          -932 ***         -0.0016 ***          -373 ***
                                                    (0.0005)             (73.2)           (0.0003)             (21.9)

              2
(Patient Age) /100                                    0.0041 ***        1,032 ***           0.0015 ***           375 ***
                                                    (0.0004)            (57.3)            (0.0003)             (17.8)

Hospital Fixed Effects?                              Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Year Fixed Effects?                                  Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Clinical Risk Covariates?                            Yes                No                 Yes                No

                                                            ¥                                     ¥
N                                                  89,359             110,177            40,114             116,556
          2
Adjusted R                                          0.067              0.118              0.122              0.137

       ***,**,* Indicates statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
              ¥
                The total number of CABG cases in the CSRS database for the years from 1992 through 1996 is 90,130.
                Subtracting the 771 records with a missing value for at least one covariate yields the total number of 89,359
                included in the regression. For PTCA, the total number of cases in the CARS data for 1994 and 1995 is 40,265.
                Subtracting the 151 cases missing at least one covariate yields the total of 40,114.

       Note: Results in Columns 1 and 3 are based on data from the CSRS and CARS databases. Results in Columns 2 and
             4 are based on discharge data from SPARCS and cost data from Medicare PPS Cost Reports. Column 2
             excludes cases with total charges less than $5,000, and Column 3 excludes cases with total charges less than
             $2,500. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Each regression includes a constant term which is not
             reported in this table.




                                                           40
  Table 6: Calculation of Approximate Annual Change in Total Mortality and Cost for
            CABG and PTCA Due to All New York Acquisitions, 1992-1999


                                         Full Sample             Balanced Panel
                                         To 3 Years        To 2 Years
                                             Post-           Post-      To 3 Years Post-
                                         Acquisition       Acquisition    Acquisition
CABG

Simple Redistribution
       Change in Mortality                           -            -3.50                     -
       Change in Cost                                -                -                     -

Volume-Outcome Effects
      Change in Mortality                       -0.01             -0.02              -0.03
      Change in Cost                          -$2,249           -$4,935            -$6,828

       Total Change in Mortality                -0.01            -3.52               -0.03
       Total Change in Cost                   -$2,249          -$4,935             -$6,828

PTCA

Simple Redistribution
       Change in Mortality                        4.16                -              5.99
       Change in Cost                                -                -        -$3,477,118

Volume-Outcome Effects
      Change in Mortality                           -                -                   -
      Change in Cost                          -$4,892         -$23,929            -$45,812

       Total Change in Mortality                 4.16             0.00               5.99
       Total Change in Cost                   -$4,892         -$23,929        -$3,522,929


Note: Calculations represent total changes across all acquisitions in New York from
      1992 through 1999. Figures are based on coefficients from versions of (1) with
      hospital-specific quality and cost intercepts, respectively, as the dependent
      variable (for simple redistribution) and Table 5 (for volume-outcome effects).
      Data on the average annual volume of procedures at local acquirers, non-local
      acquirers, and non-acquirers is for 2000. Dashes denote cases where the
      relevant coefficients used to calculate values are not statistically significant at
      better than the 10% level.


                                             41
Appendix: Clinical Covariates Included in CABG and PTCA Mortality Regressions
                                                                                    In CABG                      In PTCA
  Variable                              Description                           Mortality Regression?       Mortality Regression?

IS92            Dummy for year=1992                                                    Yes                         No
IS93            Dummy for year=1993                                                    Yes                         No
IS94            Dummy for year=1994                                                    Yes                         Yes
IS95            Dummy for year=1995                                                    Yes                         Yes
IS96            Dummy for year=1996                                                    Yes                         No
AGE             Patient age                                                            Yes                         Yes
                      2
AGEQUAD         (AGE) /100                                                             Yes                         Yes
ETHNIC          Dummy for Hispanic                                                     Yes                         No
BSA             Body surface area                                                      Yes                         Yes
ANGINA          Angina: CCS functional class                                           Yes                         Yes
NORISK          Dummy for no pre-operative risk factors                                Yes                         No
MI_24HR         Dummy for MI within previous 24 hours                                  Yes                         Yes
MI_WEEK         Dummy for MI within previous 1-7 days                                  Yes                         Yes
PREVMI          Dummy for any previous MI                                              Yes                         Yes
MORE1MI         Dummy for more than 1 previous MI                                      No                          Yes
TRNSMMI         Dummy for transmural MI                                                Yes                         Yes
STROKE          Dummy for stroke                                                       Yes                         Yes
CAROCERB        Dummy for carotid/cerebrovascular disease                              Yes                         Yes
AORTO           Dummy for aortoiliac disease                                           Yes                         Yes
FEM_POP         Dummy for femoral/popliteal                                            Yes                         Yes
UNSTABLE        Dummy for hemodynamic instability                                      Yes                         Yes
SHOCK           Dummy for shock                                                        Yes                         Yes
HYPTENS         Dummy for hypertension history                                         Yes                         Yes
IV_NTG          Dummy for IV_NTG within 24 hours of operation                          Yes                         Yes
LVENTHT         Dummy for left ventricular hypertrophy                                 Yes                         Yes
MALVENAR        Dummy for malignant ventricular arrhythmia                             Yes                         Yes
CHOBPUDS        Dummy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease                        Yes                         Yes
CPB             Dummy for cardiopulmonary bypass at start of procedure                 No                          Yes
EXCAASAO        Dummy for extensively calcified ascending aorta                        Yes                         No
DIABETES        Dummy for diabetes requiring medication                                Yes                         Yes
IMSYSTDF        Dummy for immune system deficiency                                     Yes                         Yes
IABPPREO        Dummy for IABP pre-op                                                  Yes                         Yes
ERDXCATH        Dummy for emergency transfer to OR after cath                          Yes                         No
ERPTCA          Dummy for emergency transfer to OR after PTCA                          Yes                         No
PREVCAAD        Dummy for previous PTCA, this admission                                Yes                         Yes
CABEFORE        Dummy for PTCA before this admission                                   Yes                         Yes
THROMB          Dummy for thrombolytic therapy within 7 days                           Yes                         Yes
SMOK2WK         Dummy for smoking history in past 2 weeks                              Yes                         Yes
SMOK1YR         Dummy for smoking history in past year                                 No                          Yes
FEMALE          Dummy for female                                                       Yes                         Yes
NONWHT          Dummy for non-white                                                    Yes                         Yes
EMERGNCY        Dummy for emergency surgical priority                                  Yes                         No
EJFR20          Dummy for ejection fraction less than 20%                              Yes                         Yes
EJFR2029        Dummy for ejection fraction 20-29%                                     Yes                         Yes
EJFR3039        Dummy for ejection fraction 30-39%                                     Yes                         Yes
LMT             Dummy for left main trunk, 50% or greater                              Yes                         Yes
PLAD            Dummy for Prox LAD or Maj Diag, 70% or greater                         Yes                         Yes
MDLAD           Dummy for Mid/Dist LAD or Maj Diag, 70% or greater                     Yes                         Yes
RCA             Dummy for RCA or PDA, 70% or greater                                   Yes                         Yes
LCX             Dummy for LCA or Large Marg, 70% or greater                            Yes                         Yes
LESION B        Dummy for Lesion Type B                                                No                          Yes
LESIONC         Dummy for Lesion Type C                                                No                          Yes
CHF             Dummy for congestive heart failure                                     Yes                         Yes
RENFAIL         Dummy for renal failure                                                Yes                         Yes
PREVOHS         Dummy for previous open heart operations                               Yes                         Yes
POSSTR          Dummy for positive stress test                                         No                          Yes


        Note:
                Regressions also include ln(lagged annual procedure volume) and hospital fixed effects. The CAC provides the
                following caveat with respect to the use of the indicator for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): "Prior
                to 1993, the definition used for COPD was considered subjective, and irregular frequency distributions across
                institutions were noted. The definition was changed in 1993 to include documentation of objective clinical criteria.
                However, the wide range in COPD rates reported across hospitals remains, presumably due to practice patterns
                among various providers with regard to utilizing objective testing for COPD."




                                                                42
43
